<doc id="32597" wikidata="Q216" url="?curid=32597" title="Vilnius">
<text>Vilnius ( , ) is the capital of and largest city in Lithuania and the most-populous city in the Baltic states. The city&#x27;s estimated January 2025 population was 607,404, and the Vilnius urban area (which extends beyond the city limits) has an estimated population of 747,864.

Vilnius is notable for the architecture of its Old Town, considered one of Europe&#x27;s largest and best-preserved old towns. The city was declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1994. The architectural style known as Vilnian Baroque is named after the city, which is farthest to the east among Baroque cities and the largest such city north of the Alps.

The city was noted for its multicultural population during the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, with contemporary sources comparing it to Babylon. Before World War II and the Holocaust, Vilnius was one of Europe&#x27;s most important Jewish centers. Its Jewish influence has led to its being called &quot;the Jerusalem of Lithuania&quot;, and Napoleon called it &quot;the Jerusalem of the North&quot; when he passed through in 1812.

Vilnius was a 2009 European Capital of Culture with Linz in Austria. In 2021, the city was named one of fDi&#x27;s 25 Global Cities of the Future. Vilnius is considered a global financial centre, ranked 76th globally and 29th in Europe on the Global Financial Centres Index. The city is an important center for the global fintech industry. It hosted the 2023 NATO Summit. In 2025 Vilnius was the European Green Capital. Vilnius is a member of Eurocities and the Union of Capitals of the European Union (UCEU).

==Etymology and other names==
Vilnius&#x27; name originates from the river Vilnia, the Lithuanian word for &quot;ripple&quot;. Its name has had a number of derivative spellings in various languages throughout its history; &quot;Vilna&quot; was once common in English. The most notable non-Lithuanian names for the city include , , (&quot;Vilnia&quot;), , , (&quot;Vilno&quot;), (&quot;Vilne&quot;). A Russian name dating to the Russian Empire was Вильна (&quot;Vilna&quot;), although Вильнюс (&quot;Vilnyus&quot;) is now used. The names &quot;Wilno&quot;, &quot;Wilna&quot;, and &quot;Vilna&quot; were used in English-, German-, French-, and Italian-language publications when the city was a capital of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth and an important city in the Second Polish Republic. The name &quot;Vilna&quot; is still used in Finnish, Portuguese, Spanish, and . &quot;Wilna&quot; is still used in German alongside &quot;Vilnius&quot;.
According to a legend recorded during the , Grand Duke Gediminas (–1341) was hunting in the sacred forest near Šventaragis&#x27; Valley, (where the Vilnia flows into the river Neris. The successful wisent hunt lasted longer than expected, and Gediminas decided to spend the night in the valley. He fell asleep and dreamed of a huge Iron Wolf at the top of a hill, howling loudly. Upon awakening, the Duke asked the &quot;krivis&quot; Lizdeika to interpret the dream. The chief priest told him:What is destined for the ruler and the State of Lithuania, is thus: the Iron Wolf represents a castle and a city which will be established by you on this site. This city will be the capital of the Lithuanian lands and the dwelling of their rulers, and the glory of their deeds shall echo throughout the world.
Gediminas, obeying the gods, built two castles: the Lower Castle in the valley, and the Crooked Castle on Bald Hill. He moved his court there, declared it his permanent seat and capital, and developed the surrounding area into a city he named Vilnius.
==History==


Vilnius&#x27; history dates to the Stone Age. The city at least from 1323 until 1795 was the capital of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. Later Vilnius was ruled by imperial and Soviet Russia, Napoleonic France, imperial and Nazi Germany, interwar Poland, and again became a capital of Lithuania in the 20th century.

Initially a Baltic settlement, Vilnius became significant in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. The city was first mentioned in letters by Grand Duke Gediminas, who invited Jews and Germans to settle and built a wooden castle on a hill. Vilnius became a city in 1387, after the Christianization of Lithuania, and was settled by craftsmen and merchants of a variety of nationalities. It was the capital of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania (until 1795) within the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth. Vilnius flourished under the Commonwealth, especially after the 1579 establishment of Vilnius University by the Lithuanian Grand Duke Stephen Báthory. The city became a cultural and scientific center, attracting migrants from east and west. It had diverse communities, with Jewish, Orthodox, and German populations. The city experienced a number of invasions and occupations, including by the Teutonic Knights, Russia and, later, Germany.

Under imperial Russian rule, Vilnius became the capital of Vilna Governorate and had a number of cultural revivals during the 19th and early 20th centuries by Jews, Poles, Lithuanians, and Belarusians. After World War I, the city experienced conflict between Poland and Lithuania which led to its occupation by Poland before its annexation by the Soviet Union during World War II. After that war, Vilnius became the capital of the Lithuanian Soviet Socialist Republic.

===Independence===

On 11 March 1990, the Supreme Council of the Lithuanian SSR announced its secession from the Soviet Union and intention to restore an independent Lithuania. On 9 January 1991, the Soviet Union sent in troops; this culminated in the 13 January attack on the State Radio and Television Building and Vilnius TV Tower which killed 14 civilians. The Soviet Union recognised Lithuanian independence in September 1991. According to the Constitution of Lithuania, &quot;the capital of the State of Lithuania shall be the city of Vilnius, the long-standing historical capital of Lithuania&quot;.
Vilnius has become a modern European city. Its territory has been expanded with three acts since 1990, incorporating urban areas, villages, hamlets, and the city of Grigiškės. Most historic buildings have been renovated and a business and commercial area became the New City Centre, the main administrative and business district on the north side of the river Neris. The area includes modern residential and retail space, with the municipal building and the Europa Tower its most prominent buildings. The construction of Swedbank&#x27;s headquarters indicates the importance of Scandinavian banks in Vilnius. The Vilnius Business Harbour complex was built and expanded. Over 75,000 flats were built from 1995 to 2018, making the city a Baltic construction leader.

Vilnius was selected as a 2009 European Capital of Culture with Linz, the capital of Upper Austria. The 2007–2008 financial crisis led to a drop in tourism, which prevented many projects from completion; allegations of corruption and incompetence were made; tax increases for cultural activity led to protests, and economic conditions sparked riots. On 28–29 November 2013, Vilnius hosted the Eastern Partnership summit at the Palace of the Grand Dukes of Lithuania. Many European presidents, prime ministers, and high-ranking officials participated. In 2015, Remigijus Šimašius became the city&#x27;s first directly elected mayor. The 2023 NATO summit was held in Vilnius.

==Geography==

Vilnius is at the confluence of the Vilnia and Neris rivers in southeastern Lithuania. Several countries say that the geographical midpoint of Europe is within their territory. The midpoint depends on the definition of European extent, and the &quot;Guinness Book of World Records&quot; recognises a point near Vilnius as the continental centre. After a 1989 re-estimation of European boundaries, Jean-George Affholder of the Institut Géographique National (French National Geographic Institute) determined that its geographic centre was at . The method used to calculate the point was the centre of gravity of the European geometrical figure, and is near the village of Girija (26 kilometres from Vilnius). A monument by sculptor Gediminas Jokūbonis, a column of white granite surmounted by a crown of stars, was built there in 2004.

Vilnius is from the Baltic Sea and Klaipėda, the main Lithuanian seaport. It is connected by road to other major Lithuanian cities, such as Kaunas ( away), Šiauliai ( away) and Panevėžys ( away).

Vilnius has an area of . Buildings cover 29.1 percent of the city; green space covers 68.8 percent, and water covers 2.1 percent. The city has eight nature reserves: Vokės Senslėnio Slopes Geomorphological Reserve, Aukštagiris Geomorphological Reserve, Valakupių Klonio Geomorphological Reserve, Veržuva Hydrographic Reserve, Vokė Hydrographic Reserve, Cedronas Upstream Landscape Reserve, Tapeliai Landscape Reserve, and Šeškinė Slopes Geomorphological Reserve.

Several lakes, including Balžis, are located on the north-eastern outskirts of Vilnius.

==Climate==
Vilnius has a humid continental climate (Köppen climate classification &quot;Dfb&quot;), with temperature records since 1777. The average annual temperature is ; the average January temperature is , and the July average is . Average annual precipitation is . Temperatures in the city have increased significantly during the last 30 years, a change which the Lithuanian Hydrometeorological Service attributes to human-induced global warming.

Summer days are warm to hot, especially in July and August, with daytime temperatures above during periodic heat waves. Outdoor bars, restaurants and cafés are frequented during the day.

Winters can be very cold, although temperatures above ; still occasionally occur. Temperatures below are recorded every other year. Vilnius&#x27;s rivers freeze in particularly cold winters, and the lakes surrounding the city are almost always frozen from December to March, and even April, in the most extreme years. The Lithuanian Hydrometeorological Service, headquartered in Vilnius, monitors the country&#x27;s climate.
==Culture==
===Painting and sculpture===
Vilnius was an artistic centre of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, attracting artists across Europe. The oldest surviving early Gothic artworks (14th century) are paintings dedicated to churches and liturgy, such as frescoes in the crypts of Vilnius Cathedral and decorated hymnbooks. Sixteenth-century wall paintings are in the city&#x27;s Church of St. Francis and St. Bernard and the Church of Saint Nicholas. Gothic wooden polychrome sculptures decorate church altars. Some Gothic seals from the 14th and 15th centuries still exist, including those of Kęstutis, Vytautas the Great and Sigismund II Augustus.

Renaissance sculpture appeared during the early 16th century, primarily by the Italian sculptors Bernardinus Zanobi da Gianotti, Giovani Cini, and Giovanni Maria Padovano. During the Renaissance, portrait tombstones and medals were valued; examples are the marble tombs of Albertas Goštautas (1548) and Paweł Holszański (1555) by Bernardino de Gianotis in Vilnius Cathedral. Italian sculpture is characterized by its naturalistic treatment of forms and precise proportions. Local sculptors adopted the iconographic scheme of Renaissance tombs; their works, such the tomb of Lew Sapieha () in the Church of St. Michael, are stylized. During this period, local and Western European painters created religious and mythological compositions and portraits with late Gothic and Baroque features; illustrated prayerbooks, illustrations, and miniatures have survived.

During the late-16th-century Baroque, wall painting developed. Most palaces and churches were decorated in frescoes with bright colors, sophisticated angles, and drama. Secular paintingrepresentational, imaginative, epitaph portraits, scenes of battles and politically important events in a detailed, realistic stylealso spread at this time. Baroque sculptures dominated sacred architecture: tombstones with sculpted portraits and decorative sculptures in wood, marble, and stucco. Italian sculptors such as G. P. Perti, G. M. Galli, and A. S. Capone, key figures in the development of sculpture in the 17th-century grand duchy, were commissioned by Lithuanian nobility. Their works exemplify the mature Baroque, with expressive forms and sensuality. Local sculptors emphasized Baroque decorative features, with less expression and emotion.
Lithuanian painting was influenced by the Vilnius Art School during the late 18th and 19th centuries, which introduced classical and romantic art. Painters had internships abroad, mainly in Italy. Allegorical, mythological compositions, landscapes, and portraits of representatives of various circles of society began, and historical themes prevailed. The era&#x27;s best-known classical painters are Franciszek Smaglewicz, Jan Rustem, Józef Oleszkiew, , Józef Peszka, and Wincenty Smokowski. Romantic artists were Jan Rustem, Jan Krzysztof Damel, Wincenty Dmochowski and Kanuty Rusiecki. After the 1832 closure of Vilnius University, the Vilnius Art School continued to influence Lithuanian art.

The Lithuanian Art Society was established in 1907 by Petras Rimša, Antanas Žmuidzinavičius and Antanas Jaroševičius, and the Vilnius Art Society was founded the following year. Artists included Jonas Šileika, , , Vytautas Kairiūkštis, and Vytautas Pranas Bičiūnas, who employed Western European symbolism, realism, Art Nouveau and modernism. Socialist realism was introduced after World War II, with propaganda paintings, historical and household works, still lives, landscapes, portraits, and sculptures. Late 20th- and 21st-century painters are Žygimantas Augustinas, Eglė Ridikaitė, Eglė Gineitytė, Patricija Jurkšaitytė, Jurga Barilaitė, and Solomonas Teitelbaumas.

The Užupis district near the Old Town, a run-down district during the Soviet era, hosts bohemian artists who operate a number of art galleries and workshops. In its main square, a statue of an angel blowing a trumpet symbolises artistic freedom.

The world&#x27;s first bronze memorial to Frank Zappa was installed in the Naujamiestis district in 1995. In 2015, the Vilnius Talking Statues project was introduced. Eighteen statues around the city interact by smartphone with visitors in several languages.

===Museums and galleries===
Vilnius has a variety of museums. The National Museum of Lithuania, in the Palace of the Grand Dukes of Lithuania, Gediminas&#x27; Tower and the arsenals of the Vilnius Castle Complex, has exhibits about the history of Lithuania and Lithuanian culture. The Museum of Applied Arts and Design displays Lithuanian folk and religious art, objects from the Palace of the Grand Dukes of Lithuania, and 18th- to 20th-century clothing. Other museums are the Vilnius Museum, the House of Histories, Church Heritage Museum, Museum of Occupations and Freedom Fights, Fight for Freedom Museum in the Vilnius TV Tower, M. K. Čiurlionis House, Samuel Bak Museum, Centre for Civil Education, Toy Museum, Vilnil (Museum of Illusions), Energy and Technology Museum, House of Signatories, Tolerance Center, Railway Museum, Money Museum, Kazys Varnelis House-Museum, Liubavas Manor Watermill-Museum, Museum of Vladislovas Sirokomlė, Amber Museum-Gallery, and the Paneriai Memorial visitor information centre.
Vilnius has a number of art galleries. Lithuania&#x27;s largest art collection is housed in the Lithuanian National Museum of Art. The Vilnius Picture Gallery, in the city&#x27;s Old Town, houses a collection of Lithuanian art from the 16th to the early 20th centuries. Across the Neris, the National Art Gallery has a number of exhibitions of 20th-century Lithuanian art. The Contemporary Art Centre, the largest contemporary-art venue in the Baltic States, has an exhibition space of . The centre develops international and Lithuanian exhibitions and presents a range of public programs which include lectures, seminars, performances, film and video screenings, and live music. On 10 November 2007, the Jonas Mekas Visual Arts Center was opened by avant-garde filmmaker Jonas Mekas; its premiere exhibition was &quot;The Avant-Garde: From Futurism to Fluxus&quot;. In 2018, the MO Museum opened as an initiative of Lithuanian scientists and philanthropists Danguolė and Viktoras Butkus. Its collection of 5,000 modern pieces includes major Lithuanian artworks from the 1950s to the present.

===Literature===
Around 1520, Francysk Skaryna (author of the first Ruthenian Bible) established eastern Europe&#x27;s first printing house in Vilnius. Skaryna prepared and published the &quot;Little Traveller&#x27;s Book&quot; (Ruthenian: &quot;Малая подорожная книжка&quot;), the first printed book of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, in 1522. Three years later, he printed the &quot;Acts and Epistles of the Apostles&quot; (the &quot;Apostle&quot;).

The Vilnius Academy Press was established in 1575 by Lithuanian nobleman Mikołaj Krzysztof &quot;the Orphan&quot; Radziwiłł as the Vilnius Academy printing house, delegating its management to the Jesuits. It published its first book, Piotr Skarga&#x27;s &quot;Pro Sacratissima Eucharistia contra haeresim Zwinglianam&quot;, in May 1576. The press was funded by the Lithuanian nobility and the church. In 1805, Józef Zawadzki bought the press and founded the Józef Zawadzki printing shop. Operating continuously until 1939, it published books in a number of languages; Adam Mickiewicz&#x27;s first poetry book was published in 1822.

Mikalojus Daukša translated and published a catechism by Spanish Jesuit theologian Jacobo Ledesma in 1595, the first printed Lithuanian-language book in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. He also translated and published Jakub Wujek&#x27;s &quot;Postilla Catholica&quot; in 1599.
Many writers were born in Vilnius, lived there, or are alumni of Vilnius University; they include Konstantinas Sirvydas, Maciej Kazimierz Sarbiewski, Antoni Gorecki, Józef Ignacy Kraszewski, Antoni Edward Odyniec, Michał Józef Römer, Adam Mickiewicz, Władysław Syrokomla, Józef Mackiewicz, Romain Gary, Juliusz Słowacki, Simonas Daukantas, Mykolas Biržiška, Petras Cvirka, Kazys Bradūnas, Nobel laureate Czesław Miłosz. Vilnius Academy of Arts alumnae have also added to the internationally acclaimed contemporary writers such as Jurga Ivanauskaitė, Undinė Radzevičiūtė and Kristina Sabaliauskaitė. The first consideration of the First Statute of Lithuania took place in 1522 at the Seimas of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. The code was drafted under the guidance of Grand Chancellor of Lithuania Albertas Goštautas in accordance with customary law, legislation, and canon and Roman law. It is Europe&#x27;s first codification of secular law. Albertas Goštautas supported the use of Lithuanian in literature and protected Lithuanian authors (including Abraomas Kulvietis and Michael the Lithuanian) who criticised the use of Old Church Slavonic, and called refugees Old Believers in &quot;De moribus tartarorum, lituanorum et moscorum&quot;.
Since the 16th century, the Lithuanian Metrica has been kept at the Lower Castle and safeguarded by the State Chancellor. Due to the deterioration of the books, Grand Chancellor Lew Sapieha ordered the Metrica recopied in 1594; the recopying continued until 1607. The recopied books were inventoried, rechecked, and transferred to a separate building in Vilnius; the older books remained in the Castle of Vilnius. According to 1983 data, 665 books remain on microfilm at the Lithuanian State Historical Archives in Vilnius.

Over 200 tiles and plaques commemorating writers who lived and worked in Vilnius and foreign authors connected to Vilnius and Lithuania adorn walls on Literatų Street () in the Old Town, outlining the history of Lithuanian literature. The Institute of Lithuanian Literature and Folklore and the Lithuanian Writers&#x27; Union are in the city. The Vilnius book fair is held annually at LITEXPO, the Baltics&#x27; largest exhibition centre.

===Cinema===
The first public film session in Vilnius was held in the Botanical Garden (now the Bernardinai Garden) in July 1896. It was held after 1895 film sessions by Auguste and Louis Lumière in Paris. The session in Vilnius showed the Lumière brothers&#x27; documentary films. The first films shown were educational, filmed outside Vilnius (in India and Africa), and introduced other cultures. Georges Méliès&#x27; film, &quot;A Trip to the Moon&quot;, was first shown at the Lukiškės Square movie theater in 1902; it was the first feature film shown in Vilnius.

The first movie theater in Vilnius, Iliuzija (Illusion), opened in 1905 at 60 Didžioji Street. The first movie theaters, similar to theatres, had boxes with more-expensive seats. Because early films were silent, showings were accompanied by orchestral performances. Cinema screenings were sometimes combined with theatrical performances and illusion shows.
On 4 June 1924, the Vilnius magistrate established a 1,200-seat movie theater in the city hall (, City Movie Theater) to provide cultural education for students and adults. In 1926, 502,261 tickets were sold; 24,242 tickets were given to boarding children, 778 to tourists, and 8,385 to soldiers. In 1939, Lithuanian authorities renamed it Milda. The last city government gave it to the People&#x27;s Commissariat of Education, which established the Lithuanian National Philharmonic Society, the following year.

In 1965, Lithuania&#x27;s most modern movie theater (Lietuva) opened in Vilnius; it had over 1.84 million visitors per year, and an annual profit of over 1 million roubles. After reconstruction, it had one of Europe&#x27;s largest screens: . Closed in 2002, it was demolished in 2017 and replaced by MO Museum. Kino Pavasaris is the city&#x27;s largest film festival. The Lithuanian Film Centre (), tasked with promoting the development and competitiveness of the Lithuanian film industry, is in Vilnius.

===Music===
Musicians performed at the Palace of the Grand Dukes of Lithuania as early as the 14th century, since Grand Duke Gediminas&#x27; daughter Aldona of Lithuania was known to be enthusiastic about music. Aldona brought court musicians and singers to Kraków after marrying King Casimir III the Great. During the 16th century, composers such as Wacław of Szamotuły, Jan Brant, Heinrich Finck, Cyprian Bazylik, Alessandro Pesenti, Luca Marenzio, and Michelagnolo Galilei lived in Vilnius; the city was also home to virtuoso lutist Bálint Bakfark. One of the first local musicians in written sources was Steponas Vilnietis (Stephanus de Vylna). The first textbook of Lithuanian music, &quot;The Art and Practice of Music&quot; (), was published in Vilnius by Žygimantas Liauksminas in 1667.

Italian artists produced Lithuania&#x27;s first opera on 4 September 1636 at the Palace of the Grand Dukes, commissioned by Grand Duke Władysław IV Vasa. Operas are produced at the Lithuanian National Opera and Ballet Theatre and by the Vilnius City Opera.

The Lithuanian National Philharmonic Society, the country&#x27;s largest and oldest state-owned concert organization, produces live concerts and tours in Lithuania and abroad. The Lithuanian State Symphony Orchestra, founded by Gintaras Rinkevičius, performs in Vilnius.
Choral music is popular in Lithuania, and Vilnius has three choir laureates (Brevis, Jauna Muzika, and the Chamber Choir of the Conservatoire) at the European Grand Prix for Choral Singing. The Lithuanian Song and Dance Festival in Vilnius has been presented every four years since 1990 for about 30,000 singers and folk dancers in Vingis Park. In 2008, the festival and its Latvian and Estonian counterparts were designated as a UNESCO Masterpiece of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity.

The jazz scene is active in Vilnius; in 1970–71, the Ganelin/Tarasov/Chekasin trio founded the Vilnius Jazz School. The Vilnius Jazz Festival is held annually.
The annual &quot;Gatvės muzikos diena&quot; (Street Music Day) gathers musicians on the city&#x27;s streets. Vilnius is the birthplace of singers Mariana Korvelytė – Moravskienė, Paulina Rivoli, Danielius Dolskis, Vytautas Kernagis, Algirdas Kaušpėdas, Andrius Mamontovas, Nomeda Kazlaus, and Asmik Grigorian); composers César Cui, Felix Yaniewicz, Maximilian Steinberg, Vytautas Miškinis, and Onutė Narbutaitė); conductor Mirga Gražinytė-Tyla), and musicians Antoni Radziwiłł, Jascha Heifetz, Clara Rockmore, and Romas Lileikis).

It was the hometown of 18th-century composers Michał Kazimierz Ogiński, Johann David Holland (colleague of C. Bach), Maciej Radziwiłł, and Michał Kleofas Ogiński. Nineteenth-century Vilnius was known for singer Kristina Gerhardi Frank, a close friend of Mozart and Haydn (who starred in the premiere of Haydn&#x27;s &quot;Creation&quot;), mid-19th century guitar virtuoso Marek Konrad Sokołowski and composer Stanisław Moniuszko. The wealthiest woman in Vilnius during the early 19th century was singer Maria de Neri. In the early 20th century, Vilnius was the hometown of Mikalojus Konstantinas Čiurlionis, Mikas Petrauskas, and Juozas Tallat-Kelpša. Late-20th- and early 21st-century musicians include Vyacheslav Ganelin, Petras Vyšniauskas, Petras Geniušas, Mūza Rubackytė, Alanas Chošnau, and Marijonas Mikutavičius.

The Lithuanian Academy of Music and Theatre, headquartered on Gediminas Avenue, is also located at the Slushko Palace in Antakalnis. Singers who have lectured at the academy include tenors Kipras Petrauskas and Virgilijus Noreika.

===Theatre===

The Lithuanian Grand Dukes&#x27; entertainment at the castle, rulers&#x27; visits abroad and guests&#x27; meetings had theatrical elements. During Sigismund III Vasa&#x27;s residence in Vilnius in the early 17th century, English actors performed at the palace. Władysław IV Vasa established a professional opera theatre in the Lower Castle in 1635, where &quot;drammas per musica&quot; were performed by the Italian Virgilio Puccitelli. The performances had basic, luxurious scenography.

A Jesuit School Theatre existed between the 16th and 18th centuries, with its first performance (&quot;Hercules&quot; by S. Tucci) in 1570 in Vilnius. Baroque aesthetics prevailed at the theatre, which also had medieval retrospectives, Renaissance elements, Rococo motifs, and an educational function. Performances were in Latin, but elements of the Lithuanian language were included and some of the works had Lithuanian themes (plays dedicated to Algirdas, Mindaugas, Vytautas and other Lithuanian rulers).

Wojciech Bogusławski established Vilnius City Theatre, the city&#x27;s first public theatre, in 1785. The theatre, initially in the Oskierka Palace, moved to the Radziwiłł Palace and Vilnius Town Hall. Plays were performed in Polish until 1845, from 1845 to 1864 in Polish and Russian, and after 1864 in Russian. After the Lithuanian-language ban was lifted, plays were also performed in Lithuanian. The theatre closed in 1914.
During the interwar period (when the city was part of Poland), Vilnius was known for the modern, experimental Reduta troupe and institute led by Juliusz Osterwa. The Vilnius Lithuanian Stage Amateur Company (), established in 1930 and renamed Vilnius&#x27;s Lithuanian Theatre, performed in the region. In 1945, it was merged with the Lithuanian National Drama Theatre.

After the Soviet occupation of Lithuania in 1940, theatre became a means of disseminating Soviet ideology. Performances incorporated socialist realism, and a number of revolutionary plays by Russian authors were staged. A Repertory Commission was established under the Ministry of Culture to direct theatres, control repertoire, and permit (or ban) performances.

Theatre changed after Lithuanian independence. The independent Vilnius City Opera blends classical and contemporary art. The Lithuanian National Drama Theatre, State Small Theatre of Vilnius, State Youth Theatre and a number of private theatre companies (including OKT/Vilnius City Theatre and the Anželika Cholina Dance Theatre) present classical, modern and Lithuanian plays directed by noted Lithuanian and foreign directors. There is also a Russian-language Old Theatre of Vilnius.

===Photography===

According to the memoirs of architect Bolesław Podczaszyński, published in January 1853 in the , Lithuanian photography began with the daguerreotyping in the summer of 1839 of the reconstructed Verkiai Palace by François Marcillac (governor of the children of Duke Ludwig Wittgenstein). The country&#x27;s unfavorable political situation hampered the development of new technology and cultural activities. The first known daguerreotype-portrait atelier in Vilnius was opened in 1843 by C. Ziegler, and ateliers operated in Lithuania until 1859. One of the best-known photographers was K. Neupert, from Norway.

In the 1860s, with the spread of the collodion process, glass negatives and albumen paper were used instead of daguerreotype plates. Photo portraits in standard formats became widespread, and commercial photography ateliers were established in Vilnius and other Lithuanian cities. The first landscape and architectural photographs were made by Vilnius photographers Abdonas Korzonas and Albert Swieykowski, who compiled the 32-image &quot;Vilnius Album&quot; (Lithuania&#x27;s first set of photographs). In 1862, Provisional Censorship Regulations governing the activities of photographic institutions were adopted in 1862, supervised by the Central Press Board of the Ministry of the Interior. Those who photographed the rebels in the January Uprising were punished; A. Korzonas was deported to Siberia. Other prominent 19th-century photographers were Stanisław Filibert Fleury (a stereoscopic-photography pioneer), Aleksander Władysław Strauss, and Józef Czechowicz.

The world&#x27;s second photoheliograph was installed in 1865 at the Vilnius University Astronomical Observatory, and photographed sunspots. An unprecedented system of photographing solar dynamics began in 1868 in Vilnius. Jan Bułhak founded the country&#x27;s first photography club in Vilnius in 1927. In 1952, &quot;Švyturys&quot; magazine organized the city&#x27;s first photography exhibition.

===Crafts===

Iron tools, weapons, brass, glass and silver jewelry have been produced in present-day Lithuania since the first century. Pottery wood products, and weaving became widespread in the second and fourth centuries. During the feudal era, home crafts were components of a subsistence economy. During the 13th and 14th centuries, crafts became a branch of the economy separate from agriculture. The Grand Dukes of Lithuania promoted the development of crafts in cities, and weaving, shoemaking, fur-making and other crafts predominated. With the early-14th-century introduction of foreign artisans, the development of crafts accelerated; crafts and trade stimulated the growth of Vilnius and other Lithuanian cities. In the 14th and 15th centuries, crafts were specialized (especially the production of tools, household items, fabrics, clothing, weapons, and jewelry); workshops were established which trained and defended the interests of craftspeople. Production of fine glassware began, goldsmithing was developed, and the level of pottery and weaving rose during the 16th century, and the 1529 and 1588 Statutes of Lithuania identify 25 crafts. European goldsmiths worked in the Vilnius Goldsmiths&#x27; Workshop (established in 1495), which controlled trade in precious metals and gemstones and served the Daugava and Dnieper regions, the Catholic Church, the Grand Duke, the nobility, and townspeople. The Vilnius Mint, the main mint of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, minted the Lithuanian denarius, shillings, groschen, thalers, ducats, and other coins from 1387 to 1666.

Crafting declined in the second half of the 17th century due to the Russo-Polish War, and most goods were imported and sold by Lithuanian and Polish nobles. It revived from the second half of the 18th century to the first half of the 19th century, with Vilnius the largest Lithuanian craft center. After the abolition of serfdom, craft schools were established in Lithuanian cities; crafts have prevailed in clothing manufacturing, goldsmithing, woodworking, food processing, and other fields. Under Soviet occupation, craftspeople worked in artels until 1960 and then in combines. After independence, crafts were produced by small and medium-sized businesses.

===Language===

A multicultural city, Vilnius&#x27; language changed over the centuries. The predominant spoken language in medieval Lithuania was Lithuanian. It had no literary tradition, however, and was not used in writing except for religious texts such as the Lord&#x27;s Prayer and the Hail Mary. Vytautas the Great spoke in Lithuanian with Jogaila, whose son Casimir IV Jagiellon also spoke Lithuanian. Saint Casimir, the patron saint of Lithuania, knew Lithuanian, Polish, German and Latin. Fifteenth-century Byzantine historian Laonikos Chalkokondyles reported that the Lithuanians had a distinct language.

Ruthenian was used after the incorporation of Kievan Rus&#x27;, forming the basis of 19th-century Ukrainian and Belarusian. Written Ruthenian stemmed from the interaction of Old East Slavic with Ruthenian dialects, becoming the main language of the chancery of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania in the 14th and 15th centuries and maintained its dominance until the mid-17th century.

Latin and Polish were also widely used in the chancery; Polish replaced Ruthenian in written sources and Lithuanian in public use during the second half of the 17th century. The first state documents in Lithuanian appeared in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania at the end of its existence.

At the Vilnius court of Sigismund II Augustus, the last Grand Duke of Lithuania before the Union of Lublin, Polish and Lithuanian were spoken. In 1552, Sigismund ordered that orders from the Magistrate of Vilnius be announced in Lithuanian, Polish, and Ruthenian. Minorities such as Jews, Lipka Tatars, and Crimean Karaites were ruled by the Grand Duke of Lithuania, and their languages were only used among themselves. According to Article 14 of the Lithuanian constitution, Lithuanian is the official language; however, interpreter assistance is sometimes provided.

===Fashion===

According to historian Antanas Čaplinskas, wives of merchants and craftsmen wore rings decorated with gemstones. Sixteenth- and seventeenth-century property inventories list long, wide-sleeved jackets (known as kontusz), żupans decorated with fur, and kontush belts. Buttons, made of pearl, coral, brilliant-cut diamonds and emeralds, were decorated with diamonds and enamel. Delias and dolmans were popular with townspeople and nobles.

Wealthy townspeople in luxurious clothing aroused the envy of Lithuanian nobility, who demanded laws regulating attire. The 1588 Statute of Lithuania limited townspeople to two rings, and Jews could not wear gold chains and brooches. Broader restrictions were imposed by the Sejm of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, which adopted the 1613 Act of Thrift forbidding non-noble townspeople from wearing expensive furs in public. Payment of a fee later removed the limitations.

During the late 18th century, almost all men shaved; their hair was short, and they wore open-front blue, green or black tailcoats and waistcoats with white or light-yellow trousers; women&#x27;s clothing echoed West European styles. In the early 20th century, clothing followed West European fashion trends. The State Art Institute of Lithuania introduced clothing-design studies, and the Vilnius Model House (popularizing apparel and footwear) was established in 1961.

The annual Vilnius spring &quot;Mados infekcija&quot; (Fashion Infection), Lithuania&#x27;s largest fashion show, began in 1999. Lithuanian clothing designer Juozas Statkevičius usually presents his shows in the city.

===Holidays and festivals===

Catholic holidays such as Christmas, Easter, and Saint John&#x27;s Eve) are widely celebrated. On 16 February (anniversary of the Act of Independence of Lithuania) and 11 March (anniversary of the Act of the Re-Establishment of the State of Lithuania), festive and religious events take place in Vilnius. On the evening of 12 January, bonfires are lit to commemorate the January Events.

Kaziuko mugė (Saint Casimir&#x27;s Fair), held annually in the city&#x27;s markets and streets on the Sunday nearest to 4 March (the feast of Saint Casimir), attracts many visitors and Lithuanian and foreign craftspeople. Easter palms () are symbolic of the fair. Capital Days (), Vilnius&#x27; largest festival of music and culture, is held from 30 August to 1 September. The river Vilnia is dyed green every year for Saint Patrick&#x27;s Day. During the annual Vilnius Culture Night, artists and cultural organisations hold events and performances throughout the city.

==Administration==

===Government===
Before Magdeburg rights were granted to Vilnius in 1378, the city was ruled by vicegerents. Government was later granted to a magistrate or a city council, subordinate to the ruler. In wartime, it was led by a voivode. The government headquarters was at Vilnius Town Hall.

The magistrate was responsible for the city&#x27;s economy: collecting taxes, overseeing the treasury, and accumulating stocks of grain to avoid starvation during famine or wars. He was a notary in transactions and testaments, a judge in conflicts involving construction and renovation, and took care of craftspeople; statutes involving workshops were approved by the ruler, but Sigismund II Augustus gave this responsibility to magistrates in 1552. Since a 1522 ruling by Sigismund I the Old, Vilnius magistrates had to protect the city and its residents with 24 armed guards. During wartime, the night watch was conducted by the magistrate, bishop and castle men.
The chief city administrator was a Catholic &quot;vaitas&quot; (a vicegerent of the Grand Duke of Lithuania), most of whom were beginning their careers in the magistracy, and chaired city-council meetings. He adjudicated criminal cases, with the right to impose capital punishment. Originally examining cases alone, two &quot;suolininkai&quot; also began examining important cases in the 16th century. At that time, the city council consisted of 12 burgomasters and 24 councilors; half were Catholics, the other half Orthodox). Members were chosen by wealthy townspeople, merchants, and workshop elders. Burgomasters were lifetime appointments; at death, another member of the council with the same religion was chosen. In 1536, Sigismund I the Old signed an edict prohibiting close relatives on the council and requiring prior agreement by the townspeople of new taxes, obligations and regulations.
Under the Russian Empire, the city council was replaced with a city duma. Vilnius was the capital of the Lithuania Governorate from 1797 to 1801, the Vilna Governorate-General from 1794 to 1912, and the Vilna Governorate from 1795 to 1915. After the Soviet occupation of Lithuania, Vilnius was the capital of the Lithuanian Soviet Socialist Republic.

====Vilnius City Municipality====
The Vilnius City Municipality is the representative self-government organ, one of 60 municipalities of Lithuania. In addition to Vilnius proper, it includes the town of Grigiškės, as well as the villages and rural areas of the .

The , established in 1990, is elected to four-year terms, and candidates are nominated by political parties and committees. Beginning with the 2011 elections, independent candidates are permitted. Its executive organ is the .

Before 2015, mayors were appointed by the council. Beginning that year, mayors were elected in a two-round system. Remigijus Šimašius was the city&#x27;s first directly elected mayor.

===Subdivisions===
Elderships, a statewide administrative division, are municipal districts. The 21 elderships are based on neighbourhoods:

# Verkiai – includes Baltupiai, Jeruzalė, Santariškės, Balsiai, and Visoriai
# Antakalnis – includes Valakampiai, Turniškės, and Dvarčionys
# Pašilaičiai – includes Tarandė
# Fabijoniškės – includes Bajorai
# Pilaitė
# Justiniškės
# Viršuliškės
# Šeškinė
# Šnipiškės
# Žirmūnai – includes and 
# Karoliniškės
# Žvėrynas
# Grigiškės – a town
# Lazdynai
# Vilkpėdė – includes Vingis Park
# Naujamiestis – includes bus and train stations
# Senamiestis (Old Town) – includes Užupis
# Naujoji Vilnia – includes Pavilnys and Pūčkoriai
# Paneriai – includes Trakų Vokė and Gariūnai
# Naujininkai – includes Kirtimai, Salininkai, and Vilnius International Airport
# Rasos – includes Belmontas and Markučiai

===Vilnius District Municipality===

Vilnius District Municipality (), one of the country&#x27;s largest municipalities, covers and has 23 elderships. There are over 1,000 villages and five towns (Nemenčinė, Bezdonys, Maišiagala, Mickūnai and Šumskas) in the district. It borders Belarus and the Švenčionys, Moletai, Širvintos, Elektrėnai, Trakai and Šalčininkai districts.

The district has a multinational population, of which 52 percent are Poles, 33 percent Lithuanians, and the remainder Russians, Belarusians and other nationalities (including Ukrainians). It has a population of over 100,000; 95 percent live in villages, and five percent live in towns. Vilnius district has Lithuania&#x27;s highest terrain, with the Aukštojas, Juozapinė and Kruopinė Hills over above sea level.

Palm Sunday is celebrated in the district, and Vilnian Easter palms (&quot;verbos&quot;) are made from dried flowers and herbs. Palm-making dates to the time of St. Casimir.

Medininkai Castle, the Liubavas Manor mill and Bareikiškės Manor are the district&#x27;s best-known historic landmarks. From 1769 to 1795, Vilnius Voivodeship surrounded the independent Republic of Paulava. The microstate, known for its Enlightenment values, had its own president, peasant parliament, army and laws.

With its large Polish population, the Vilnius District Municipality Council primarily consists of members of the Electoral Action of Poles in Lithuania party. Its mayor is Robert Duchniewicz of the Lithuanian Social Democratic Union.

===National government===
Vilnius is the seat of Lithuania&#x27;s national government. The country&#x27;s two chief officers have their offices in Vilnius. The president resides at the Presidential Palace in Daukanto Square, and the prime minister&#x27;s seat is at the Government of Lithuania office in Gediminas Avenue. According to law, the president has a residence in Vilnius&#x27; Turniškės district near the Neris. The prime minister is also has entitled to a residence in Turniškės district during their term in office. Government ministries are located throughout the city, many in the Old Town.

The Seimas of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania primarily gathered in Vilnius. The present-day Seimas meets at the Seimas Palace in Gediminas Avenue.

Lithuania&#x27;s highest courts are in Vilnius. The Supreme Court of Lithuania (), which reviews criminal and civil cases, is in Gynėjų Street. The Supreme Administrative Court of Lithuania (), which adjudicates litigation against public bodies, is in Žygimantų Street. The Constitutional Court of Lithuania (), an advisory body with authority over the constitutionality of laws, meets in the Constitutional Court Palace in Gediminas Avenue. The Lithuanian Tribunal, the highest appellate court for the nobility of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and established by Stephen Báthory in 1581, was in Vilnius until the Third Partition of Poland in 1795.

===Special services===
Security in Vilnius is primarily the responsibility of the &quot;Vilniaus apskrities vyriausiasis policijos komisariatas&quot;, the highest police office in the city, and local police offices. Its main responsibilities are ensuring public order and safety, reporting and investigating criminal offenses, and traffic control. In 2016, the city had 1,500 police officers. The Public Security Service is responsible for the prompt restoration of public order in special situations and ensuring the protection of important state objects and escorted subjects.

&quot;Vilniaus apskrities priešgaisrinė gelbėjimo valdyba&quot; is the primary governing body of Vilnius&#x27;s firefighters. There were 1,287 fire incidents in the first nine months of 2018, killing six people and injuring 16.

&quot;Vilniaus greitosios medicinos pagalbos stotis&quot; is responsible for emergency medical services in the city, and the EMS telephone number is 033. Established in 1902, it is one of eastern Europe&#x27;s oldest EMS institutions. Many doctors and other personnel received medals for their assistance to victims of the 1991 January Events. The common number for contacting emergency services in Vilnius and other parts of Lithuania is 112.

==Cityscape==

===Urbanism and architecture===
The Old Town covers about , and its history dates to the Neolithic. The glacial hills were intermittently occupied, and a wooden castle was built at the confluence of the Neris and Vilnia to fortify Gedimino Hill. The settlement developed into a town in the 13th century, when the pagan Baltic people were invaded by Western Europeans during the Lithuanian Crusade. Around 1323 (the first written sources about Vilnia), it was the capital of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and had a few brick buildings. By the 15th century, the duchy extended from the Baltic to the Black Sea (primarily present-day Belarus, Ukraine and Russia). The historic centre consists of three castles (Upper, Lower and Curved) and the area previously encircled by the Wall of Vilnius. It is mainly circular, centered on the original castle site. Streets are small and narrow, with large squares later developed. Pilies Street, the main artery, links the Palace of the Grand Dukes of Lithuania with Vilnius Town Hall. Other streets are lined with the palaces of feudal lords and landlords, churches, shops and craftspeople&#x27;s workrooms.

Historic buildings feature Gothic, Renaissance, Baroque and classical architecture. The variety of preserved churches and former palaces of the Lithuanian nobility exemplifies Vilnius&#x27; multicultural heritage.

Lithuanians and others shaped the development of the capital, with Western and Eastern influences. Lithuania was Christianized in 1387, but Eastern Orthodoxy and the growing importance of Judaism led to construction of the Orthodox Cathedral of the Theotokos and the Great Synagogue of Vilna).
Disasters resulted in building reconstructions in Vilnian Baroque style, which later influenced the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. Artists such as Matteo Castelli and Pietro Perti) from the present-day Canton of Ticino were preferred by the Grand Duke and local nobility, and designed the Chapel of Saint Casimir. The Lithuanian Laurynas Gucevičius was a noted classical architect in the city.

The Old Town was designated as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1994. The Vilnius Historic Centre is noted for maintaining its medieval street pattern with no significant gaps. Some places were damaged during Lithuania&#x27;s occupations and wars, including Cathedral Square (demolished in 1795) and a square east of the Church of All Saints where the Convent of the Barefoot Carmelites stood with Vice-Chancellor Stefan Pac&#x27;s Baroque Church of St. Joseph the Betrothed (both demolished by the tsar. The Great Synagogue and part of the buildings in Vokiečių Street were demolished after World War II.

Vilnius covers , of which one-fifth is developed; the remainder is greenspace and water. The city is known as one of Europe&#x27;s &quot;greenest&quot; capital cities.

===Crypts===
Notable Lithuanian Catholics are interred in the crypts of Vilnius Cathedral. Grand Duke Alexander Jagiellon, Queen Elizabeth of Austria, Barbara Radziwiłł, and the heart of Grand Duke Władysław IV Vasa are buried at the Royal Mausoleum. These crypts have one of the country&#x27;s oldest frescoes, painted in the late 14th or early 15th century after Lithuania was Christianized.

===Housing===

Vilnius Old Town (), with medieval stone-paved streets, and Užupis have prestigious housing, with apartments featuring views of iconic churches and urban landmarks (particularly Gediminas Tower), enclosed inner courtyards, high ceilings, attics, non-standard layouts and luxurious interiors; Flats in these neighbourhoods may cost millions of euros. Traffic jams, expensive parking, air pollution, high maintenance costs and limitations on renovation, however, also encourage wealthy Vilnians to buy or build private houses in outlying parts of the city such as Balsiai, Bajorai, Pavilnys, Kalnėnai and Pilaitė or the nearby Vilnius District Municipality. Around 21,000 residents live in the Old Town, and 7,000 in Užupis.

Valakampiai and Turniškės are prestigious neighborhoods, with private houses on large lots surrounded by pine forests which are easily accessible from the city centre. Wealthy people and heads of state (such as the president) live there, and most of the larger private houses costs millions of euros. Part of the Žvėrynas neighbourhood has luxurious private houses near Vingis Park, but it also has Soviet-era apartment buildings and wooden houses in poor condition.

Neighbourhoods around the Old Town (Antakalnis, Žirmūnai, Naujamiestis, and Žvėrynas) have a variety of flats and green space, and are popular with middle-class residents. Wealthier people live in a new construction or renovated Soviet-era apartments. The government is supportive of renovation, and reimburses 30 percent or more of the cost. Poorer residents and low-income pensioners, however, foster regionalism.

More-distant neighbourhoods, such as Lazdynai, Karoliniškės, Viršuliškės, Šeškinė, Justiniškės, Pašilaičiai, Fabijoniškės and Naujininkai, have more-affordable housing. Their disadvantages are a longer commute, unrenovated Soviet-era high-rise buildings, traffic congestion and a shortage of parking spaces near older apartments.
The Šnipiškės eldership has received significant investment during the 2010s. The area was first mentioned in 1536, when Grand Duke Sigismund I the Old ordered Ulrich Hosius to build a wooden bridge over the Neris and a suburb developed around the bridge. That century, a building for Muscovite and Tatar messengers was built by the magistrate of Vilnius north of Šnipiškės. The Jesuit Church of St. Raphael the Archangel and monastery and housing for wealthy and middle-class townspeople were built in Šnipiškės during the 18th century. Craftspeople lived on the outskirts, where a smoking-pipe factory, sawmills and a small candy factory were built. The Skansenas neighbourhood, west of the Kalvarijų market, has late-19th-century wooden houses. Nearby Piromontas was built at the same time.

During the 1960s, Šnipiškės was renamed the New City Centre. It had the city&#x27;s first pedestrian zone and a number of buildings, including the country&#x27;s largest shopping centre, a large hotel, a planetarium, a museum and a number of ministries of the Lithuanian SSR, were built before 1990. Šnipiškės north of Konstitucijos Avenue was underdeveloped until the early 2000s, when the new Vilnius city municipality building spurred construction of Europa Square with a shopping centre, a 33-story office building and a 27-story apartment building. The former Museum of the Revolution became the National Art Gallery in the late 2000s.
According to economists, the number of transactions and the housing affordability index reached record highs in 2019 because of increased city-residents&#x27; income and slowing price increases for flats. One-fourth of residents 26 to 35 years old still live in homes owned by their parents or other relatives, however, the highest percentage in the Baltic states.

==Demographics==

In the eldership of Vilkpėdė, remnants of a Magdalenian settlement were found which date to . Kairėnai, Pūčkoriai and Naujoji Vilnia had large settlements during the first millennium AD. The most densely-populated area was the confluence of the Neris and Vilnia, which had fortified homesteads.

According to some historians, Vilnius could have been a city during the Kingdom of Lithuania times: King Mindaugas did not permanently live there, however, may have built Lithuania&#x27;s first Catholic church for his coronation there. It is well established, however, that Vilnius existed as a city during the times of Traidenis and Vytenis. The first mention in the historical sources as a capital in 1323 in the letters to the Western cities of Gediminas.

It became a multicultural city, with 14th-century sources noting that it consisted of a Great (Lithuanian) city and a Ruthenian one. By the 16th century, German merchants, artisans, Jews and Tatars had also settled in Vilnius. During the 16th– and 17th-century Reformation and Counter-Reformation, the city&#x27;s Polish-speaking population began to grow; by the middle of the 17th century, most writing was in Polish. City was inhabited by a large number of Italian and Swiss artisans as well and generally all the European nations were presented to an extent (those included Vilnius university professors and students among whom there were French, Spanish, Swedes and even some Croatians as Tomaš Zdelarius, musicians at the Palace of the Grand Dukes of Lithuania or such military servants as Hungarian Gáspár Bekes). Because of many nations inhabiting the city, in the 16th-18th. centuries it was known and nicknamed in Western sources as Babylon of Europe.

By the inter-war period, after the brief Polish–Lithuanian War and the annexation of the so-called Republic of Central Lithuania by Poland, the population became overwhelmingly Polish with very significant Jewish minority. Because of the annexation, the 1931 Polish census recorded only 0.8% Lithuanians. After World War II, the number of ethnic Lithuanians in Vilnius rebounded; however, Lithuanization was soon replaced with Sovietization, and the population became a mix of Lithuanians, Russians and Poles. Following independence in 1990, for the first time in modern history Lithuanians became a clear majority, increasing to 63.2 percent in 2011 and 67.4 percent in 2021.

===Evolution===
Demographic evolution of Vilnius between 1766 and 2024:
==Economy==
Vilnius is Lithuania&#x27;s economic centre, with a per-capita GDP in the metropolitan area of almost €30,000. The city&#x27;s budget reached €1.0 billion in 2022. In the second quarter of 2024, the average monthly salary in Vilnius was €2,501.1 (gross) and €1,526.2 (net).
Lithuania&#x27;s economic growth has been uneven, with GDP per capita at nearly 110 percent of the EU average in Vilnius but from 42 to 77 percent in other regions. The country&#x27;s convergence is fuelled by two regions (Vilnius and Kaunas County) which produce 42 and 20 percent of the national GDP, respectively. From 2014 to 2016, the Vilnius region grew by 4.6 percent.

The supply of new housing in Vilnius and its suburbs has reached post-recession highs, and the stock of unsold apartments in Lithuania&#x27;s three largest cities has begun to increase since the beginning of 2017. Demand for housing is strong, fuelled by rising wages, benign financial conditions and positive expectations. In the first half of 2018, the number of monthly transactions was the highest since its 2007–2008 peak. Most foreign direct investment and productive public investment in Lithuania is concentrated on Vilnius and Kaunas. Vilnius Industrial Park, 18.5 kilometres from the city, is intended for commercial and industrial use.

===Science and research===

Vilnius resident Tito Livio Burattini published &quot;Misura universale&quot; in 1675, in which he first suggested the term metre as a unit of length. The Vilnius University Astronomical Observatory, established in 1753 at the initiative of Thomas Zebrowski, was one of Europe&#x27;s first observatories and the first in the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth. Marcin Odlanicki Poczobutt led the reconstruction of the observatory, designed by Marcin Knackfus, from 1770 to 1772. Poczobutt began his astronomical observations in 1773, recording them in the journal (), and created the constellation &quot;Taurus Poniatovii&quot;. Jean-Emmanuel Gilibert established the Botanical Garden of Vilnius University in 1781 with over 2,000 plants, and provided the first herbariums, collections of stuffed animals and birds, fossil plants, animal remains, and a collection of minerals to Vilnius University., The observatory published the Russian Empire&#x27;s first exact sciences journal, the &quot;Journal of Mathematical Sciences&quot; (), after the Third Partition of Poland.
Sunrise Valley Science and Technology Park () is a non-profit organization which was founded in 2003. Over 20,000 students study in the Vilnius University and Vilnius Gediminas Technical University facilities in Sunrise Valley, and 5,000 scientists conduct research in its science centres.

The Centre for Physical Sciences and Technology (, FTMC) is the country&#x27;s largest scientific research institution, specialising in laser technology, optoelectronics, nuclear physics, organic chemistry, bio and nanotechnology, electrochemical materials science, and electronics. The centre was created in 2010 with the merger of the institutes of chemistry, physics and semiconductor physics in Vilnius and the Textile institute in Kaunas. With 250 laboratories (24 open to the public), it can accommodate over 700 researchers and students. The centre has a PhD program and hosts annual conferences of PhD students and young researchers. FTMC is the founder and sole shareholder of the Science and Technology Park of Institute of Physics in Savanorių Avenue, which assists companies with research and development.

Vilnius University&#x27;s Laser Research Centre () is one of five departments in the university&#x27;s Faculty of Physics, which prepares physicists, laser physicists and laser-technology specialists. The department conducts research in laser physics, nonlinear optics, optical-component characterization, biophotonics and laser microtechnology. Lithuania has over 50 percent of the world&#x27;s market share in ultrashort pulses lasers produced by Vilnius-based companies. A laser system was produced in 2019 for the Extreme Light Infrastructure laboratory in Szeged which produces high-intensity, ultra-short pulses with a peak power up to 1,000 times that of the most powerful nuclear power plant in the United States. Corning Inc. bought a glass-cutting licence from the Vilnius-based laser company Altechna and for manufacturing Gorilla Glass.
The Vilnius University Life Sciences Centre () is a scientific research centre which consists of three institutes: the Institute of Biochemistry, Institute of Biosciences, and Institute of Biotechnology. The centre was opened in 2016 and has 800 students, 120 PhD students, 200 teaching staff, and open-access scientific laboratories with advanced equipment. It has a technology business incubator for small and medium businesses in the life sciences or related fields. Vilnius Gediminas Technical University has three research centres at Sunrise Valley: the Civil Engineering Research Centre, Technology Centre for Building Information and Digital Modelling, and Competence Centre of Intermodal Transport and Logistics.

The Lithuanian Centre for Social Sciences (), which cooperates with the Lithuanian government, produces and disseminates scientific information in the fields of economics, sociology and law to implement public policy. Santara Valley () is a science and research facility which focuses on medicine, biopharmaceutical and bioinformatics. The Vilnius University Faculty of Medicine Science Centre was scheduled for completion in Santara Valley in 2021.

Vilnius University rector Jonas Kubilius, known for probabilistic number theory, the Kubilius model, the Theorem of Kubilius and Turán–Kubilius inequality, successfully resisted attempts to Russify Vilnius University. Vilnius&#x27; Marija Gimbutas was the first to formulate the Kurgan hypothesis. In 1963, Vytautas Straižys and his colleagues created the Vilnius photometric system used in astronomy. Kavli Prize laureate Virginijus Šikšnys invented CRISPR-Cas9 genetic editing.

===Information technology===

Vilnius is attractive for foreign companies because of its qualified employees and good infrastructure. Several schools are preparing skilled specialists, including the Vilnius University Faculty of Mathematics and Informatics and Vilnius Gediminas Technical University Faculty of Fundamental Sciences. Information technology jobs are well-paid. The 2018 output of the Lituanian IT sector was  billion, much of which was created in Vilnius.

Vilnius Tech Park in Sapieha Park, the largest IT startup hub in the Baltic and Nordic countries, unites international startups, technology companies, accelerators, and incubators. &quot;fDi Intelligence&quot; ranked Vilnius number one city on its 2019 Tech Start-up FDI Attraction Index.

Vilnius had the world&#x27;s fastest internet speed in 2011 and, despite its fall in the rankings, remains one of the world&#x27;s fastest. Vilnius Airport has one of Europe&#x27;s fastest airport Wi-Fi speeds. The National Cyber Security Centre of Lithuania was established in Vilnius to address internet attacks on Lithuanian government organizations.

Bebras, an international informatics and IT contest, has been held annually for pupils in grades three through 12 since 2004. Since 2017, computer programming is taught in primary schools.

Vilnius is a popular fintech hub due to Lithuania&#x27;s flexible e-money licence regulations. The Bank of Lithuania granted an e-money licence in 2018 to Vilnius-based Google Payment Lithuania. The startup Revolut also has an e-money licence and headquarters in Vilnius, and began moving its clients to the Lithuanian company Revolut Payments in 2019. On 23 January 2019, Europe&#x27;s first international blockchain centre opened in Vilnius.

===Finance and banking===

Vilnius is Lithuania&#x27;s financial centre. The Ministry of Finance in Vilnius is responsible for an effective public financial policy to ensure the country&#x27;s economic growth. The Bank of Lithuania fosters a reliable financial system and ensures sustainable economic growth. The Nasdaq Vilnius stock exchange is in The K29 business centre.
The National Audit Office of Lithuania () helps the government manage public funds and property, and the State Tax Inspectorate () is responsible for collecting and refunding taxes.

In 2023, 13 banks held a bank or specialised-bank licence; six banks are foreign-bank branches. Most of the Lithuanian financial system consists of capital banks of Nordic countries. The two largest banks registered in Lithuania (SEB bankas and Swedbank) are supervised by the European Central Bank and the Bank of Lithuania.

==Education==

===Primary and secondary education===

Primary and lower secondary education is mandatory in Lithuania. Children begin pre-primary education at age six, education is compulsory until age 16. Primary and secondary education is free, but there are also private schools in Vilnius. The country&#x27;s educational system is governed by the Ministry of Education, Science and Sports, headquartered in Vilnius.

Cathedral School of Vilnius, first mentioned in a 1397 source, is the earliest known Lithuanian school. Vilnius Vytautas the Great Gymnasium, established in 1915, is the first Lithuanian gymnasium in eastern Lithuania. In 2018, the city had 120 schools (not including preschools) with 61,123 pupils and 4,955 teachers. Four out of five best rated schools in Lithuania are in Vilnius, and the Vilnius Lyceum is number one.

Ethnic minorities in Lithuania have their own schools. Vilnius has seven elementary schools, eight primary schools, two progymnasiums and 12 gymnasiums for minority children, with lessons in minority languages. In 2017, 4,658 Poles and 9,274 Russians studied in their languages in the city. Vilnius has 11 vocational schools.

The National M. K. Čiurlionis School of Art is the country&#x27;s only 12-year art school. The Vilnius Justinas Vienožinskis Art School is another art school in Vilnius.

Most school graduates in Vilnius later study at universities or colleges. According to the OECD, 57.5 percent of 25– to 34-year-olds in Lithuania had a tertiary education in 2021.
Vilnius has nine international schools, including the International School of Vilnius, Vilnius International French Lyceum, British International School of Vilnius, and American International School of Vilnius.

===Tertiary education===

On 14 October 1773, the Commission of National Education () was created by the Sejm of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth and Grand Duke Stanisław August Poniatowski, who supervised schools and Vilnius University in the Commonwealth. Because of its authority and autonomy, it is considered Europe&#x27;s first ministry of education and an example of the Enlightenment in the Commonwealth.

Vilnius has a number of universities, the largest and oldest of which is Vilnius University. With its main campus in the Old Town, it has been ranked among the top 500 universities in the world by QS World University Rankings. The university participates in projects with UNESCO and NATO. It has master&#x27;s programs in English and Russian, and programs in cooperation with other universities throughout Europe. The university has 14 faculties.

Other universities include Mykolas Romeris University, Vilnius Gediminas Technical University and the Lithuanian University of Educational Sciences, which merged with Vytautas Magnus University in 2018. Specialized tertiary schools with university status include the General Jonas Žemaitis Military Academy of Lithuania, the Lithuanian Academy of Music and Theatre, and the Vilnius Academy of Arts. The museum associated with the Vilnius Academy of Arts contains about 12,000 artworks.

===Libraries===

The Vilnius city municipality central library () operates public libraries in the city. It has 16 branches, one (Saulutė) dedicated to children&#x27;s literature. Many libraries offer free computer literacy courses. The public libraries require a free LIBIS (integrated information system of Lithuanian libraries) card.

The Martynas Mažvydas National Library of Lithuania () in Gediminas Avenue, founded in 1919, collects, organizes and preserves Lithuania&#x27;s written cultural heritage, collects Lithuanian and foreign documents relevant to research and Lithuania&#x27;s educational and cultural needs, and provides library services to the public. By 1 July 2019, its electronic catalog had 1,140,708 bibliographic records.

The Wroblewski Library of the Lithuanian Academy of Sciences () is open to all. The library had 3,733,514 volumes by 1 January 2015, and 12,274 registered users.

Every Lithuanian university and college has a library for students, professors and alumni. The National Open Access Scientific Communication and Information Center of Vilnius University () in Saulėtekis Valley opened in 2013 and has over 800 workplaces in an area of . Central Vilnius University Library, Vilnius Gediminas Technical University Library, Mykolas Romeris University Library, ISM University of Management and Economics Library, European Humanities University Library, and Kazimieras Simonavičius University Library are on their respective campuses in Vilnius.

==Religion==

By the 17th century, Vilnius was known as a city of numerous religions. In 1600, Samuel Lewkenor&#x27;s book about cities with universities was published in London; According to Lewkenor, Vilnius&#x27; population included Catholics, Orthodox, followers of John Calvin and Martin Luther, Jews and Tartar Muslims.

During that century, Vilnius had a reputation as a city unrivaled in Europe for its number and variety of churches. Robert Morden wrote in &quot;Geography Rectified or a Description of the World&quot; that no other city in the world could surpass Vilnius in the number of churches and temples except, perhaps, Amsterdam.

Vilnius is the seat of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Vilnius, housing major church institutions and the archdiocesan Vilnius Cathedral. A number of Christian beatified people, martyrs, servants of God and saints are associated with the city. They include the Franciscan martyrs of Vilnius, the Orthodox martyrs Anthony, John, and Eustathius, Saint Casimir, Josaphat Kuntsevych, Andrew Bobola, Raphael Kalinowski, Faustina Kowalska, and Jurgis Matulaitis-Matulevičius. There are a number of Roman Catholic churches in the city, small monasteries, and religious schools. Church architecture includes Gothic, Renaissance, Baroque and neoclassical styles, with examples of each in the Old Town. Eastern Rite Catholicism has also had a presence in Vilnius since the Union of Brest. The Baroque Basilian Gate is part of an Eastern Rite monastery.
Vilnius has had an Eastern Orthodox presence since the 12th century, and the Russian Orthodox Monastery of the Holy Spirit is near the [Gate of Dawn. St. Paraskeva&#x27;s Orthodox Church in the Old Town was the site of the 1705 baptism of Hannibal, the great-grandfather of Alexander Pushkin, by Tsar Peter the Great. Many Old Believers, who split from the Russian Orthodox Church in 1667, settled in Lithuania; a Supreme Council of Old Believers is based in Vilnius. The Orthodox Church of St. Constantine and St. Michael was built in 1913. A number of Protestant and other Christian denominations are represented in Vilnius, notably Lutheran Evangelicals and Baptists.

Lithuania&#x27;s pre-Christian religion, centred on the forces of nature and personified by deities such as Perkūnas (the thunder god), is experiencing increased interest. Romuva established a Vilnius branch in 1991.

===Judaism and Karaism===
Known as &quot;Yerushalayim D&#x27;Lita&quot; (the Jerusalem of Lithuania), Vilnius had been a world centre for Torah study and had a large Jewish population since the 18th century. A major scholar of Judaism and the Kabbalah was Rabbi Eliyahu Kremer, known as the Vilna Gaon, whose writings significantly influence Orthodox Jews. The Vilna Shas, the most widely used version of the Talmud, was published in the city in 1886. Jewish life in Vilnius was destroyed during the Holocaust, and a memorial stone dedicated to victims of Nazi genocide is in the centre of the former Jewish Ghetto on present-day Mėsinių Street. The Vilna Gaon Museum of Jewish History is dedicated to the history of Lithuanian Jewish life. The site of Vilnius&#x27;s largest synagogue, built in the early 1630s, destroyed by Nazi Germany during its occupation of Lithuania and later demolished by Soviet authorities, was found by ground-penetrating radar in June 2015. Archaeologists began excavating the site in 2016, and that work continues as of July 2024.

The Karaites are a Jewish sect who migrated to Lithuania from the Crimea. Small in numbers, they have become more prominent since Lithuanian independence and have restored their kenesas (including the Vilnius Kenesa).

===Pilgrimage sites===
Since the 1387 Christianization of Lithuania, Vilnius has become a centre of Christianity in the country and a pilgrimage site. The Vilnius Pilgrimage Centre () coordinates pilgrimages, assists with their preparation, and performs pilgrimage pastoral care. A number of places in Vilnius are associated with miracles or mark events significant to Christians, and the Chapel of the Gate of Dawn is visited by thousands of Christian pilgrims annually. The gates were initially part of the defensive Wall of Vilnius; they were given to the Carmelites in the 16th century, who installed a chapel in the gates with a 17th-century Catholic painting: &quot;Our Lady of the Gate of Dawn&quot;. The painting was later decorated with gold-plated silver and is associated with miracles and a legend.
The Sanctuary of the Divine Mercy is a pilgrimage site which has a Divine Mercy image. Vilnius was the birthplace of the Divine Mercy devotion when Saint Faustina Kowalska began her mission under the guidance of Michał Sopoćko, her spiritual director. The first Divine Mercy image was painted in 1934 by Eugeniusz Kazimirowski under the supervision of Kowalska, and it hangs in the Divine Mercy Sanctuary in Vilnius. Adoration of the Blessed Sacrament takes place in the shrine around the clock. The House of St. Faustina, in Antakalnis&#x27; V. Grybo Street, is open to pilgrims.

The Church of St. Philip and St. Jacob, near Lukiškės Square, has the painting of the Mother of God of Lukiškės which has reportedly attracted miracles. The icon, painted in the 15th or 16th century, is one of the country&#x27;s oldest examples of easel painting. It was brought by Grand Duchy of Lithuania artillery general Motiejus Korvinas Gosievskis from the Russo-Polish War. Since 1684, miracles have been reported at the Vilnius Dominican monastery related to the image which were published in a 1737 book, &quot;Mystical Fountain&quot; (). The icon was restored and returned to the Dominicans in 2012.

Three Crosses is a monument in the city. According to a legend in the &quot;Bychowiec Chronicle&quot;, fourteen Franciscan friars were invited to Vilnius from Podolia by Petras Goštautas. The friars preached the gospel and denigrated pagan Lithuanian gods; angry city residents burned the monastery and killed the fourteen friars. Seven were beheaded on Bleak Hill, and the other seven were crucified and thrown into the Neris or Vilnia.
Verkiai Calvary (or Vilnius Calvary), Lithuania&#x27;s second-oldest calvary, is in the neighborhood of Verkiai. The calvary was built from 1662 to 1669 in gratitude for victory in the Second Northern War (1655–60). The consecration ceremony of the Stations of the Cross took place for Pentecost on 9 June 1669. The calvary includes 20 brick chapels, seven wooden gates and a brick one, and a bridge with a wood chapel. The path ends at the Church of the Discovery of the Holy Cross. All the chapels except the four closest to the church were destroyed by Soviet authorities overnight with dynamite in 1962. The calvary was reconstructed from 1990 to 2002, and the chapels were consecrated on Pentecost in 2002. Pilgrimages to the calvary are organized regularly with the clergy.

The Church Heritage Museum () contains city&#x27;s the oldest and largest collection of liturgical artefacts in the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Vilnius. Vilnius is the only city in the Baltic states with an Apostolic Nunciature, where Pope John Paul II and Pope Francis stayed during their visits to Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia.

==Parks, squares and cemeteries==

Almost half of Vilnius is covered by green space such as parks, public gardens, and nature reserves. The city has a number of lakes where residents and visitors swim and barbecue in the summer. Thirty lakes and 16 rivers cover 2.1 percent of Vilnius&#x27; area, some of which have sand beaches.

Vingis Park, the city&#x27;s largest, hosted several large rallies during Lithuania&#x27;s drive towards independence in the 1980s. Sections of the annual Vilnius Marathon are on public walkways along the Neris. The green area next to the White Bridge is a popular place to enjoy good weather, and has become a venue for several musical and film events.
Cathedral Square in the Old Town is surrounded by a number of the city&#x27;s most historic sites. Lukiškės Square is the largest, bordered by several government buildings: the Lithuanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Finance, Polish Embassy and the Genocide Victims&#x27; Museum, where the KGB tortured and killed opponents of the communist regime. A large statue of Vladimir Lenin in its centre was removed in 1991. Town Hall Square has been a centre of trade fairs, celebrations and events, including the Kaziukas Fair. The city&#x27;s Christmas tree is displayed there. State ceremonies are often held in Daukanto Square, facing the Presidential Palace.
Bernardinai Garden, near Gediminas Tower (previously known as Sereikiškės Park), opened on 20 October 2013 after it was restored to its 19th-century Vladislovas Štrausas environment. It is a venue for concerts, festivals, and exhibitions. Chiune Sugihara Sakura Park was established in 2001, and a Japanese garden (both in Šnipiškės) was opened in 2023.

Rasos Cemetery, consecrated in 1801, is the burial site of Jonas Basanavičius and other signatories of the 1918 Act of Independence and the heart of Polish leader Józef Piłsudski. Two of the city&#x27;s three Jewish cemeteries were destroyed by communist authorities during the Soviet era, and the remains in the Vilna Gaon were moved to the remaining one. A monument was erected at the site of Užupis Old Jewish Cemetery was. The Bernardine Cemetery, established in 1810, has about 18,000 burials; closed during the 1970s, it is being restored. Antakalnis Cemetery, established in 1809, has memorials to Polish, Lithuanian, German and Russian soldiers and the graves of those who were killed during the January Events.

==Tourism==
According to Lithuanian Department of Statistics, 1,200,858 visitors rented rooms in Vilnius in 2018 and spent a total of 2,212,109 nights there; this was a respective increase of 12 percent and 11 percent over the previous year. Eighty-one percent of the visitors were foreigners (970,577), 11 percent more than in 2017. Most foreign visitors (47 percent) came from Belarus (102,915), Germany (101,999), Poland (99,386), Russia (90,388) and Latvia (61,829). Nineteen percent of the guests were Lithuanian, 18 percent more than in 2017.

A 2018 Vilnius visitor survey reported that 48 percent were visiting the city for the first time, 85 percent of tourists planned the trip by themselves, and 15 percent used a travel agency. Forty percent said that they visited Vilnius to learn about the city&#x27;s history and heritage, with 23 percent also planning trips to other parts of Lithuania. Many Belarusians (about 200,000 travel visas annually) visit the city&#x27;s shopping malls and submit half-meter-long receipts to customs officials.

Vilnius&#x27; Tourist Information Centres were visited by 119,136 visitors in 2018 (95,932 foreigners and 23,204 Lithuanians), a five-percent increase over 2017. The city&#x27;s highest-rated tourist services are restaurants (cafés), old-town attractions, hotels or other accommodations, trips to Trakai, parks and other green zones, connections to Vilnius Airport, and food in hotels, restaurants and cafés. Vilnius is one of a few European capitals which allows hot air ballooning through the city, with nearly 1,000 trips in 2022. In the City Costs Barometer 2019, Vilnius was ranked number one of European capitals for offering the best value to visitors. The controversial Vilnius Palace of Concerts and Sports, built by Soviet authorities on the site of a Jewish graveyard, was scheduled to become the leading convention center in the Baltic states in 2022.

===Hotels===

Lithuania is a member of the European Hotelstars Union. Vilnius has six five-star hotels, all in the Old Town, and 27 four-star hotels. The Kempinski Hotel, with a view of Cathedral Square, is considered the city&#x27;s most luxurious hotel.

According to a 2018 Vilnius visitors&#x27; survey, 44 percent stayed in mid-range hotels (three or four stars), 12 percent stayed in standard or economy hotels (one or two stars) and 11 percent stayed in five-star hotels. The city had 82 hotels, eight motels and 40 other accommodation facilities in 2019, with 6,822 rooms and 15,248 beds. The highest hotel-room occupancy was in August, and the lowest was in February.

==Sports==

Several basketball teams are based in the city. BC Wolves began competing in the 2022–23 season of the Lithuanian Basketball League (LKL). The largest team is BC Rytas, who participates in the international Basketball Champions League (BCL) and the LKL; they won the ULEB Cup (predecessor to the EuroCup) in 2005 and the EuroCup in 2009. Their home arena is the 2,500-seat Jeep Arena; all European matches and important domestic matches are played at the 10,000-seat Twinsbet Arena.

Vilnius also has several football teams; FK Žalgiris, the main team, plays at the 5,000-seat LFF Stadium. The multi-use Lithuania National Stadium is under construction. The 28-court SEB Arena is the largest tennis complex in central Europe and home of the Lithuanian tennis and squash teams.

Olympic swimming champions Lina Kačiušytė and Robertas Žulpa are from Vilnius. The city has several public swimming pools, with the Lazdynai Swimming Pool the only Olympic-size swimming pool. Vilnius is home to the Lithuanian Bandy Association, Badminton Federation, Canoeing Sports Federation, Baseball Association, Biathlon Federation, Sailors Union, Football Federation, Fencing Federation, Cycling Sports Federation, Archery Federation, Athletics Federation, Ice Hockey Federation, Basketball Federation, Curling Federation, Rowing Federation, Wrestling Federation, Speed Skating Association, Gymnastics Federation, Equestrian Union, Modern Pentathlon Federation, Shooting Union, Triathlon Federation, Volleyball Federation, Tennis Union, Taekwondo Federation, Weightlifting Federation, Table Tennis Association, Skiing Association, Rugby Federation, and Swimming Federation. The annual international Vilnius Marathon has thousands of participants.

==Transport==

Navigability of the Neris is limited; no regular water routes exist, although it was used for transport in the past. Vilnius Airport, Lithuania&#x27;s largest, serves about 50 cities in 25 countries. The airport, from the city centre, has a direct link to the Vilnius railway station. The station is a rail hub with direct passenger service to Minsk, Kaliningrad, Moscow and Saint Petersburg, and is part of the Pan-European Corridor IX&#x27;s Branch B.

Vilnius is the starting point of the A1 motorway which runs across Lithuania, connecting its three major cities (Vilnius, Kaunas and Klaipėda), and is part of European route E85. The A2, connecting Vilnius and Panevėžys, is part of the E272. Other highways out of the city include the A3, A4, A14, A15, and A16. Vilnius&#x27; southern bypass is the A19.

===Bus service===
The bus and trolleybus networks are operated by Vilniaus viešasis transportas. There are over 60 bus, 18 trolleybus, six rapid bus and one night bus routes. The trolleybus network is one of Europe&#x27;s most extensive; over 250 buses and 260 trolleybuses transport about 500,000 passengers every workday. The first bus routes were established in 1926, and the first trolleybuses were introduced in 1956.

At the end of 2007, an electronic monthly ticket system was introduced in which passengers could buy an electronic card in shops and newsstands and load it with money; monthly e-ticket cards could also be loaded over the Internet. Paper monthly tickets were in use until August 2008. On 15 August 2012, e-cards were replaced by Vilnius Citizen Cards (Vilniečio Kortelė) which could be purchased at newsstands and loaded with money and ticket type. Single-trip tickets have been replaced by 30- and 60-minute tickets. In 2014, a mobile app was introduced for public-transport tickets.

Buses are low-floor Volvo and Mercedes-Benz buses, and trolleybuses are manufactured by Solaris. Older Škoda vehicles, built in the Czech Republic and many refurbished, are still in service. In 2004, a contract was signed with Volvo Buses to purchase 90 new 7700 buses over a three-year period.

In 2017, Vilnius began the largest upgrade of its bus service by purchasing 250 new low-floor buses. Sixty percent of the city&#x27;s public buses were new by mid-2018, with free Wi-Fi and chargers for electronic devices. On 5 September 2017, 50 new Isuzu buses were introduced. Vilnius City Municipality accepted bids for 41 new trolleybuses; Solaris contracted to provide the trolleybuses by autumn 2018, with free Wi-Fi and chargers. On 13 November of that year, the municipality signed a contract with Solaris for the remaining 150 fourth-generation Solaris Urbino buses (100 standard and 50 articulated) with free Wi-Fi and USB charging. Five electric Karsan Jest Electric buses were introduced on 20 September 2019 for the number 89 route&#x27;s narrow streets.

Since 2017, a 30-minute ticket costs ; a 60-minute ticket costs €0.90, and a single ticket bought on board costs €1.00. Short- and long-term tickets and discounts for students and the elderly are available.

Vilnius Metro and an electric tram have been proposed. In 2018, the Seimas and the president approved a metro project.

==Healthcare==
When Vilnius was part of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, the city had public bathhouses; one-fourth the city&#x27;s houses had individual bathhouses, and almost half had alcohol distilleries. In 1518, doctor and canon Martynas Dušnickis established the first &quot;špitolė&quot; in Vilnius: Lithuania&#x27;s first hospital-like institution which treated people unable to care for themselves due to health, age, or poverty.

The Brotherhood of Saint Roch maintained basic hospitals and shelters for the sick and disabled in Vilnius from 1708 to 1799, although it is unknown if the brothers had any medical education. They hired paramedics, doctors, surgeons, and female nurses for female patients. A significant number of patients had sexually transmitted diseases which other Catholic hospitals refused to treat. The brotherhood sheltered pregnant women, abandoned children and patients with injuries, tuberculosis, rheumatism and arthritis.

In 1805, the Vilnius Medical Society was established by Joseph Frank (son of Johann Peter Frank) as the first medical society in eastern Europe. The same year, the society established a teaching hospital (clinic) as part of the Vilnius University Faculty of Medicine. From 1918 to 1941, the Lithuanian Sanitary Aid Society operated in Vilnius.

The Ministry of Health, in Vilnius, is responsible for Lithuanian health care. Vilnians pay compulsory health insurance (6.98 percent of their salary), which is governed by the Vilnius Territorial Health Insurance Fund and guarantees free health care to every insured person. Some residents, such as the disabled, children and full-time students, are exempt from the tax.

Vilnius University Hospital Santaros Klinikos and the Vilnius City Clinical Hospital are the city&#x27;s primary hospitals. Vilnius also has eight polyclinics, the Medical Centre of the Ministry of the Interior, and a number of private health-care facilities.

==Media==

The first Lithuanian weekly newspaper, &quot;Kurier Litewski&quot;, was published in Vilnius from 1760 to 1763. Vilnius is home to a number of newspapers, magazines and other publications, including &quot;Lietuvos rytas&quot;, &quot;Lietuvos žinios&quot;, &quot;Verslo žinios&quot;, &quot;Respublika&quot;, &quot;Valstiečių laikraštis&quot;, &quot;Mokesčių žinios&quot;, &quot;Aktualijos&quot;, &quot;15min&quot;, &quot;Vilniaus diena&quot;, &quot;Vilniaus Kraštas&quot;, &quot;Lietuvos aidas&quot;, &quot;Valstybė&quot;, &quot;Veidas&quot;, &quot;Panelė&quot;, the Franciscan &quot;Bernardinai.lt&quot;, the Russian &quot;Litovskij kurjer&quot; and the Polish &quot;Tygodnik Wileńszczyzny&quot;.

The Vilnius TV Tower in Karoliniškės broadcasts to the city. The most-viewed networks in Lithuania are headquartered in Vilnius and include LRT televizija, TV3, LNK, BTV, LRT Plius, LRT Lituanica, TV6, Lietuvos rytas TV, TV1, TV8, Sport1, Liuks!, Info TV.
Vilnius&#x27; first radio station, &quot;Rozgłośnia Wileńska&quot;, began broadcasting in the Žvėrynas microdistrict on 28 November 1927 and was moved to present-day Gediminas Avenue in 1935. M-1, the country&#x27;s first commercial radio station, began broadcasting from Vilnius in 1989. Other Lithuanian or foreign-language radio stations also broadcast from Vilnius, most from the Vilnius TV Tower or the Vilnius Press House. The Lithuanian Union of Journalists () and the Lithuanian Society of Journalists () are headquartered in Vilnius.

==Twin towns and sister cities==
Vilnius is twinned with:
* Aalborg, Denmark
* Almaty, Kazakhstan
* Astana, Kazakhstan
* Chicago, United States
* Dnipro, Ukraine
* Donetsk, Ukraine
* Duisburg, Germany
* Erfurt, Germany
* Gdańsk, Poland (1998)
* Guangzhou, China
* Joensuu, Finland
* Kyiv, Ukraine
* Kraków, Poland
* Łódź, Poland
* Madison, United States
* Pavia, Italy
* Reykjavík, Iceland
* Riga, Latvia
* Salzburg, Austria
* Taipei, Taiwan
* Tallinn, Estonia
* Tbilisi, Georgia
* Warsaw, Poland

Twin and friendly towns until 2022:

* Irkutsk, Russia
* Kaliningrad, Russia
* Krasnoyarsk, Russia
* Minsk, Belarus
* Saint Petersburg, Russia
* Ulan-Ude, Russia
* Yaroslavl, Russia
==Notable people==

==See also==

*Coat of arms of Vilnius
*List of public art in Vilnius
*List of Vilnius Elderships in other languages
*Neighborhoods of Vilnius
*Vilnius conflict

==References==
===Bibliography===
*References from &quot;vle.lt&quot; stands for the &quot;Visuotinė lietuvių enciklopedija&quot;.
*
*
*

==External links==
* 
* The Jerusalem of Lithuania: The Story of the Jewish Community of Vilna an online exhibition by Yad Vashem
* A. Srebrakowski, &quot;The nationality panorama of Vilnius&quot;, &quot;Studia z Dziejów Rosji i Europy Środkowo-Wschodniej&quot;, Vol. 55, No. 3 (2020)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q216" start="0" end="7" title="Vilnius" label="Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36" end="48" title="List of cities in Lithuania#Cities" label="largest city"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="52" end="61" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6609832" start="70" end="88" title="List of cities in the Baltic states by population" label="most-populous city"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="96" end="109" title="Baltic states" label="Baltic states"/>
<link wikidata="Q117374137" start="182" end="200" title="Vilnius urban area" label="Vilnius urban area"/>
<link wikidata="Q445649" start="328" end="336" title="Vilnius Old Town" label="Old Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="356" end="362" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="432" end="458" title="World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568026" start="501" end="516" title="Vilnian Baroque" label="Vilnian Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q840829" start="578" end="585" title="Baroque architecture" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="632" end="636" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="666" end="690" title="#Demographics" label="multicultural population"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="702" end="732" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="776" end="783" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="792" end="804" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752358" start="809" end="822" title="The Holocaust in Lithuania" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="981" end="989" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q129372" start="1091" end="1118" title="European Capital of Culture" label="European Capital of Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q41329" start="1124" end="1128" title="Linz" label="Linz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5425303" start="1176" end="1179" title="fDi Intelligence" label="fDi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772346" start="1315" end="1345" title="Global Financial Centres Index" label="Global Financial Centres Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q16319025" start="1394" end="1401" title="fintech" label="fintech"/>
<link wikidata="Q116954207" start="1426" end="1442" title="2023 Vilnius summit" label="2023 NATO Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q686681" start="1468" end="1490" title="European Green Capital" label="European Green Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374874" start="1515" end="1525" title="Eurocities" label="Eurocities"/>
<link wikidata="Q661684" start="1658" end="1664" title="Vilnia" label="Vilnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="2011" end="2025" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="2290" end="2320" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="2350" end="2372" title="Second Polish Republic" label="Second Polish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q44342" start="2542" end="2548" title="legend" label="legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q37260" start="2549" end="2557" title="Writing" label="recorded"/>
<link wikidata="Q244852" start="2582" end="2591" title="Gediminas" label="Gediminas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12680256" start="2638" end="2662" title="Šventaragis&amp;#x27; Valley" label="Šventaragis&amp;#x27; Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q207903" start="2703" end="2708" title="Neris" label="Neris"/>
<link wikidata="Q81091" start="2725" end="2731" title="European bison" label="wisent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4179040" start="2859" end="2868" title="Iron Wolf (character)" label="Iron Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q447243" start="2948" end="2954" title="Kriwe" label="krivis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4261405" start="2961" end="2969" title="Lizdeika" label="Lizdeika"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598101" start="3102" end="3121" title="Vilnius Castle Complex" label="represents a castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q692301" start="3254" end="3266" title="List of heads of state of Lithuania" label="their rulers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633966" start="3349" end="3357" title="List of Lithuanian gods and mythological figures" label="the gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q83238" start="3436" end="3445" title="Three Crosses" label="Bald Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q11759" start="3631" end="3640" title="Stone Age" label="Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="3704" end="3728" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="3757" end="3765" title="Russian Empire" label="imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="3770" end="3783" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q71084" start="3785" end="3802" title="Napoleonic France" label="Napoleonic France"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="3804" end="3812" title="German Empire" label="imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="3817" end="3829" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="3831" end="3846" title="interwar Poland" label="interwar Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q207761" start="3922" end="3928" title="Balts" label="Baltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q244852" start="4055" end="4064" title="Gediminas" label="Gediminas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503652" start="4183" end="4212" title="Christianization of Lithuania" label="Christianization of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="4363" end="4393" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q658192" start="4481" end="4499" title="Vilnius University" label="Vilnius University"/>
<link wikidata="Q54030" start="4529" end="4544" title="Stephen Báthory" label="Stephen Báthory"/>
<link wikidata="Q48189" start="4788" end="4804" title="Teutonic Order" label="Teutonic Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q129797" start="4841" end="4862" title="Russian partition" label="imperial Russian rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q279583" start="4894" end="4911" title="Vilna Governorate" label="Vilna Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="5037" end="5054" title="Second Polish Republic" label="After World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q173761" start="5266" end="5302" title="Lithuanian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Lithuanian Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363003" start="5347" end="5384" title="Supreme Soviet of the Lithuanian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Supreme Council of the Lithuanian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823577" start="5399" end="5408" title="Act of the Re-Establishment of the State of Lithuania" label="secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540695" start="5568" end="5574" title="January Events" label="attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407353" start="5622" end="5638" title="Vilnius TV Tower" label="Vilnius TV Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865054" start="5754" end="5779" title="Constitution of Lithuania" label="Constitution of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5992" end="6002" title=":lt:Lietuvos administraciniai-teritoriniai pokyčiai 1989–2001 m.#Vilniaus apskritis" label="three acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q950639" start="6077" end="6086" title="Grigiškės" label="Grigiškės"/>
<link wikidata="Q16465406" start="6178" end="6193" title="Vilnius Central Business District" label="New City Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345944" start="6370" end="6382" title="Europa Tower" label="Europa Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145493" start="6433" end="6441" title="Swedbank" label="Swedbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="6490" end="6501" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6525" end="6549" title="Vilnius Business Harbour" label="Vilnius Business Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q129372" start="6708" end="6735" title="European Capital of Culture" label="European Capital of Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q41329" start="6741" end="6745" title="Linz" label="Linz"/>
<link wikidata="Q41967" start="6762" end="6775" title="Upper Austria" label="Upper Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="6781" end="6807" title="2007–2008 financial crisis" label="2007–2008 financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q208019" start="7070" end="7089" title="Eastern Partnership" label="Eastern Partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284847" start="7104" end="7142" title="Palace of the Grand Dukes of Lithuania" label="Palace of the Grand Dukes of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397662" start="7237" end="7255" title="Remigijus Šimašius" label="Remigijus Šimašius"/>
<link wikidata="Q116954207" start="7313" end="7329" title="2023 Vilnius summit" label="2023 NATO summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q723748" start="7385" end="7395" title="confluence" label="confluence"/>
<link wikidata="Q661684" start="7403" end="7409" title="Vilnia" label="Vilnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q207903" start="7414" end="7419" title="Neris" label="Neris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133467" start="7485" end="7516" title="geographical midpoint of Europe" label="geographical midpoint of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="7617" end="7647" title="Guinness Book of World Records" label="Guinness Book of World Records"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7764" end="7785" title="Jean-George Affholder" label="Jean-George Affholder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665102" start="7793" end="7823" title="Institut géographique national (France)" label="Institut Géographique National"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945123" start="7957" end="7974" title="centre of gravity" label="centre of gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="7991" end="8009" title="geometry" label="geometrical figure"/>
<link wikidata="Q16451794" start="8038" end="8044" title="Girija (village)" label="Girija"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="8223" end="8233" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q776965" start="8238" end="8246" title="Klaipėda" label="Klaipėda"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="8268" end="8275" title="Port" label="seaport"/>
<link wikidata="Q134712" start="8359" end="8367" title="Šiauliai" label="Šiauliai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719466" start="8380" end="8389" title="Panevėžys" label="Panevėžys"/>
<link wikidata="Q179049" start="8549" end="8563" title="nature reserve" label="nature reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q16445324" start="8889" end="8895" title="Balžis" label="Balžis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="8979" end="9004" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="9006" end="9035" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q25257" start="9205" end="9218" title="precipitation" label="precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q957060" start="9323" end="9361" title="Lithuanian Hydrometeorological Service" label="Lithuanian Hydrometeorological Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="9390" end="9404" title="global warming" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q46825" start="10186" end="10192" title="Gothic art" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q172331" start="10257" end="10264" title="liturgy" label="liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281237" start="10300" end="10317" title="Vilnius Cathedral" label="Vilnius Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516252" start="10332" end="10341" title="hymnal" label="hymnbooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453455" start="10399" end="10436" title="Church of St. Francis and St. Bernard, Vilnius" label="Church of St. Francis and St. Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q940192" start="10445" end="10469" title="Church of Saint Nicholas, Vilnius" label="Church of Saint Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q162919" start="10543" end="10548" title="Seal (emblem)" label="seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q355869" start="10614" end="10622" title="Kęstutis" label="Kęstutis"/>
<link wikidata="Q218186" start="10624" end="10642" title="Vytautas the Great" label="Vytautas the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q54058" start="10647" end="10668" title="Sigismund II Augustus" label="Sigismund II Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="10671" end="10682" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="10750" end="10757" title="Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657145" start="10944" end="10962" title="Albertas Goštautas" label="Albertas Goštautas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669571" start="10974" end="10990" title="Paweł Holszański" label="Paweł Holszański"/>
<link wikidata="Q117227996" start="11001" end="11023" title="Bernardino de Gianotis" label="Bernardino de Gianotis"/>
<link wikidata="Q727122" start="11245" end="11256" title="Lew Sapieha" label="Lew Sapieha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982296" start="11267" end="11288" title="Church of St. Michael, Vilnius" label="Church of St. Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="11334" end="11348" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="11561" end="11568" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q47848" start="11903" end="11922" title="sacred architecture" label="sacred architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q33526" start="12006" end="12012" title="stucco" label="stucco"/>
<link wikidata="Q910437" start="12182" end="12201" title="Lithuanian nobility" label="Lithuanian nobility"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12415" end="12433" title=":lt:Vilniaus meno mokykla" label="Vilnius Art School"/>
<link wikidata="Q170292" start="12492" end="12501" title="Classicism" label="classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="12506" end="12514" title="Romanticism" label="romantic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12774" end="12795" title="Franciszek Smaglewicz" label="Franciszek Smaglewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q216018" start="12797" end="12807" title="Jan Rustem" label="Jan Rustem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12809" end="12824" title="Józef Oleszkiew" label="Józef Oleszkiew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397798" start="12828" end="12840" title="Józef Peszka" label="Józef Peszka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4424913" start="12846" end="12864" title="Wincenty Smokowski" label="Wincenty Smokowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976584" start="12900" end="12919" title="Jan Krzysztof Damel" label="Jan Krzysztof Damel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502071" start="12921" end="12940" title="Wincenty Dmochowski" label="Wincenty Dmochowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478267" start="12945" end="12960" title="Kanuty Rusiecki" label="Kanuty Rusiecki"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13075" end="13097" title=":lt:Lietuvių dailės draugija" label="Lithuanian Art Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963692" start="13125" end="13137" title="Petras Rimša" label="Petras Rimša"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995957" start="13139" end="13162" title="Antanas Žmuidzinavičius" label="Antanas Žmuidzinavičius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4770948" start="13167" end="13187" title="Antanas Jaroševičius" label="Antanas Jaroševičius"/>
<link wikidata="Q710258" start="13285" end="13305" title="Vytautas Kairiūkštis" label="Vytautas Kairiūkštis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087635" start="13311" end="13335" title="Vytautas Pranas Bičiūnas" label="Vytautas Pranas Bičiūnas"/>
<link wikidata="Q130711699" start="13367" end="13376" title="Symbolism (arts)" label="symbolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10857409" start="13378" end="13385" title="Realism (arts)" label="realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q34636" start="13387" end="13398" title="Art Nouveau" label="Art Nouveau"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="13403" end="13412" title="modernism" label="modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q180902" start="13414" end="13431" title="Socialist realism" label="Socialist realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="13453" end="13465" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281" start="13472" end="13482" title="propaganda" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q170571" start="13526" end="13537" title="still life" label="still lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q945499" start="13747" end="13753" title="Užupis" label="Užupis"/>
<link wikidata="Q127330" start="14032" end="14043" title="Frank Zappa" label="Frank Zappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981178" start="14065" end="14077" title="Naujamiestis, Vilnius" label="Naujamiestis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790447" start="14316" end="14344" title="National Museum of Lithuania" label="National Museum of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q323860" start="14792" end="14832" title="Museum of Occupations and Freedom Fights" label="Museum of Occupations and Freedom Fights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407353" start="14866" end="14882" title="Vilnius TV Tower" label="Vilnius TV Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865041" start="15364" end="15397" title="Lithuanian National Museum of Art" label="Lithuanian National Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q20504412" start="15645" end="15668" title="Contemporary Art Centre (Vilnius)" label="Contemporary Art Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6272184" start="15973" end="16003" title="Jonas Mekas Visual Arts Center" label="Jonas Mekas Visual Arts Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q699702" start="16040" end="16051" title="Jonas Mekas" label="Jonas Mekas"/>
<link wikidata="Q131221" start="16109" end="16117" title="Futurism" label="Futurism"/>
<link wikidata="Q108908" start="16121" end="16127" title="Fluxus" label="Fluxus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16464897" start="16148" end="16157" title="MO Museum" label="MO Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q435320" start="16392" end="16408" title="Francysk Skaryna" label="Francysk Skaryna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="16440" end="16445" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="16459" end="16473" title="eastern Europe" label="eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500733" start="16487" end="16501" title="printing house" label="printing house"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16817" end="16838" title=":lt:Vilniaus akademijos spaustuvė" label="Vilnius Academy Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q968484" start="16886" end="16936" title="Mikołaj Krzysztof &amp;quot;the Orphan&amp;quot; Radziwiłł" label="Mikołaj Krzysztof &amp;quot;the Orphan&amp;quot; Radziwiłł"/>
<link wikidata="Q658192" start="16944" end="16959" title="Vilnius Academy" label="Vilnius Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="17009" end="17016" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q712463" start="17047" end="17059" title="Piotr Skarga" label="Piotr Skarga"/>
<link wikidata="Q4182867" start="17223" end="17237" title="Józef Zawadzki (publisher)" label="Józef Zawadzki"/>
<link wikidata="Q12678861" start="17271" end="17299" title="Józef Zawadzki printing shop" label="Józef Zawadzki printing shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q79822" start="17381" end="17396" title="Adam Mickiewicz" label="Adam Mickiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395241" start="17446" end="17462" title="Mikalojus Daukša" label="Mikalojus Daukša"/>
<link wikidata="Q189279" start="17490" end="17499" title="catechism" label="catechism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17529" end="17543" title="Jacobo Ledesma" label="Jacobo Ledesma"/>
<link wikidata="Q982015" start="17662" end="17673" title="Jakub Wujek" label="Jakub Wujek"/>
<link wikidata="Q662826" start="17687" end="17695" title="Postilla" label="Postilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q508719" start="17776" end="17782" title="alumni" label="alumni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618122" start="17819" end="17840" title="Konstantinas Sirvydas" label="Konstantinas Sirvydas"/>
<link wikidata="Q471723" start="17842" end="17869" title="Maciej Kazimierz Sarbiewski" label="Maciej Kazimierz Sarbiewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q4144113" start="17871" end="17885" title="Antoni Gorecki" label="Antoni Gorecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q254524" start="17887" end="17910" title="Józef Ignacy Kraszewski" label="Józef Ignacy Kraszewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q597298" start="17912" end="17933" title="Antoni Edward Odyniec" label="Antoni Edward Odyniec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3917264" start="17935" end="17953" title="Michał Józef Römer" label="Michał Józef Römer"/>
<link wikidata="Q472576" start="17972" end="17991" title="Władysław Syrokomla" label="Władysław Syrokomla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427659" start="17993" end="18009" title="Józef Mackiewicz" label="Józef Mackiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q157322" start="18011" end="18022" title="Romain Gary" label="Romain Gary"/>
<link wikidata="Q243267" start="18024" end="18040" title="Juliusz Słowacki" label="Juliusz Słowacki"/>
<link wikidata="Q382666" start="18042" end="18059" title="Simonas Daukantas" label="Simonas Daukantas"/>
<link wikidata="Q64557" start="18061" end="18077" title="Mykolas Biržiška" label="Mykolas Biržiška"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496710" start="18079" end="18092" title="Petras Cvirka" label="Petras Cvirka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398095" start="18094" end="18108" title="Kazys Bradūnas" label="Kazys Bradūnas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="18110" end="18124" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel laureate"/>
<link wikidata="Q45970" start="18125" end="18139" title="Czesław Miłosz" label="Czesław Miłosz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476319" start="18141" end="18164" title="Vilnius Academy of Arts" label="Vilnius Academy of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q383772" start="18251" end="18269" title="Jurga Ivanauskaitė" label="Jurga Ivanauskaitė"/>
<link wikidata="Q16405319" start="18271" end="18290" title="Undinė Radzevičiūtė" label="Undinė Radzevičiūtė"/>
<link wikidata="Q6438276" start="18295" end="18318" title="Kristina Sabaliauskaitė" label="Kristina Sabaliauskaitė"/>
<link wikidata="Q197806" start="18351" end="18377" title="Statutes of Lithuania" label="First Statute of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q596840" start="18404" end="18442" title="Seimas of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Seimas of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510806" start="18487" end="18516" title="Grand Chancellor of Lithuania" label="Grand Chancellor of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479995" start="18555" end="18568" title="customary law" label="customary law"/>
<link wikidata="Q188462" start="18587" end="18592" title="canon law" label="canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q162314" start="18597" end="18606" title="Roman law" label="Roman law"/>
<link wikidata="Q214214" start="18634" end="18646" title="Codification (law)" label="codification"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="18650" end="18661" title="secular law" label="secular law"/>
<link wikidata="Q329898" start="18772" end="18790" title="Abraomas Kulvietis" label="Abraomas Kulvietis"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534416" start="18795" end="18817" title="Michael the Lithuanian" label="Michael the Lithuanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35499" start="18845" end="18864" title="Old Church Slavonic" label="Old Church Slavonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q223710" start="18886" end="18899" title="Old Believers" label="Old Believers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534416" start="18909" end="18954" title="De moribus tartarorum, lituanorum et moscorum" label="De moribus tartarorum, lituanorum et moscorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865043" start="18990" end="19008" title="Lithuanian Metrica" label="Lithuanian Metrica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284847" start="19030" end="19042" title="Royal Palace of Lithuania" label="Lower Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q373085" start="19072" end="19082" title="Chancellor" label="Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q830450" start="19420" end="19429" title="microfilm" label="microfilm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4472899" start="19638" end="19653" title="Literatų Street" label="Literatų Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q15709822" start="19726" end="19773" title="Institute of Lithuanian Literature and Folklore" label="Institute of Lithuanian Literature and Folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4430544" start="19782" end="19812" title="Lithuanian Writers&amp;#x27; Union" label="Lithuanian Writers&amp;#x27; Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7931185" start="19834" end="19851" title="Vilnius book fair" label="Vilnius book fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q6458828" start="19872" end="19879" title="LITEXPO" label="LITEXPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449036" start="19957" end="19969" title="film session" label="film session"/>
<link wikidata="Q7453082" start="20023" end="20041" title="Bernardinai Garden" label="Bernardinai Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q55965" start="20097" end="20122" title="Auguste and Louis Lumière" label="Auguste and Louis Lumière"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="20190" end="20201" title="documentary" label="documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q152272" start="20326" end="20340" title="Georges Méliès" label="Georges Méliès"/>
<link wikidata="Q244971" start="20359" end="20377" title="A Trip to the Moon" label="A Trip to the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1877087" start="20408" end="20423" title="Lukiškės Square" label="Lukiškės Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q24869" start="20464" end="20476" title="feature film" label="feature film"/>
<link wikidata="Q41253" start="20506" end="20519" title="movie theater" label="movie theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q4472076" start="20574" end="20589" title="Didžioji Street" label="Didžioji Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868004" start="20642" end="20647" title="Box (theatre)" label="boxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594605" start="20881" end="20891" title="magistrate" label="magistrate"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21419" end="21426" title=":lt:Lietuva (kino teatras)" label="Lietuva"/>
<link wikidata="Q615640" start="21530" end="21536" title="Soviet rouble" label="rouble"/>
<link wikidata="Q252763" start="22022" end="22041" title="Aldona of Lithuania" label="Aldona of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="22130" end="22136" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q53457" start="22157" end="22178" title="Casimir III the Great" label="Casimir III the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q772603" start="22223" end="22242" title="Wacław of Szamotuły" label="Wacław of Szamotuły"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22244" end="22253" title="Jan Brant" label="Jan Brant"/>
<link wikidata="Q677573" start="22255" end="22269" title="Heinrich Finck" label="Heinrich Finck"/>
<link wikidata="Q709965" start="22271" end="22286" title="Cyprian Bazylik" label="Cyprian Bazylik"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22288" end="22306" title="Alessandro Pesenti" label="Alessandro Pesenti"/>
<link wikidata="Q316532" start="22308" end="22321" title="Luca Marenzio" label="Luca Marenzio"/>
<link wikidata="Q975540" start="22327" end="22347" title="Michelagnolo Galilei" label="Michelagnolo Galilei"/>
<link wikidata="Q214970" start="22392" end="22400" title="virtuoso" label="virtuoso"/>
<link wikidata="Q180733" start="22401" end="22407" title="lute" label="lutist"/>
<link wikidata="Q788956" start="22408" end="22422" title="Bálint Bakfark" label="Bálint Bakfark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484016" start="22635" end="22657" title="Žygimantas Liauksminas" label="Žygimantas Liauksminas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="22716" end="22721" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q54054" start="22803" end="22820" title="Władysław IV Vasa" label="Władysław IV Vasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4263961" start="22849" end="22893" title="Lithuanian National Opera and Ballet Theatre" label="Lithuanian National Opera and Ballet Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q25497177" start="22905" end="22923" title="Vilnius City Opera" label="Vilnius City Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q6648433" start="23106" end="23141" title="Lithuanian State Symphony Orchestra" label="Lithuanian State Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525168" start="23154" end="23174" title="Gintaras Rinkevičius" label="Gintaras Rinkevičius"/>
<link wikidata="Q131186" start="23197" end="23209" title="Choral music" label="Choral music"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774405" start="23347" end="23385" title="European Grand Prix for Choral Singing" label="European Grand Prix for Choral Singing"/>
<link wikidata="Q18638656" start="23391" end="23425" title="Lithuanian Song and Dance Festival" label="Lithuanian Song and Dance Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509362" start="23529" end="23540" title="Vingis Park" label="Vingis Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298953" start="23572" end="23579" title="Latvian Song and Dance Festival" label="Latvian"/>
<link wikidata="Q633506" start="23584" end="23592" title="Estonian Song Festival" label="Estonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="23627" end="23633" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q877988" start="23634" end="23693" title="Masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity" label="Masterpiece of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="23700" end="23704" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7931191" start="23816" end="23837" title="Vilnius Jazz Festival" label="Vilnius Jazz Festival"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24002" end="24033" title="Mariana Korvelytė – Moravskienė" label="Mariana Korvelytė – Moravskienė"/>
<link wikidata="Q3334219" start="24035" end="24049" title="Paulina Rivoli" label="Paulina Rivoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q434862" start="24051" end="24068" title="Danielius Dolskis" label="Danielius Dolskis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110456" start="24070" end="24087" title="Vytautas Kernagis" label="Vytautas Kernagis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724244" start="24089" end="24107" title="Algirdas Kaušpėdas" label="Algirdas Kaušpėdas"/>
<link wikidata="Q471687" start="24109" end="24127" title="Andrius Mamontovas" label="Andrius Mamontovas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048515" start="24129" end="24143" title="Nomeda Kazlaus" label="Nomeda Kazlaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201210" start="24149" end="24164" title="Asmik Grigorian" label="Asmik Grigorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q208546" start="24177" end="24186" title="César Cui" label="César Cui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361895" start="24188" end="24203" title="Felix Yaniewicz" label="Felix Yaniewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346926" start="24205" end="24225" title="Maximilian Steinberg" label="Maximilian Steinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q338588" start="24227" end="24244" title="Vytautas Miškinis" label="Vytautas Miškinis"/>
<link wikidata="Q459292" start="24250" end="24266" title="Onutė Narbutaitė" label="Onutė Narbutaitė"/>
<link wikidata="Q18345498" start="24279" end="24299" title="Mirga Gražinytė-Tyla" label="Mirga Gražinytė-Tyla"/>
<link wikidata="Q561112" start="24316" end="24332" title="Antoni Radziwiłł" label="Antoni Radziwiłł"/>
<link wikidata="Q243472" start="24334" end="24348" title="Jascha Heifetz" label="Jascha Heifetz"/>
<link wikidata="Q271187" start="24350" end="24364" title="Clara Rockmore" label="Clara Rockmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362916" start="24370" end="24384" title="Romas Lileikis" label="Romas Lileikis"/>
<link wikidata="Q704506" start="24434" end="24458" title="Michał Kazimierz Ogiński" label="Michał Kazimierz Ogiński"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24460" end="24480" title="Johann David Holland" label="Johann David Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q76428" start="24495" end="24502" title="Carl Philipp Emanuel Bach" label="C. Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492647" start="24505" end="24521" title="Maciej Radziwiłł" label="Maciej Radziwiłł"/>
<link wikidata="Q709977" start="24527" end="24549" title="Michał Kleofas Ogiński" label="Michał Kleofas Ogiński"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24599" end="24622" title="Kristina Gerhardi Frank" label="Kristina Gerhardi Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q254" start="24642" end="24648" title="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart" label="Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349" start="24653" end="24658" title="Joseph Haydn" label="Haydn"/>
<link wikidata="Q204854" start="24679" end="24687" title="premiere" label="premiere"/>
<link wikidata="Q163138" start="24710" end="24718" title="The Creation (Haydn)" label="Creation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24760" end="24783" title="Marek Konrad Sokołowski" label="Marek Konrad Sokołowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q217613" start="24797" end="24816" title="Stanisław Moniuszko" label="Stanisław Moniuszko"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24891" end="24904" title="Maria de Neri" label="Maria de Neri"/>
<link wikidata="Q297137" start="24961" end="24994" title="Mikalojus Konstantinas Čiurlionis" label="Mikalojus Konstantinas Čiurlionis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336680" start="24996" end="25012" title="Mikas Petrauskas" label="Mikas Petrauskas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4450497" start="25018" end="25038" title="Juozas Tallat-Kelpša" label="Juozas Tallat-Kelpša"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038724" start="25092" end="25110" title="Vyacheslav Ganelin" label="Vyacheslav Ganelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080474" start="25112" end="25130" title="Petras Vyšniauskas" label="Petras Vyšniauskas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091723" start="25132" end="25147" title="Petras Geniušas" label="Petras Geniušas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745408" start="25149" end="25163" title="Mūza Rubackytė" label="Mūza Rubackytė"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708181" start="25165" end="25179" title="Alanas Chošnau" label="Alanas Chošnau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898159" start="25185" end="25207" title="Marijonas Mikutavičius" label="Marijonas Mikutavičius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787936" start="25214" end="25253" title="Lithuanian Academy of Music and Theatre" label="Lithuanian Academy of Music and Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008822" start="25272" end="25288" title="Gediminas Avenue" label="Gediminas Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504070" start="25313" end="25327" title="Slushko Palace" label="Slushko Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q570649" start="25331" end="25341" title="Antakalnis" label="Antakalnis"/>
<link wikidata="Q27914" start="25392" end="25397" title="tenor" label="tenor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4360428" start="25399" end="25416" title="Kipras Petrauskas" label="Kipras Petrauskas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4327337" start="25421" end="25439" title="Virgilijus Noreika" label="Virgilijus Noreika"/>
<link wikidata="Q52940" start="25604" end="25622" title="Sigismund III Vasa" label="Sigismund III Vasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895961" start="25818" end="25836" title="dramma per musica" label="drammas per musica"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="26157" end="26165" title="Middle Ages" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q122960" start="26204" end="26210" title="Rococo" label="Rococo"/>
<link wikidata="Q25379" start="26375" end="26380" title="Play (theatre)" label="plays"/>
<link wikidata="Q336754" start="26394" end="26402" title="Algirdas" label="Algirdas"/>
<link wikidata="Q290902" start="26455" end="26475" title="Wojciech Bogusławski" label="Wojciech Bogusławski"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544858" start="26617" end="26633" title="Radziwiłł Palace, Vilnius" label="Radziwiłł Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257109" start="26638" end="26655" title="Town Hall, Vilnius" label="Vilnius Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q588195" start="27028" end="27043" title="Juliusz Osterwa" label="Juliusz Osterwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664657" start="27218" end="27251" title="Lithuanian National Drama Theatre" label="Lithuanian National Drama Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="27422" end="27435" title="Russian Revolution" label="revolutionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4400756" start="28080" end="28102" title="Old Theatre of Vilnius" label="Old Theatre of Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q11633" start="28232" end="28243" title="photography" label="photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q179744" start="28259" end="28274" title="Daguerreotype" label="daguerreotyping"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130435" start="28318" end="28332" title="Verkiai Palace" label="Verkiai Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q467946" start="28389" end="28408" title="Ludwig zu Sayn-Wittgenstein-Berleburg" label="Ludwig Wittgenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072285" start="28569" end="28576" title="atelier" label="atelier"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="28726" end="28732" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q904614" start="28772" end="28789" title="collodion process" label="collodion process"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138868" start="28791" end="28806" title="Photographic plate" label="glass negatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q580807" start="28811" end="28824" title="albumen paper" label="albumen paper"/>
<link wikidata="" start="29101" end="29117" title=":lt: Abdonas Korzonas" label="Abdonas Korzonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q473670" start="29471" end="29487" title="January Uprising" label="January Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="29531" end="29538" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="" start="29588" end="29613" title=":lt:Stanislovas Filibertas Fleris" label="Stanisław Filibert Fleury"/>
<link wikidata="Q35158" start="29617" end="29629" title="Stereoscopy" label="stereoscopic"/>
<link wikidata="" start="29686" end="29702" title=":lt:Juzefas Čechavičius" label="Józef Czechowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238291" start="29729" end="29744" title="Solar telescope" label="photoheliograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q4111356" start="29774" end="29817" title="Vilnius University Astronomical Observatory" label="Vilnius University Astronomical Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6582994" start="29836" end="29843" title="sunspot" label="sunspot"/>
<link wikidata="Q941506" start="29928" end="29938" title="Jan Bułhak" label="Jan Bułhak"/>
<link wikidata="Q39782" start="30140" end="30145" title="brass" label="brass"/>
<link wikidata="Q11469" start="30147" end="30152" title="glass" label="glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="30157" end="30163" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642" start="30241" end="30248" title="Pottery" label="Pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q192296" start="30268" end="30275" title="weaving" label="weaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="30341" end="30347" title="feudalism" label="feudal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2207288" start="30358" end="30364" title="crafts" label="crafts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572679" start="30386" end="30405" title="subsistence economy" label="subsistence economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q656720" start="30982" end="30990" title="workshop" label="workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q10862987" start="31086" end="31095" title="glassware" label="glassware"/>
<link wikidata="Q211423" start="31103" end="31115" title="goldsmithing" label="goldsmithing"/>
<link wikidata="Q105972811" start="31296" end="31329" title="Vilnius Goldsmiths&amp;#x27; Workshop" label="Vilnius Goldsmiths&amp;#x27; Workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q271449" start="31379" end="31393" title="precious metal" label="precious metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q83437" start="31399" end="31407" title="gemstone" label="gemstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q8197" start="31424" end="31431" title="Daugava" label="Daugava"/>
<link wikidata="Q40855" start="31436" end="31443" title="Dnieper" label="Dnieper"/>
<link wikidata="Q739726" start="31457" end="31472" title="Catholic Church in Lithuania" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q311995" start="31494" end="31502" title="Szlachta" label="nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q3917352" start="31525" end="31537" title="Vilnius Mint" label="Vilnius Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q464780" start="31548" end="31552" title="Mint (facility)" label="mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q187776" start="31608" end="31616" title="denarius" label="denarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q213142" start="31618" end="31626" title="shilling" label="shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q159505" start="31629" end="31637" title="groschen" label="groschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q162528" start="31639" end="31645" title="thaler" label="thaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q202018" start="31648" end="31653" title="ducat" label="ducat"/>
<link wikidata="Q631991" start="31760" end="31776" title="Russo-Polish War (1654–1667)" label="Russo-Polish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q103350" start="32013" end="32020" title="serfdom" label="serfdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11460" start="32100" end="32108" title="clothing" label="clothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q706486" start="32234" end="32239" title="artel" label="artel"/>
<link wikidata="Q835400" start="32264" end="32272" title="Combine (enterprise)" label="combines"/>
<link wikidata="Q190656" start="32372" end="32385" title="Multiculturalism" label="multicultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="32478" end="32486" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q23393" start="32619" end="32637" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s Prayer" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s Prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q42203" start="32646" end="32655" title="Hail Mary" label="Hail Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q218186" start="32657" end="32665" title="Vytautas" label="Vytautas"/>
<link wikidata="Q54049" start="32701" end="32708" title="Władysław II Jagiełło" label="Jogaila"/>
<link wikidata="Q53459" start="32720" end="32740" title="Casimir IV Jagiellon" label="Casimir IV Jagiellon"/>
<link wikidata="Q312057" start="32764" end="32777" title="Saint Casimir" label="Saint Casimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="32871" end="32880" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q324534" start="32891" end="32914" title="Laonikos Chalkokondyles" label="Laonikos Chalkokondyles"/>
<link wikidata="Q13211" start="32971" end="32980" title="Ruthenian language" label="Ruthenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108445" start="33017" end="33033" title="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;" label="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q9091" start="33083" end="33093" title="Belarusian language" label="Belarusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35228" start="33145" end="33160" title="Old East Slavic" label="Old East Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570373" start="33220" end="33228" title="Chancery (medieval office)" label="chancery"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="33360" end="33366" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q54058" start="33659" end="33680" title="Sigismund II Augustus" label="Sigismund II Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q963303" start="33726" end="33741" title="Union of Lublin" label="Union of Lublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421205" start="33918" end="33922" title="Litvaks" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q836076" start="33924" end="33936" title="Lipka Tatars" label="Lipka Tatars"/>
<link wikidata="Q720982" start="33942" end="33958" title="Crimean Karaites" label="Crimean Karaites"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="34129" end="34146" title="official language" label="official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q210439" start="34157" end="34168" title="interpreter" label="interpreter"/>
<link wikidata="Q83185991" start="34242" end="34260" title="Antanas Čaplinskas" label="Antanas Čaplinskas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783432" start="34430" end="34437" title="kontusz" label="kontusz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423981" start="34440" end="34445" title="żupan" label="żupan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397979" start="34471" end="34484" title="Pas kontuszowy" label="kontush belts"/>
<link wikidata="Q160464" start="34486" end="34492" title="Button" label="Button"/>
<link wikidata="Q43436" start="34503" end="34508" title="pearl" label="pearl"/>
<link wikidata="Q171446" start="34510" end="34515" title="coral" label="coral"/>
<link wikidata="Q429571" start="34517" end="34539" title="Brilliant (diamond cut)" label="brilliant-cut diamonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q43513" start="34544" end="34551" title="emerald" label="emerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436707" start="34595" end="34601" title="Delia (clothing)" label="Delias"/>
<link wikidata="Q925572" start="34606" end="34612" title="dolman" label="dolman"/>
<link wikidata="Q499916" start="34881" end="34887" title="brooch" label="brooch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660626" start="34932" end="34974" title="Sejm of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Sejm of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q112053" start="35255" end="35263" title="tailcoat" label="tailcoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q958210" start="35269" end="35278" title="waistcoat" label="waistcoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476319" start="35447" end="35479" title="State Art Institute of Lithuania" label="State Art Institute of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153401" start="35706" end="35718" title="fashion show" label="fashion show"/>
<link wikidata="" start="35764" end="35783" title=":lt:Juozas Statkevičius" label="Juozas Statkevičius"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="35881" end="35890" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="35892" end="35898" title="Easter" label="Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q10398273" start="35904" end="35925" title="Saint John&amp;#x27;s Eve" label="Saint John&amp;#x27;s Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823577" start="36052" end="36105" title="Act of the Re-Establishment of the State of Lithuania" label="Act of the Re-Establishment of the State of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988340" start="36243" end="36255" title="Kaziuko mugė" label="Kaziuko mugė"/>
<link wikidata="Q312057" start="36385" end="36398" title="Saint Casimir" label="Saint Casimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896698" start="36465" end="36476" title="Easter palm" label="Easter palm"/>
<link wikidata="Q181817" start="36662" end="36686" title="Saint Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day" label="Saint Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q16457345" start="36706" end="36727" title="Vilnius Culture Night" label="Vilnius Culture Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q163725" start="36859" end="36875" title="Magdeburg rights" label="Magdeburg rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925098" start="36931" end="36941" title="vicegerent" label="vicegerent"/>
<link wikidata="Q735687" start="37062" end="37069" title="Voivode of Vilnius" label="voivode"/>
<link wikidata="Q189010" start="37314" end="37320" title="notary" label="notary"/>
<link wikidata="Q16533" start="37355" end="37360" title="judge" label="judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q54056" start="37599" end="37618" title="Sigismund I the Old" label="Sigismund I the Old"/>
<link wikidata="Q146071" start="38013" end="38026" title="criminal case" label="criminal case"/>
<link wikidata="Q177529" start="38241" end="38252" title="burgomaster" label="burgomaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q383258" start="38309" end="38317" title="Orthodoxy" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4145423" start="38755" end="38764" title="city duma" label="city duma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390950" start="38797" end="38818" title="Lithuania Governorate" label="Lithuania Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972183" start="38842" end="38867" title="Vilna Governorate-General" label="Vilna Governorate-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q279583" start="38895" end="38912" title="Vilna Governorate" label="Vilna Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q58473" start="38942" end="38972" title="Soviet occupation of Lithuania" label="Soviet occupation of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q173761" start="39005" end="39041" title="Lithuanian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Lithuanian Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363145" start="39163" end="39190" title="municipalities of Lithuania" label="municipalities of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q950639" start="39247" end="39256" title="Grigiškės" label="Grigiškės"/>
<link wikidata="Q615255" start="39632" end="39648" title="two-round system" label="two-round system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026687" start="39863" end="39870" title="Verkiai" label="Verkiai"/>
<link wikidata="Q12657436" start="39893" end="39901" title="Jeruzalė" label="Jeruzalė"/>
<link wikidata="Q570649" start="39940" end="39950" title="Antakalnis" label="Antakalnis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157121" start="40003" end="40014" title="Pašilaičiai" label="Pašilaičiai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390465" start="40036" end="40048" title="Fabijoniškės" label="Fabijoniškės"/>
<link wikidata="Q11125041" start="40070" end="40077" title="Pilaitė" label="Pilaitė"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260423" start="40080" end="40091" title="Justiniškės" label="Justiniškės"/>
<link wikidata="Q596251" start="40094" end="40105" title="Viršuliškės" label="Viršuliškės"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455066" start="40108" end="40115" title="Šeškinė" label="Šeškinė"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573951" start="40118" end="40127" title="Šnipiškės" label="Šnipiškės"/>
<link wikidata="Q394093" start="40130" end="40138" title="Žirmūnai" label="Žirmūnai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514004" start="40157" end="40169" title="Karoliniškės" label="Karoliniškės"/>
<link wikidata="Q394349" start="40172" end="40180" title="Žvėrynas" label="Žvėrynas"/>
<link wikidata="Q950639" start="40183" end="40192" title="Grigiškės" label="Grigiškės"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646619" start="40204" end="40212" title="Lazdynai" label="Lazdynai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577081" start="40215" end="40223" title="Vilkpėdė" label="Vilkpėdė"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509362" start="40235" end="40246" title="Vingis Park" label="Vingis Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981178" start="40249" end="40261" title="Naujamiestis, Vilnius" label="Naujamiestis"/>
<link wikidata="Q445649" start="40298" end="40320" title="Vilnius Old Town" label="Senamiestis (Old Town)"/>
<link wikidata="Q945499" start="40332" end="40338" title="Užupis" label="Užupis"/>
<link wikidata="Q937667" start="40341" end="40355" title="Naujoji Vilnia" label="Naujoji Vilnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q708092" start="40392" end="40400" title="Paneriai" label="Paneriai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850320" start="40438" end="40449" title="Naujininkai" label="Naujininkai"/>
<link wikidata="Q847711" start="40487" end="40516" title="Vilnius International Airport" label="Vilnius International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094071" start="40519" end="40524" title="Rasos (Vilnius)" label="Rasos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40697" end="40710" title="Vilnius District Municipality#Elderships" label="23 elderships"/>
<link wikidata="Q118910" start="40758" end="40767" title="Nemenčinė" label="Nemenčinė"/>
<link wikidata="Q853452" start="40769" end="40777" title="Bezdonys" label="Bezdonys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494848" start="40779" end="40789" title="Maišiagala" label="Maišiagala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337369" start="40791" end="40799" title="Mickūnai" label="Mickūnai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247177" start="40804" end="40811" title="Šumskas" label="Šumskas"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="40841" end="40848" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813849" start="40857" end="40867" title="Švenčionys district" label="Švenčionys"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089785" start="40869" end="40876" title="Molėtai district" label="Moletai"/>
<link wikidata="Q58882" start="40878" end="40887" title="Širvintos district" label="Širvintos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089777" start="40889" end="40899" title="Elektrėnai district" label="Elektrėnai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987743" start="40901" end="40907" title="Trakai district" label="Trakai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799182" start="40912" end="40932" title="Šalčininkai district" label="Šalčininkai district"/>
<link wikidata="Q973846" start="41005" end="41010" title="Poles in Lithuania" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q186192" start="41023" end="41034" title="Lithuanians" label="Lithuanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988847" start="41054" end="41062" title="Russians in Lithuania" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918594" start="41064" end="41075" title="Belarusians in Lithuania" label="Belarusians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7878565" start="41111" end="41121" title="Ukrainians in Lithuania" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q771431" start="41286" end="41295" title="Aukštojas Hill" label="Aukštojas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566132" start="41297" end="41306" title="Juozapinė Hill" label="Juozapinė"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259356" start="41311" end="41324" title="Kruopinė Hill" label="Kruopinė Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q125465" start="41337" end="41346" title="sea level" label="sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q42236" start="41349" end="41360" title="Palm Sunday" label="Palm Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652794" start="41524" end="41541" title="Medininkai Castle" label="Medininkai Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12663710" start="41547" end="41561" title="Liubavas Manor" label="Liubavas Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347932" start="41663" end="41682" title="Vilnius Voivodeship" label="Vilnius Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347656" start="41710" end="41729" title="Republic of Paulava" label="Republic of Paulava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377650" start="41735" end="41745" title="European microstates" label="microstate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="41761" end="41774" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q838811" start="41806" end="41813" title="peasant" label="peasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357218" start="41955" end="41993" title="Electoral Action of Poles in Lithuania" label="Electoral Action of Poles in Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q117272363" start="42014" end="42032" title="Robert Duchniewicz" label="Robert Duchniewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5616934" start="42040" end="42074" title="Lithuanian Social Democratic Union" label="Lithuanian Social Democratic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q277656" start="42143" end="42162" title="Government of Lithuania" label="national government"/>
<link wikidata="Q878222" start="42237" end="42246" title="President of Lithuania" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577652" start="42262" end="42281" title="Presidential Palace, Vilnius" label="Presidential Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227975" start="42285" end="42300" title="Daukanto Square" label="Daukanto Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q845439" start="42310" end="42324" title="Prime Minister of Lithuania" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q374152" start="42687" end="42693" title="Seimas" label="Seimas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331436" start="42793" end="42806" title="Seimas Palace" label="Seimas Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q630332" start="42881" end="42907" title="Supreme Court of Lithuania" label="Supreme Court of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011200" start="42977" end="43018" title="Supreme Administrative Court of Lithuania" label="Supreme Administrative Court of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474348" start="43103" end="43136" title="Constitutional Court of Lithuania" label="Constitutional Court of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666678" start="43275" end="43294" title="Lithuanian Tribunal" label="Lithuanian Tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959031" start="43308" end="43323" title="appellate court" label="appellate court"/>
<link wikidata="Q54030" start="43392" end="43407" title="Stephen Báthory" label="Stephen Báthory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453505" start="43442" end="43467" title="Third Partition of Poland" label="Third Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12677182" start="43875" end="43898" title="Public Security Service (Lithuania)" label="Public Security Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q107711" start="44170" end="44181" title="firefighter" label="firefighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q860447" start="44364" end="44390" title="emergency medical services" label="emergency medical services"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="44836" end="44845" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497616" start="44978" end="44991" title="Gedimino Hill" label="Gedimino Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="45060" end="45065" title="pagan" label="pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q207761" start="45066" end="45079" title="Baltic people" label="Baltic people"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="45096" end="45113" title="Western Europeans" label="Western Europeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q16362506" start="45125" end="45143" title="Lithuanian Crusade" label="Lithuanian Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="45330" end="45336" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="45344" end="45353" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598101" start="45439" end="45452" title="Vilnius Castle Complex" label="three castles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545166" start="45520" end="45535" title="Wall of Vilnius" label="Wall of Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988894" start="45664" end="45677" title="Pilies Street" label="Pilies Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="45920" end="45926" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q236122" start="45928" end="45939" title="Renaissance architecture" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q840829" start="45941" end="45948" title="Baroque architecture" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198718" start="45953" end="45975" title="classical architecture" label="classical architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503652" start="46221" end="46234" title="Christianization of Lithuania" label="Christianized"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="46296" end="46303" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736161" start="46331" end="46366" title="Cathedral of the Theotokos, Vilnius" label="Orthodox Cathedral of the Theotokos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548437" start="46375" end="46399" title="Great Synagogue of Vilna" label="Great Synagogue of Vilna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568026" start="46452" end="46467" title="Vilnian Baroque" label="Vilnian Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1909346" start="46544" end="46559" title="Matteo Castelli" label="Matteo Castelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395499" start="46564" end="46576" title="Pietro Perti" label="Pietro Perti"/>
<link wikidata="Q12724" start="46599" end="46615" title="Canton of Ticino" label="Canton of Ticino"/>
<link wikidata="Q11735283" start="46686" end="46709" title="Chapel of Saint Casimir" label="Chapel of Saint Casimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808445" start="46726" end="46745" title="Laurynas Gucevičius" label="Laurynas Gucevičius"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="46825" end="46851" title="World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988837" start="47049" end="47065" title="Cathedral Square, Vilnius" label="Cathedral Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390932" start="47112" end="47132" title="Church of All Saints, Vilnius" label="Church of All Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q16476437" start="47143" end="47177" title="Church of St. Joseph the Betrothed, Vilnius" label="Convent of the Barefoot Carmelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070965" start="47189" end="47204" title="Deputy Chancellor of Lithuania" label="Vice-Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619001" start="47205" end="47215" title="Stefan Pac" label="Stefan Pac"/>
<link wikidata="Q16476437" start="47231" end="47265" title="Church of St. Joseph the Betrothed, Vilnius" label="Church of St. Joseph the Betrothed"/>
<link wikidata="Q44356" start="47290" end="47294" title="tsar" label="tsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4471700" start="47345" end="47360" title="Vokiečių Street" label="Vokiečių Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q53450" start="47669" end="47688" title="Alexander Jagiellon" label="Alexander Jagiellon"/>
<link wikidata="Q93408" start="47696" end="47716" title="Elizabeth of Austria (1436–1505)" label="Elizabeth of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q233823" start="47718" end="47735" title="Barbara Radziwiłł" label="Barbara Radziwiłł"/>
<link wikidata="Q188507" start="48075" end="48084" title="apartment" label="apartment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497616" start="48155" end="48170" title="Gediminas Tower" label="Gediminas Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="48320" end="48324" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743" start="48486" end="48499" title="private house" label="private house"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48539" end="48546" title="Balsiai" label="Balsiai"/>
<link wikidata="Q910437" start="48548" end="48555" title="Bajorai" label="Bajorai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48557" end="48565" title="Pavilnys" label="Pavilnys"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48567" end="48575" title="Kalnėnai" label="Kalnėnai"/>
<link wikidata="Q11125041" start="48580" end="48587" title="Pilaitė" label="Pilaitė"/>
<link wikidata="Q118903" start="48602" end="48631" title="Vilnius District Municipality" label="Vilnius District Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="" start="48701" end="48712" title=":lt:Valakampiai" label="Valakampiai"/>
<link wikidata="" start="48717" end="48726" title=":lt:Turniškės" label="Turniškės"/>
<link wikidata="Q133128" start="48806" end="48810" title="Scots pine" label="pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q394349" start="49014" end="49022" title="Žvėrynas" label="Žvėrynas"/>
<link wikidata="Q241588" start="49317" end="49329" title="middle class" label="middle-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749879" start="49544" end="49553" title="pensioner" label="pensioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2684060" start="49572" end="49583" title="Regionalism (politics)" label="regionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455066" start="49660" end="49667" title="Šeškinė" label="Šeškinė"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850320" start="49712" end="49723" title="Naujininkai" label="Naujininkai"/>
<link wikidata="Q18142" start="49820" end="49838" title="high-rise building" label="high-rise building"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573951" start="49920" end="49929" title="Šnipiškės" label="Šnipiškės"/>
<link wikidata="Q545523" start="50076" end="50089" title="Ulrich Hosius" label="Ulrich Hosius"/>
<link wikidata="Q170770" start="50201" end="50210" title="Grand Duchy of Moscow" label="Muscovite"/>
<link wikidata="Q35565" start="50215" end="50220" title="Tatars" label="Tatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984637" start="50302" end="50337" title="Church of St. Raphael the Archangel, Vilnius" label="Church of St. Raphael the Archangel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16465406" start="50755" end="50770" title="Vilnius Central Business District" label="New City Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q11020830" start="51030" end="51050" title="Konstitucijos Avenue" label="Konstitucijos Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q65053729" start="51106" end="51140" title="Vilnius city municipality building" label="Vilnius city municipality building"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577081" start="51756" end="51764" title="Vilkpėdė" label="Vilkpėdė"/>
<link wikidata="Q693549" start="51780" end="51791" title="Magdalenian" label="Magdalenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656775" start="52104" end="52124" title="Kingdom of Lithuania" label="Kingdom of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q242436" start="52137" end="52146" title="Mindaugas" label="Mindaugas"/>
<link wikidata="Q209715" start="52250" end="52260" title="coronation" label="coronation"/>
<link wikidata="Q638655" start="52352" end="52361" title="Traidenis" label="Traidenis"/>
<link wikidata="Q557859" start="52366" end="52373" title="Vytenis" label="Vytenis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1958788" start="52447" end="52476" title="Letters of Gediminas" label="letters to the Western cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q244852" start="52480" end="52489" title="Gediminas" label="Gediminas"/>
<link wikidata="Q690869" start="52610" end="52619" title="Ruthenians" label="Ruthenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="52646" end="52652" title="Germans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q35565" start="52683" end="52689" title="Tatars" label="Tatars"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="52753" end="52764" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="52769" end="52788" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="52951" end="52958" title="Italians" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q124216" start="52963" end="52968" title="Swiss people" label="Swiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q658192" start="53069" end="53087" title="Vilnius university" label="Vilnius university"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="53134" end="53140" title="French people" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q160894" start="53142" end="53149" title="Spaniards" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q165192" start="53151" end="53157" title="Swedes" label="Swedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="53172" end="53181" title="Croatians" label="Croatians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284847" start="53219" end="53257" title="Palace of the Grand Dukes of Lithuania" label="Palace of the Grand Dukes of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="53287" end="53296" title="Hungarians" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q792146" start="53297" end="53309" title="Gáspár Bekes" label="Gáspár Bekes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="53434" end="53441" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495944" start="53495" end="53516" title="Polish–Lithuanian War" label="Polish–Lithuanian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q523380" start="53553" end="53582" title="Republic of Central Lithuania" label="Republic of Central Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571818" start="53881" end="53894" title="Sovietization of the Baltic states" label="Sovietization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="54318" end="54319" title="EUR" label="€"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="54545" end="54548" title="Gross domestic product" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q759757" start="54674" end="54685" title="Convergence (economics)" label="convergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q853861" start="54725" end="54738" title="Kaunas County" label="Kaunas County"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="55300" end="55325" title="foreign direct investment" label="foreign direct investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q561034" start="55560" end="55580" title="Tito Livio Burattini" label="Tito Livio Burattini"/>
<link wikidata="Q11573" start="55667" end="55672" title="metre" label="metre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4111356" start="55698" end="55741" title="Vilnius University Astronomical Observatory" label="Vilnius University Astronomical Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479042" start="55784" end="55800" title="Thomas Zebrowski" label="Thomas Zebrowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q62832" start="55833" end="55846" title="observatory" label="observatories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354652" start="55900" end="55926" title="Marcin Odlanicki Poczobutt" label="Marcin Odlanicki Poczobutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995949" start="55982" end="55997" title="Marcin Knackfus" label="Marcin Knackfus"/>
<link wikidata="Q818557" start="56038" end="56063" title="Observational astronomy" label="astronomical observations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755736" start="56143" end="56160" title="Taurus Poniatovii" label="Taurus Poniatovii"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621687" start="56168" end="56190" title="Jean-Emmanuel Gilibert" label="Jean-Emmanuel Gilibert"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948445" start="56207" end="56245" title="Botanical Garden of Vilnius University" label="Botanical Garden of Vilnius University"/>
<link wikidata="Q181916" start="56301" end="56310" title="herbarium" label="herbarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q192694" start="56355" end="56368" title="Paleobotany" label="fossil plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="56406" end="56414" title="minerals" label="minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q475023" start="56497" end="56511" title="exact sciences" label="exact sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q389852" start="56770" end="56808" title="Vilnius Gediminas Technical University" label="Vilnius Gediminas Technical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="57038" end="57043" title="laser" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q193091" start="57056" end="57071" title="optoelectronics" label="optoelectronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q81197" start="57073" end="57088" title="nuclear physics" label="nuclear physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11351" start="57090" end="57107" title="organic chemistry" label="organic chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108" start="57109" end="57112" title="Biotechnology" label="bio"/>
<link wikidata="Q11468" start="57117" end="57131" title="nanotechnology" label="nanotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q228736" start="57149" end="57166" title="materials science" label="materials science"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="57172" end="57183" title="electronics" label="electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="57464" end="57475" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="PhD program"/>
<link wikidata="Q276099" start="57694" end="57718" title="research and development" label="research and development"/>
<link wikidata="Q4252992" start="57958" end="57971" title="laser physics" label="laser physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q756033" start="57973" end="57989" title="nonlinear optics" label="nonlinear optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q864656" start="58027" end="58039" title="biophotonics" label="biophotonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484779" start="58050" end="58065" title="microtechnology" label="microtechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q844471" start="58133" end="58149" title="ultrashort pulse" label="ultrashort pulse"/>
<link wikidata="Q753269" start="58239" end="58267" title="Extreme Light Infrastructure" label="Extreme Light Infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q81581" start="58282" end="58288" title="Szeged" label="Szeged"/>
<link wikidata="Q134447" start="58401" end="58420" title="nuclear power plant" label="nuclear power plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5842736" start="58443" end="58455" title="Corning Inc." label="Corning Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q268706" start="58555" end="58568" title="Gorilla Glass" label="Gorilla Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132207" start="58949" end="58967" title="business incubator" label="business incubator"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="59580" end="59588" title="medicine" label="medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q679692" start="59590" end="59607" title="biopharmaceutical" label="biopharmaceutical"/>
<link wikidata="Q128570" start="59612" end="59626" title="bioinformatics" label="bioinformatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q658192" start="59632" end="59670" title="Vilnius University Faculty of Medicine" label="Vilnius University Faculty of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702987" start="59769" end="59783" title="Jonas Kubilius" label="Jonas Kubilius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246860" start="59795" end="59822" title="probabilistic number theory" label="probabilistic number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q55616267" start="59828" end="59842" title="Kubilius model" label="Kubilius model"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856599" start="59872" end="59897" title="Turán–Kubilius inequality" label="Turán–Kubilius inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q221084" start="59975" end="59990" title="Marija Gimbutas" label="Marija Gimbutas"/>
<link wikidata="Q221513" start="60022" end="60039" title="Kurgan hypothesis" label="Kurgan hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944033" start="60050" end="60067" title="Vytautas Straižys" label="Vytautas Straižys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3962230" start="60099" end="60125" title="Vilnius photometric system" label="Vilnius photometric system"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="60134" end="60143" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094530" start="60145" end="60156" title="Kavli Prize" label="Kavli Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q22202040" start="60166" end="60184" title="Virginijus Šikšnys" label="Virginijus Šikšnys"/>
<link wikidata="Q412563" start="60194" end="60200" title="CRISPR" label="CRISPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q16965677" start="60201" end="60205" title="Cas9" label="Cas9"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="60206" end="60210" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q658192" start="60423" end="60480" title="Vilnius University Faculty of Mathematics and Informatics" label="Vilnius University Faculty of Mathematics and Informatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q389852" start="60485" end="60555" title="Vilnius Gediminas Technical University Faculty of Fundamental Sciences" label="Vilnius Gediminas Technical University Faculty of Fundamental Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q11661" start="60557" end="60579" title="Information technology" label="Information technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q129238" start="60746" end="60753" title="startup" label="startup"/>
<link wikidata="Q52062" start="60776" end="60792" title="Nordic countries" label="Nordic countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5425303" start="60883" end="60899" title="fDi Intelligence" label="fDi Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q847711" start="61126" end="61141" title="Vilnius Airport" label="Vilnius Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="61183" end="61188" title="Wi-Fi" label="Wi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18729063" start="61201" end="61244" title="National Cyber Security Centre of Lithuania" label="National Cyber Security Centre of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="" start="61341" end="61347" title=":lt:Bebras (konkursas)" label="Bebras"/>
<link wikidata="Q80006" start="61479" end="61499" title="computer programming" label="computer programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q16319025" start="61552" end="61559" title="fintech" label="fintech"/>
<link wikidata="Q10836209" start="61597" end="61604" title="e-money" label="e-money"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908307" start="61738" end="61745" title="Revolut" label="Revolut"/>
<link wikidata="Q957151" start="62053" end="62072" title="Ministry of Finance (Lithuania)" label="Ministry of Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q616849" start="62190" end="62207" title="Bank of Lithuania" label="Bank of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q600958" start="62289" end="62303" title="Nasdaq Vilnius" label="Nasdaq Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q12663236" start="62354" end="62388" title="National Audit Office of Lithuania" label="National Audit Office of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q13473517" start="62455" end="62477" title="State Tax Inspectorate" label="State Tax Inspectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17988504" start="62525" end="62530" title="Taxation in Lithuania" label="taxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607164" start="62545" end="62550" title="List of banks in Lithuania" label="banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389567" start="62763" end="62773" title="SEB bankas" label="SEB bankas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8901" start="62810" end="62831" title="European Central Bank" label="European Central Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q957126" start="63211" end="63252" title="Ministry of Education and Science (Lithuania)" label="Ministry of Education, Science and Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052284" start="63281" end="63308" title="Cathedral School of Vilnius" label="Cathedral School of Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699846" start="63385" end="63421" title="Vilnius Vytautas the Great Gymnasium" label="Vilnius Vytautas the Great Gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="63468" end="63477" title="Gymnasium (school)" label="gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076052" start="63549" end="63558" title="preschool" label="preschool"/>
<link wikidata="Q739859" start="63673" end="63687" title="Vilnius Lyceum" label="Vilnius Lyceum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404290" start="63704" end="63734" title="Ethnic minorities in Lithuania" label="Ethnic minorities in Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63824" end="63837" title="Gymnasium (school)#School structure" label="progymnasiums"/>
<link wikidata="Q322563" start="64010" end="64027" title="vocational school" label="vocational school"/>
<link wikidata="Q595922" start="64035" end="64074" title="National M. K. Čiurlionis School of Art" label="National M. K. Čiurlionis School of Art"/>
<link wikidata="" start="64126" end="64166" title=":lt:Vilniaus Justino Vienožinskio dailės mokykla" label="Vilnius Justinas Vienožinskis Art School"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="64293" end="64297" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q111019378" start="64469" end="64504" title="Vilnius International French Lyceum" label="Vilnius International French Lyceum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562345" start="64644" end="64676" title="Commission of National Education" label="Commission of National Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q192350" start="64930" end="64938" title="Ministry (government department)" label="ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3796477" start="64974" end="65007" title="Polish Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment in the Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790510" start="65207" end="65235" title="QS World University Rankings" label="QS World University Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="65293" end="65297" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247342" start="65485" end="65511" title="Mykolas Romeris University" label="Mykolas Romeris University"/>
<link wikidata="Q56860" start="65560" end="65605" title="Lithuanian University of Educational Sciences" label="Lithuanian University of Educational Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756541" start="65625" end="65651" title="Vytautas Magnus University" label="Vytautas Magnus University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501626" start="65725" end="65777" title="General Jonas Žemaitis Military Academy of Lithuania" label="General Jonas Žemaitis Military Academy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476319" start="65832" end="65855" title="Vilnius Academy of Arts" label="Vilnius Academy of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476319" start="65888" end="65911" title="Vilnius Academy of Arts" label="Vilnius Academy of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q28564" start="66020" end="66036" title="public library" label="public libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q131539" start="66097" end="66123" title="children&amp;#x27;s literature" label="children&amp;#x27;s literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q595868" start="66151" end="66168" title="computer literacy" label="computer literacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635759" start="66287" end="66334" title="Martynas Mažvydas National Library of Lithuania" label="Martynas Mažvydas National Library of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3919007" start="66696" end="66752" title="Wroblewski Library of the Lithuanian Academy of Sciences" label="Wroblewski Library of the Lithuanian Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q493334" start="66861" end="66894" title="List of universities and colleges in Lithuania" label="Lithuanian university and college"/>
<link wikidata="Q508719" start="66938" end="66944" title="alumni" label="alumni"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66950" end="67018" title="Vilnius University Library#National Open Access Scientific Communication and Information Center" label="National Open Access Scientific Communication and Information Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365873" start="68105" end="68142" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Vilnius" label="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q51620" start="68240" end="68249" title="Beatification" label="beatified"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68258" end="68265" title="Martyr#Christianity" label="martyrs"/>
<link wikidata="Q869974" start="68267" end="68282" title="Servant of God" label="servants of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q43115" start="68287" end="68292" title="saint" label="saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q19892501" start="68341" end="68370" title="Franciscan martyrs of Vilnius" label="Franciscan martyrs of Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984809" start="68393" end="68422" title="Anthony, John, and Eustathius" label="Anthony, John, and Eustathius"/>
<link wikidata="Q355884" start="68439" end="68458" title="Josaphat Kuntsevych" label="Josaphat Kuntsevych"/>
<link wikidata="Q129674" start="68460" end="68473" title="Andrew Bobola" label="Andrew Bobola"/>
<link wikidata="Q941608" start="68475" end="68493" title="Raphael Kalinowski" label="Raphael Kalinowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q18978" start="68495" end="68512" title="Faustina Kowalska" label="Faustina Kowalska"/>
<link wikidata="Q559765" start="68518" end="68548" title="Jurgis Matulaitis-Matulevičius" label="Jurgis Matulaitis-Matulevičius"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="68713" end="68725" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q49376" start="68773" end="68797" title="Eastern Catholic Churches" label="Eastern Rite Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q845668" start="68843" end="68857" title="Union of Brest" label="Union of Brest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="68942" end="68958" title="Eastern Orthodox" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="69000" end="69016" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640381" start="69017" end="69045" title="Orthodox Church of the Holy Spirit, Vilnius" label="Monastery of the Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960270" start="69073" end="69109" title="Church of St. Paraskeva, Vilnius" label="St. Paraskeva&amp;#x27;s Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="69151" end="69158" title="baptism" label="baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q326449" start="69162" end="69170" title="Abram Petrovich Gannibal" label="Hannibal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200" start="69197" end="69214" title="Alexander Pushkin" label="Alexander Pushkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8479" start="69224" end="69239" title="Peter the Great" label="Peter the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q223710" start="69246" end="69259" title="Old Believers" label="Old Believers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627627" start="69404" end="69445" title="Church of St. Constantine and St. Michael" label="Church of St. Constantine and St. Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="69558" end="69566" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="69584" end="69592" title="Baptists" label="Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q616848" start="69703" end="69711" title="Perkūnas" label="Perkūnas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094619" start="69767" end="69773" title="Romuva (religion)" label="Romuva"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="69951" end="69956" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q123006" start="70056" end="70064" title="Kabbalah" label="Kabbalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q279359" start="70104" end="70114" title="Vilna Gaon" label="Vilna Gaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906565" start="70174" end="70184" title="Vilna Edition Shas" label="Vilna Shas"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="70222" end="70228" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="70369" end="70373" title="Nazism" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q707539" start="70414" end="70427" title="Vilna Ghetto" label="Jewish Ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013998" start="70463" end="70498" title="Vilna Gaon Museum of Jewish History" label="Vilna Gaon Museum of Jewish History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548437" start="70566" end="70598" title="Great Synagogue of Vilna" label="Vilnius&amp;#x27;s largest synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083668" start="70663" end="70686" title="German occupation of Lithuania during World War II" label="occupation of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q503560" start="70744" end="70768" title="ground-penetrating radar" label="ground-penetrating radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q208398" start="70879" end="70887" title="Karaite Judaism" label="Karaites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738742" start="71053" end="71059" title="kenesa" label="kenesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q585335" start="71076" end="71090" title="Vilnius Kenesa" label="Vilnius Kenesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118145" start="71228" end="71238" title="Christian pilgrimage" label="pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q170774" start="71424" end="71432" title="Miracles in Christianity" label="miracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q186277" start="71653" end="71663" title="Carmelites" label="Carmelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q108325" start="71701" end="71707" title="chapel" label="chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721080" start="71766" end="71794" title="Our Lady of the Gate of Dawn" label="Our Lady of the Gate of Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655953" start="71840" end="71858" title="Riza" label="gold-plated silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391143" start="71909" end="71938" title="Sanctuary of the Divine Mercy, Vilnius" label="Sanctuary of the Divine Mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404743" start="71972" end="71990" title="Divine Mercy image" label="Divine Mercy image"/>
<link wikidata="Q118646171" start="72026" end="72047" title="Divine Mercy (Catholic devotion)" label="Divine Mercy devotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q18978" start="72059" end="72076" title="Faustina Kowalska" label="Faustina Kowalska"/>
<link wikidata="Q83579" start="72117" end="72131" title="Michał Sopoćko" label="Michał Sopoćko"/>
<link wikidata="Q45684" start="72137" end="72155" title="spiritual director" label="spiritual director"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348934" start="72209" end="72231" title="Eugeniusz Kazimirowski" label="Eugeniusz Kazimirowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="72339" end="72356" title="Blessed Sacrament" label="Blessed Sacrament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026142" start="72491" end="72525" title="Church of St. Philip and St. Jacob, Vilnius" label="Church of St. Philip and St. Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q132137" start="72644" end="72648" title="icon" label="icon"/>
<link wikidata="Q939611" start="72735" end="72740" title="easel" label="easel"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="73077" end="73087" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q83238" start="73098" end="73111" title="Three Crosses" label="Three Crosses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2987855" start="73174" end="73193" title="Bychowiec Chronicle" label="Bychowiec Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="73210" end="73220" title="Franciscan" label="Franciscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q191607" start="73257" end="73264" title="Podolia" label="Podolia"/>
<link wikidata="" start="73268" end="73284" title=":lt:Petras Goštautas (1305)" label="Petras Goštautas"/>
<link wikidata="Q34274" start="73310" end="73316" title="gospel" label="gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235597" start="73489" end="73498" title="crucifixion" label="crucified"/>
<link wikidata="Q4111357" start="73536" end="73551" title="Verkiai Calvary" label="Verkiai Calvary"/>
<link wikidata="Q11331347" start="73605" end="73612" title="Calvary (sanctuary)" label="calvary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026687" start="73640" end="73647" title="Verkiai" label="Verkiai"/>
<link wikidata="Q654006" start="73721" end="73740" title="Second Northern War" label="Second Northern War"/>
<link wikidata="Q231685" start="73785" end="73806" title="Stations of the Cross" label="Stations of the Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q39864" start="73822" end="73831" title="Pentecost" label="Pentecost"/>
<link wikidata="Q10949996" start="73977" end="74018" title="Church of the Discovery of the Holy Cross, Vilnius" label="Church of the Discovery of the Holy Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q80728" start="74126" end="74134" title="dynamite" label="dynamite"/>
<link wikidata="Q19932615" start="74526" end="74546" title="Apostolic Nunciature to Lithuania" label="Apostolic Nunciature"/>
<link wikidata="Q450675" start="74576" end="74588" title="Pope Francis" label="Pope Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="74630" end="74636" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="74641" end="74648" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136968" start="75137" end="75153" title="Vilnius Marathon" label="Vilnius Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988837" start="75336" end="75352" title="Cathedral Square, Vilnius" label="Cathedral Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1877087" start="75435" end="75450" title="Lukiškės Square" label="Lukiškės Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548931" start="75513" end="75551" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Lithuania)" label="Lithuanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q323860" start="75597" end="75626" title="Museum of Occupations and Freedom Fights" label="Genocide Victims&amp;#x27; Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="75638" end="75641" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="75715" end="75729" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Vladimir Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988340" start="75855" end="75868" title="Kaziuko mugė" label="Kaziukas Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227975" start="75956" end="75971" title="Daukanto Square" label="Daukanto Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q7453082" start="76005" end="76023" title="Bernardinai Garden" label="Bernardinai Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497616" start="76030" end="76045" title="Gediminas&amp;#x27; Tower" label="Gediminas Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q161381" start="76244" end="76259" title="Chiune Sugihara" label="Chiune Sugihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q871991" start="76260" end="76266" title="Sakura" label="Sakura"/>
<link wikidata="Q15835" start="76303" end="76318" title="Japanese garden" label="Japanese garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q340065" start="76360" end="76374" title="Rasos Cemetery" label="Rasos Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q363949" start="76419" end="76437" title="Jonas Basanavičius" label="Jonas Basanavičius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774010" start="76448" end="76491" title="Signatories of the Act of Independence of Lithuania" label="signatories of the 1918 Act of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q885" start="76523" end="76538" title="Józef Piłsudski" label="Józef Piłsudski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715736" start="76569" end="76586" title="Jewish cemeteries of Vilnius" label="Jewish cemeteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362479" start="76791" end="76810" title="Bernardine Cemetery" label="Bernardine Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457300" start="76906" end="76925" title="Antakalnis Cemetery" label="Antakalnis Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q12663462" start="77106" end="77141" title="Lithuanian Department of Statistics" label="Lithuanian Department of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="77479" end="77486" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q170404" start="78016" end="78027" title="travel visa" label="travel visa"/>
<link wikidata="Q31374404" start="78061" end="78074" title="shopping mall" label="shopping mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q182290" start="78115" end="78122" title="customs" label="customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q30022" start="78361" end="78365" title="café" label="café"/>
<link wikidata="Q191015" start="78432" end="78438" title="Trakai" label="Trakai"/>
<link wikidata="Q847711" start="78484" end="78499" title="Vilnius Airport" label="Vilnius Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q805325" start="78599" end="78617" title="hot air ballooning" label="hot air ballooning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7931195" start="78813" end="78850" title="Vilnius Palace of Concerts and Sports" label="Vilnius Palace of Concerts and Sports"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="79043" end="79068" title="Hotel rating#European Hotelstars Union" label="European Hotelstars Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976556" start="79086" end="79102" title="Hotel rating" label="five-star hotels"/>
<link wikidata="Q671990" start="79154" end="79163" title="Kempinski" label="Kempinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q113639176" start="79738" end="79747" title="BC Wolves" label="BC Wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q113268951" start="79771" end="79785" title="2022–23 LKL season" label="2022–23 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q613287" start="79793" end="79821" title="Lietuvos krepšinio lyga" label="Lithuanian Basketball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q46942" start="79849" end="79857" title="BC Rytas" label="BC Rytas"/>
<link wikidata="Q22340390" start="79897" end="79924" title="Basketball Champions League" label="Basketball Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q456092" start="79986" end="79993" title="EuroCup Basketball" label="EuroCup"/>
<link wikidata="Q180249" start="79998" end="80002" title="2004–05 ULEB Cup" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374931" start="80022" end="80026" title="2008–09 Eurocup Basketball" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138809" start="80063" end="80073" title="Jeep Arena" label="Jeep Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q917881" start="80157" end="80171" title="Twinsbet Arena" label="Twinsbet Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q500988" start="80215" end="80226" title="FK Žalgiris" label="FK Žalgiris"/>
<link wikidata="Q965566" start="80267" end="80278" title="LFF Stadium" label="LFF Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4315106" start="80294" end="80320" title="Lithuania National Stadium" label="Lithuania National Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4144690" start="80357" end="80366" title="SEB Arena" label="SEB Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="80382" end="80388" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="80400" end="80414" title="central Europe" label="central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q133201" start="80453" end="80459" title="Squash (sport)" label="squash"/>
<link wikidata="Q159821" start="80468" end="80475" title="Summer Olympic Games" label="Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q270350" start="80495" end="80509" title="Lina Kačiušytė" label="Lina Kačiušytė"/>
<link wikidata="Q643531" start="80514" end="80528" title="Robertas Žulpa" label="Robertas Žulpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501" start="80575" end="80588" title="swimming pool" label="swimming pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084454" start="80632" end="80658" title="Olympic-size swimming pool" label="Olympic-size swimming pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q183018" start="80694" end="80699" title="Bandy" label="Bandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136968" start="81373" end="81389" title="Vilnius Marathon" label="Vilnius Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q847711" start="81554" end="81569" title="Vilnius Airport" label="Vilnius Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q453936" start="81697" end="81720" title="Vilnius railway station" label="Vilnius railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1829" start="81788" end="81799" title="Kaliningrad" label="Kaliningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="81801" end="81807" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="81812" end="81828" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7129507" start="81849" end="81873" title="Pan-European Corridor IX" label="Pan-European Corridor IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q429154" start="81929" end="81931" title="A1 highway (Lithuania)" label="A1"/>
<link wikidata="Q776965" start="82025" end="82033" title="Klaipėda" label="Klaipėda"/>
<link wikidata="Q926976" start="82051" end="82069" title="European route E85" label="European route E85"/>
<link wikidata="Q429416" start="82075" end="82077" title="A2 highway (Lithuania)" label="A2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719466" start="82102" end="82111" title="Panevėžys" label="Panevėžys"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477727" start="82128" end="82132" title="European route E272" label="E272"/>
<link wikidata="Q667003" start="82177" end="82179" title="A3 highway (Lithuania)" label="A3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563148" start="82181" end="82183" title="A4 highway (Lithuania)" label="A4"/>
<link wikidata="Q12664126" start="82185" end="82188" title="A14 highway (Lithuania)" label="A14"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428757" start="82190" end="82193" title="A15 highway (Lithuania)" label="A15"/>
<link wikidata="Q12664128" start="82199" end="82202" title="A16 highway (Lithuania)" label="A16"/>
<link wikidata="Q5731706" start="82241" end="82244" title="A10 highway (Lithuania)" label="A19"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129798" start="82277" end="82287" title="Trolleybuses in Vilnius" label="trolleybus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373435" start="83276" end="83281" title="Volvo Buses" label="Volvo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427345" start="83286" end="83305" title="Mercedes-Benz buses" label="Mercedes-Benz buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q838369" start="83344" end="83351" title="Solaris Bus &amp;amp; Coach" label="Solaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q391795" start="83359" end="83364" title="Škoda Works" label="Škoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q29803" start="83802" end="83807" title="Isuzu" label="Isuzu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639" start="83882" end="83892" title="trolleybus" label="trolleybus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577605" start="84106" end="84120" title="Solaris Urbino" label="Solaris Urbino"/>
<link wikidata="Q654749" start="84148" end="84159" title="Articulated bus" label="articulated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076882" start="84200" end="84208" title="Battery electric vehicle" label="electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734420" start="84209" end="84215" title="Karsan" label="Karsan"/>
<link wikidata="Q727599" start="84529" end="84542" title="Vilnius Metro" label="Vilnius Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q785952" start="84732" end="84748" title="public bathhouse" label="public bathhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104153" start="84874" end="84879" title="Canon (priest)" label="canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11835046" start="85090" end="85115" title="Brotherhood of Saint Roch" label="Brotherhood of Saint Roch"/>
<link wikidata="Q330204" start="85289" end="85298" title="paramedic" label="paramedic"/>
<link wikidata="Q774306" start="85310" end="85317" title="surgeon" label="surgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q121176" start="85331" end="85336" title="nurse" label="nurse"/>
<link wikidata="Q12198" start="85396" end="85425" title="sexually transmitted diseases" label="sexually transmitted diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q202415" start="85517" end="85535" title="abandoned children" label="abandoned children"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="85564" end="85576" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q684924" start="85578" end="85588" title="rheumatism" label="rheumatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q170990" start="85593" end="85602" title="arthritis" label="arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16476397" start="85618" end="85641" title="Vilnius Medical Society" label="Vilnius Medical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q4492358" start="85661" end="85673" title="Joseph Frank (physician)" label="Joseph Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q65428" start="85682" end="85700" title="Johann Peter Frank" label="Johann Peter Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813474" start="85791" end="85808" title="teaching hospital" label="teaching hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774898" start="85810" end="85816" title="clinic" label="clinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q115820082" start="85896" end="85927" title="Lithuanian Sanitary Aid Society" label="Lithuanian Sanitary Aid Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q957137" start="85954" end="85972" title="Ministry of Health (Lithuania)" label="Ministry of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q31207" start="86016" end="86027" title="health care" label="health care"/>
<link wikidata="Q334911" start="86053" end="86069" title="health insurance" label="health insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774578" start="86323" end="86368" title="Vilnius University Hospital Santaros Klinikos" label="Vilnius University Hospital Santaros Klinikos"/>
<link wikidata="Q16917" start="86436" end="86444" title="hospital" label="hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q56342399" start="86470" end="86480" title="polyclinic" label="polyclinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13027919" start="86640" end="86655" title="Kurier Litewski" label="Kurier Litewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824397" start="86800" end="86814" title="Lietuvos rytas" label="Lietuvos rytas"/>
<link wikidata="Q181327" start="86828" end="86843" title="Lietuvos žinios" label="Lietuvos žinios"/>
<link wikidata="Q2240679" start="86857" end="86870" title="Verslo žinios" label="Verslo žinios"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739951" start="86884" end="86894" title="Respublika (Lithuanian newspaper)" label="Respublika"/>
<link wikidata="Q194350" start="86996" end="87001" title="15min" label="15min"/>
<link wikidata="Q7931174" start="87015" end="87029" title="Vilniaus diena" label="Vilniaus diena"/>
<link wikidata="Q64552" start="87073" end="87087" title="Lietuvos aidas" label="Lietuvos aidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7912640" start="87101" end="87109" title="Valstybė" label="Valstybė"/>
<link wikidata="Q925192" start="87123" end="87129" title="Veidas" label="Veidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893824" start="87178" end="87192" title="Bernardinai.lt" label="Bernardinai.lt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407353" start="87297" end="87313" title="Vilnius TV Tower" label="Vilnius TV Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514004" start="87317" end="87329" title="Karoliniškės" label="Karoliniškės"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635809" start="87433" end="87447" title="LRT televizija" label="LRT televizija"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293880" start="87449" end="87452" title="TV3 Lithuania" label="TV3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798236" start="87454" end="87457" title="LNK (television station)" label="LNK"/>
<link wikidata="Q797069" start="87459" end="87462" title="BTV (Lithuania)" label="BTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q734189" start="87464" end="87473" title="LRT Plius" label="LRT Plius"/>
<link wikidata="Q5763611" start="87475" end="87488" title="LRT Lituanica" label="LRT Lituanica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512505" start="87490" end="87493" title="TV6 (Lithuania)" label="TV6"/>
<link wikidata="Q5620904" start="87495" end="87512" title="Lietuvos rytas TV" label="Lietuvos rytas TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5619592" start="87514" end="87517" title="TV1 (Lithuania)" label="TV1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5010562" start="87519" end="87522" title="TV8 (Lithuania)" label="TV8"/>
<link wikidata="Q5763700" start="87524" end="87530" title="Sport1 (Lithuania)" label="Sport1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5010591" start="87532" end="87538" title="Liuks!" label="Liuks!"/>
<link wikidata="Q5763655" start="87540" end="87547" title="Info TV" label="Info TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="87569" end="87582" title="radio station" label="radio station"/>
<link wikidata="Q394349" start="87643" end="87651" title="Žvėrynas" label="Žvėrynas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6711967" start="87741" end="87744" title="M-1 (Lithuanian radio station)" label="M-1"/>
<link wikidata="" start="87957" end="87976" title=":lt:Vilniaus spaudos rūmai" label="Vilnius Press House"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="88137" end="88144" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q300856" start="88153" end="88160" title="Aalborg Municipality" label="Aalborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q35493" start="88172" end="88178" title="Almaty" label="Almaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520" start="88193" end="88199" title="Astana" label="Astana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="88214" end="88221" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q48256" start="88239" end="88245" title="Dnipro" label="Dnipro"/>
<link wikidata="Q43070" start="88257" end="88264" title="Donetsk" label="Donetsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2100" start="88276" end="88284" title="Duisburg" label="Duisburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729" start="88296" end="88302" title="Erfurt" label="Erfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="88314" end="88320" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="88338" end="88347" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q186237" start="88357" end="88364" title="Joensuu" label="Joensuu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="88376" end="88380" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="88392" end="88398" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q580" start="88409" end="88413" title="Łódź" label="Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q43788" start="88424" end="88431" title="Madison, Wisconsin" label="Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259" start="88449" end="88454" title="Pavia" label="Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764" start="88464" end="88473" title="Reykjavík" label="Reykjavík"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773" start="88485" end="88489" title="Riga" label="Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q34713" start="88500" end="88508" title="Salzburg" label="Salzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867" start="88520" end="88526" title="Taipei" label="Taipei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770" start="88537" end="88544" title="Tallinn" label="Tallinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q994" start="88556" end="88563" title="Tbilisi" label="Tbilisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="88575" end="88581" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q6576" start="88630" end="88637" title="Irkutsk" label="Irkutsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1829" start="88648" end="88659" title="Kaliningrad" label="Kaliningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q919" start="88670" end="88681" title="Krasnoyarsk" label="Krasnoyarsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280" start="88692" end="88697" title="Minsk" label="Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="88709" end="88725" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6816" start="88736" end="88744" title="Ulan-Ude" label="Ulan-Ude"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423" start="88755" end="88764" title="Yaroslavl" label="Yaroslavl"/>
<link wikidata="Q964743" start="88808" end="88831" title="Coat of arms of Vilnius" label="Coat of arms of Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4343639" start="88833" end="88862" title="List of public art in Vilnius" label="List of public art in Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4460817" start="88864" end="88909" title="Names of Lithuanian places in other languages" label="List of Vilnius Elderships in other languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q6988120" start="88911" end="88935" title="Neighborhoods of Vilnius" label="Neighborhoods of Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q130342467" start="88937" end="88953" title="Vilnius conflict" label="Vilnius conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q494622" start="89046" end="89078" title="Visuotinė lietuvių enciklopedija" label="Visuotinė lietuvių enciklopedija"/>
<link wikidata="Q156591" start="89212" end="89222" title="Yad Vashem" label="Yad Vashem"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="32600" wikidata="Q80284" url="?curid=32600" title="Viola">
<text>The viola ( , ) is a string instrument of the violin family, and is usually bowed when played. Violas are slightly larger than violins, and have a lower and deeper sound. Since the 18th century, it has been the middle or alto voice of the violin family, between the violin (which is tuned a perfect fifth higher) and the cello (which is tuned an octave lower). The strings from low to high are typically tuned to C3, G3, D4, and A4.

In the past, the viola varied in size and style, as did its names. The word &quot;viola&quot; originates from the Italian language. The Italians often used the term &quot;viola da braccio&quot;, meaning, literally, &#x27;of the arm&#x27;. &quot;Brazzo&quot; was another Italian word for the viola, which the Germans adopted as &quot;Bratsche&quot;. The French had their own names: &quot;cinquiesme&quot; was a small viola, &quot;haute contre&quot; was a large viola, and &quot;taile&quot; was a tenor. Today, the French use the term &quot;alto&quot;, a reference to its range.

The viola was popular in the heyday of five-part harmony, up until the eighteenth century, taking three lines of the harmony and occasionally playing the melody line. Music for the viola differs from most other instruments in that it primarily uses the alto clef. When viola music has substantial sections in a higher register, it switches to the treble clef to make it easier to read.

The viola often plays the &quot;inner voices&quot; in string quartets and symphonic writing, and it is more likely than the first violin to play accompaniment parts. The viola occasionally plays a major, soloistic role in orchestral or chamber music. Examples include the symphonic poem &quot;Don Quixote&quot;, by Richard Strauss, the 13th Quartet by Dmitri Shostakovich, and a symphony with a main viola line: &quot;Harold en Italie&quot;, by Hector Berlioz. In the earlier part of the 20th century, more composers began to write for the viola, encouraged by the emergence of specialized soloists such as Lionel Tertis and William Primrose. English composers Arthur Bliss, Edwin York Bowen, Benjamin Dale, Frank Bridge, Benjamin Britten, Rebecca Clarke and Ralph Vaughan Williams all wrote substantial chamber and concert works. Many of these pieces were commissioned by, or written for, Tertis. William Walton, Bohuslav Martinů, Tōru Takemitsu, Tibor Serly, Alfred Schnittke, and Béla Bartók have written well-known viola concertos. The concerti by Bartók, Paul Hindemith, Carl Stamitz, Georg Philipp Telemann, and Walton are considered major works of the viola repertoire. Hindemith, who was a violist, wrote a substantial amount of music for viola, including the concerto &quot;Der Schwanendreher&quot;.

== Form ==
The viola is similar in material and construction to the violin. A full-size viola&#x27;s body is between longer than the body of a full-size violin (i.e., between ), with an average length of . Small violas typically made for children typically start at , which is equivalent to a half-size violin. For a child who needs a smaller size, a fractional-sized violin is often strung with the strings of a viola. Unlike the violin, the viola does not have a standard full size. The body of a viola would need to measure about long to match the acoustics of a violin, however it can only be played vertically like a Cello, hence the name Vertical viola. For centuries, viola makers have experimented with the size and shape of the viola, often adjusting proportions or shape to make a lighter instrument with shorter string lengths, but with a large enough sound box to retain the viola sound. Prior to the eighteenth century, violas had no uniform size. Large violas (tenors) were designed to play the lower register viola lines or second viola in five part harmony depending on instrumentation. A smaller viola, nearer the size of the violin, was called an &quot;alto viola&quot;. It was more suited to higher register writing, as in the viola 1 parts, as their sound was usually richer in the upper register. Its size was not as conducive to a full tone in the lower register.
Several experiments have intended to increase the size of the viola to improve its sound and harmony. Hermann Ritter&#x27;s &quot;viola alta&quot;, which measured about , was intended for use in Wagner&#x27;s operas. The Tertis model viola, which has wider bouts and deeper ribs to promote a better tone, is another slightly &quot;nonstandard&quot; shape that allows the player to use a larger instrument. Many experiments with the acoustics of a viola, particularly increasing the size of the body, have resulted in a much deeper tone, making it resemble the tone of a cello. Since many composers wrote for a traditional-sized viola, particularly in orchestral music, changes in the tone of a viola can have unintended consequences upon the balance in ensembles.

One of the most notable makers of violas of the twentieth century was Englishman A. E. Smith, whose violas are sought after and highly valued. Many of his violas remain in Australia, his country of residence, where during some decades the violists of the Sydney Symphony Orchestra had a dozen of them in their section.

More recent (and more radically shaped) innovations have addressed the ergonomic problems associated with playing the viola by making it shorter and lighter, while finding ways to keep the traditional sound. These include the Otto Erdesz &quot;cutaway&quot; viola, which has one shoulder cut out to make shifting easier; the &quot;Oak Leaf&quot; viola, which has two extra bouts; viol-shaped violas such as Joseph Curtin&#x27;s &quot;Evia&quot; model, which also uses a moveable neck and maple-veneered carbon fibre back, to reduce weight: violas played in the same manner as cellos (see vertical viola); and the eye-catching &quot;Dalí-esque&quot; shapes of both Bernard Sabatier&#x27;s violas in fractional sizes—which appear to have melted—and David Rivinus&#x27; &quot;Pellegrina&quot; model violas.

Other experiments that deal with the &quot;ergonomics vs. sound&quot; problem have appeared. The American composer Harry Partch fitted a viola with a cello neck to allow the use of his 43-tone scale, called the &quot;adapted viola&quot;. Luthiers have also created five-stringed violas, which allow a greater playing range.

== Method of playing ==
A person who plays the viola is called a &quot;violist&quot; or a &quot;viola player&quot;. The technique required for playing a viola has certain differences compared with that of a violin, partly because of its larger size: the notes are spread out further along the fingerboard and often require different fingerings. The viola&#x27;s less responsive strings and the heavier bow warrant a somewhat different bowing technique, and a violist has to lean more intensely on the strings.

The viola is held in the same manner as the violin; however, due to its larger size, some adjustments must be made to accommodate. The viola, just like the violin, is placed on top of the left shoulder between the shoulder and the left side of the face (chin). Because of the viola&#x27;s size, violists with short arms tend to use smaller-sized instruments for easier playing. The most immediately noticeable adjustments that a player accustomed to playing the violin has to make are to use wider-spaced fingerings. It is common for some players to use a wider and more intense vibrato in the left hand, facilitated by employing the fleshier pad of the finger rather than the tip, and to hold the bow and right arm further away from the player&#x27;s body. A violist must bring the left elbow further forward or around, so as to reach the lowest string, which allows the fingers to press firmly and so create a clearer tone. Different positions are often used, including half position.

The viola is strung with thicker gauge strings than the violin. This, combined with its larger size and lower pitch range, results in a deeper and mellower tone. However, the thicker strings also mean that the viola responds to changes in bowing more slowly. Practically speaking, if a violist and violinist are playing together, the violist must begin moving the bow a fraction of a second sooner than the violinist. The thicker strings also mean that more weight must be applied with the bow to make them vibrate.

The viola&#x27;s bow has a wider band of horsehair than a violin&#x27;s bow, which is particularly noticeable near the frog (or &quot;heel&quot; in the UK). Viola bows, at , are heavier than violin bows (). The profile of the rectangular outside corner of a viola bow frog generally is more rounded than on violin bows.

== Tuning ==

The viola&#x27;s four strings are normally tuned in fifths: the lowest string is C (an octave below middle C), with G, D, and A above it. This tuning is exactly one fifth below the violin, so that they have three strings in common—G, D, and A—and is one octave above the cello.

Each string of a viola is wrapped around a peg near the scroll and is tuned by turning the peg. Tightening the string raises the pitch; loosening the string lowers the pitch. The A string is normally tuned first, to the pitch of the ensemble: generally 400–442 Hz. The other strings are then tuned to it in intervals of fifths, usually by bowing two strings simultaneously. Most violas also have &quot;adjusters&quot;—&quot;fine tuners&quot;, particularly on the A string that make finer changes. These adjust the tension of the string via rotating a small knob above the tailpiece. Such tuning is generally easier to learn than using the pegs, and adjusters are usually recommended for younger players and put on smaller violas, though pegs and adjusters are usually used together. Some violists reverse the stringing of the C and G pegs, so that the thicker C string does not turn so severe an angle over the nut, although this is uncommon.

Small, temporary tuning adjustments can also be made by stretching a string with the hand. A string may be tuned down by pulling it above the fingerboard, or tuned up by pressing the part of the string in the pegbox. These techniques may be useful in performance, reducing the ill effects of an out-of-tune string until an opportunity to tune properly.

The tuning C–G–D–A is used for the great majority of all viola music. However, other tunings are occasionally employed, both in classical music, where the technique is known as &quot;scordatura&quot;, and in some folk styles. Mozart, in his Sinfonia Concertante for Violin, Viola and Orchestra in E, wrote the viola part in D major, and specified that the violist raises the strings in pitch by a semitone. He probably intended to give the viola a brighter tone so the rest of the ensemble would not overpower it. Tertis, in his transcription of the Elgar cello concerto, wrote the slow movement with the C string tuned down to B, enabling the viola to play one passage an octave lower.

== Organizations and research ==
A renewal of interest in the viola by performers and composers in the twentieth century led to increased research devoted to the instrument. Paul Hindemith and Vadim Borisovsky made an early attempt at an organization, in 1927, with the Violists&#x27; World Union. But it was not until 1968, with the creation of the Viola-Forschungsgesellschaft, now the International Viola Society (IVS), that a lasting organization took hold. The IVS now consists of twelve chapters around the world, the largest being the American Viola Society (AVS), which publishes the &quot;Journal of the American Viola Society&quot;. In addition to the journal, the AVS sponsors the David Dalton Research Competition and the Primrose International Viola Competition.

The 1960s also saw the beginning of several research publications devoted to the viola, beginning with Franz Zeyringer&#x27;s, &quot;Literatur für Viola&quot;, which has undergone several versions, the most recent being in 1985. In 1980, Maurice Riley produced the first attempt at a comprehensive history of the viola, in his &quot;History of the Viola&quot;, which was followed with the second volume in 1991. The IVS published the multi-language Viola Yearbook from 1979 to 1994, during which several other national chapters of the IVS published respective newsletters. The Primrose International Viola Archive at Brigham Young University houses the greatest amount of material related to the viola, including scores, recordings, instruments, and archival materials from some of the world&#x27;s greatest violists.

== Music ==
=== Reading music ===
Music that is written for the viola primarily uses the alto clef, which is otherwise rarely used. Viola music employs the treble clef when there are substantial sections of music written in a higher register. The alto clef is defined by the placement of C4 on the middle line of the staff.

As the viola is tuned exactly one octave above the cello, music that is notated for the cello can be easily transcribed for alto clef without any changes in key. For example, there are numerous editions of Bach&#x27;s Cello Suites transcribed for viola. The viola also has the advantage of smaller scale-length, which means that the stretches needed by cellists to play the piece are easier to achieve on the viola. However, occasional changes must be made due to differences in the ways that the two instruments are played, as well as their differences in range.

=== Role in pre-twentieth century works ===
In early orchestral music, the viola part was usually limited to filling in harmonies, with very little melodic material assigned to it. When the viola was given a melodic part, it was often duplicated (or was in unison with) the melody played by other strings.

The concerti grossi, &quot;Brandenburg Concertos&quot;, composed by J. S. Bach, were unusual in their use of viola. The third concerto grosso, scored for three violins, three violas, three cellos, and basso continuo, requires virtuosity from the violists. Indeed, Viola I has a solo in the last movement which is commonly found in orchestral auditions. The sixth concerto grosso, Brandenburg Concerto No. 6, which was scored for 2 violas &quot;concertino&quot;, cello, 2 violas da gamba, and continuo, had the two violas playing the primary melodic role. He also used this unusual ensemble in his cantata, Gleichwie der Regen und Schnee vom Himmel fällt, BWV 18 and in Mein Herze schwimmt im Blut, BWV 199, the chorale is accompanied by an obbligato viola.

There are a few Baroque and Classical concerti, such as those by Georg Philipp Telemann (one for solo viola, being one of the earliest viola concertos known, and one for two violas), Alessandro Rolla, Franz Anton Hoffmeister and Carl Stamitz.

The viola plays an important role in chamber music. Mozart used the viola in more creative ways when he wrote his six string quintets. The viola quintets use two violas, which frees them (especially the first viola) for solo passages and increases the variety of writing that is possible for the ensemble. Mozart also wrote for the viola in his Sinfonia Concertante, a set of two duets for violin and viola, and the Kegelstatt Trio for viola, clarinet, and piano. The young Felix Mendelssohn wrote a little-known Viola Sonata in C minor (without opus number, but dating from 1824). Robert Schumann wrote his &quot;Märchenbilder&quot; for viola and piano. He also wrote a set of four pieces for clarinet, viola, and piano, &quot;Märchenerzählungen&quot;.

Max Bruch wrote a romance for viola and orchestra, his Op. 85, which explores the emotive capabilities of the viola&#x27;s timbre. In addition, his Eight pieces for clarinet, viola, and piano, Op. 83, features the viola in a very prominent, solo aspect throughout. His Concerto for Clarinet, Viola, and Orchestra, Op. 88 has been quite prominent in the repertoire and has been recorded by prominent violists throughout the 20th century.

From his earliest works, Brahms wrote music that prominently featured the viola. Among his first published pieces of chamber music, the sextets for strings Op. 18 and Op. 36 contain what amounts to solo parts for both violas. Late in life, he wrote two greatly admired sonatas for clarinet and piano, his Op. 120 (1894): he later transcribed these works for the viola (the solo part in his Horn Trio is also available in a transcription for viola). Brahms also wrote &quot;Two Songs for Voice, Viola and Piano&quot;, Op. 91, &quot;Gestillte Sehnsucht&quot; (&quot;Satisfied Longing&quot;) and &quot;Geistliches Wiegenlied&quot; (&quot;Spiritual Lullaby&quot;) as presents for the famous violinist Joseph Joachim and his wife, Amalie. Dvořák played the viola and apparently said that it was his favorite instrument: his chamber music is rich in important parts for the viola. Two Czech composers, Bedřich Smetana and Leoš Janáček, included significant viola parts, originally written for viola d&#x27;amore, in their quartets &quot;From My Life&quot; and &quot;Intimate Letters&quot; respectively: the quartets begin with an impassioned statement by the viola. This is similar to Bach, Mozart, and Beethoven all occasionally played the viola part in chamber music.

The viola occasionally has a major role in orchestral music, a prominent example being Richard Strauss&#x27; tone poem &quot;Don Quixote&quot; for solo cello and viola and orchestra. Other examples are the &quot;Ysobel&quot; variation of Edward Elgar&#x27;s &quot;Enigma Variations&quot; and the solo in his work, &quot;In the South (Alassio)&quot;, the &quot;pas de deux&quot; scene from act 2 of Adolphe Adam&#x27;s &quot;Giselle&quot; and the &quot;La Paix&quot; movement of Léo Delibes&#x27;s ballet &quot;Coppélia&quot;, which features a lengthy viola solo.

Gabriel Fauré&#x27;s Requiem was originally scored (in 1888) with divided viola sections, lacking the usual violin sections, having only a solo violin for the &quot;Sanctus&quot;. It was later scored for orchestra with violin sections, and published in 1901. Recordings of the older scoring with violas are available.

While the viola repertoire is quite large, the amount written by well-known pre-20th-century composers is relatively small. There are many transcriptions of works for other instruments for the viola and the large number of 20th-century compositions is very diverse. See &quot;The Viola Project&quot; at the San Francisco Conservatory of Music, where Professor of Viola Jodi Levitz has paired a composer with each of her students, resulting in a recital of brand-new works played for the very first time.

=== Twentieth century and beyond ===

In the earlier part of the 20th century, more composers began to write for the viola, encouraged by the emergence of specialized soloists such as Tertis. Englishmen Arthur Bliss, Edwin York Bowen, Benjamin Dale, and Ralph Vaughan Williams all wrote chamber and concert works for Tertis. William Walton, Bohuslav Martinů, and Béla Bartók wrote well-known viola concertos. Hindemith wrote a substantial amount of music for the viola; being himself a violist, he often performed his own works. Claude Debussy&#x27;s Sonata for flute, viola and harp has inspired a significant number of other composers to write for this combination.

Charles Wuorinen composed his virtuosic &quot;Viola Variations&quot; in 2008 for Lois Martin. Elliott Carter also wrote several works for viola including his &quot;Elegy&quot; (1943) for viola and piano; it was subsequently transcribed for clarinet. Ernest Bloch, a Swiss-born American composer best known for his compositions inspired by Jewish music, wrote two famous works for viola, the &quot;Suite 1919&quot; and the &quot;Suite Hébraïque&quot; for solo viola and orchestra. Rebecca Clarke was a 20th-century composer and violist who also wrote extensively for the viola. Lionel Tertis records that Elgar (whose cello concerto Tertis transcribed for viola, with the slow movement in scordatura), Alexander Glazunov (who wrote an &quot;Elegy&quot;, Op. 44, for viola and piano), and Maurice Ravel all promised concertos for viola, yet all three died before doing any substantial work on them.

In the latter part of the 20th century a substantial repertoire was produced for the viola; many composers including Miklós Rózsa, Revol Bunin, Alfred Schnittke, Sofia Gubaidulina, Giya Kancheli and Krzysztof Penderecki, have written viola concertos. The American composer Morton Feldman wrote a series of works entitled &quot;The Viola in My Life&quot;, which feature concertante viola parts. In spectral music, the viola has been sought after because of its lower overtone partials that are more easily heard than on the violin. Spectral composers like Gérard Grisey, Tristan Murail, and Horațiu Rădulescu have written solo works for viola. Neo-Romantic, post-Modern composers have also written significant works for viola including Robin Holloway Viola Concerto Op. 56 and Sonata Op. 87, Peter Seabourne a large five-movement work with piano, &quot;Pietà&quot;, Airat Ichmouratov Viola Concerto No. 1, Op. 7 and Three Romances for Viola, Strings, and Harp, Op. 22.

=== Contemporary pop music ===
The viola is sometimes used in contemporary popular music, mostly in the avant-garde. John Cale of The Velvet Underground used the viola, as do some modern groups such as alternative rock band 10,000 Maniacs, Imagine Dragons, folk duo John &amp; Mary, British Sea Power, The Airborne Toxic Event, Marillion, and others often with instruments in a chamber setting. Jazz music has also seen its share of violists, from those used in string sections in the early 1900s to a handful of quartets and soloists emerging from the 1960s onward. It is quite unusual though, to use individual bowed string instruments in contemporary popular music.

== Notable violists==
There are few well-known viola virtuoso soloists, perhaps because little virtuoso viola music was written before the twentieth century. Pre-twentieth century viola players of note include Stamitz, Rolla, Antonio Rolla, Chrétien Urhan, Casimir Ney, Louis van Waefelghem, and Ritter. Important viola pioneers from the twentieth century were Tertis, William Primrose, Hindemith, Théophile Laforge, Cecil Aronowitz, Maurice Vieux, Borisovsky, Lillian Fuchs, Dino Asciolla, Frederick Riddle, Walter Trampler, Ernst Wallfisch, Csaba Erdélyi, the only violist to ever win the Carl Flesch International Violin Competition, and Emanuel Vardi, the first violist to record the 24 Caprices by Paganini on viola. Many noted violinists have publicly performed and recorded on the viola as well, among them Eugène Ysaÿe, Yehudi Menuhin, David Oistrakh, Pinchas Zukerman, Maxim Vengerov, Julian Rachlin, James Ehnes, and Nigel Kennedy.

Among the great composers, several preferred the viola to the violin when they were playing in ensembles, the most noted being Ludwig van Beethoven, Bach and Mozart. Other composers also chose to play the viola in ensembles, including Joseph Haydn, Franz Schubert, Mendelssohn, Dvořák, and Benjamin Britten. Among those noted both as violists and as composers are Rebecca Clarke and Hindemith. Contemporary composers and violists Kenji Bunch, Scott Slapin, and Lev Zhurbin have written a number of works for viola.

== Electric violas ==
Amplification of a viola with a pickup, an instrument amplifier (and speaker), and adjusting the tone with a graphic equalizer can make up for the comparatively weaker output of a violin-family instrument string tuned to notes below G3. There are two types of instruments used for electric viola: regular acoustic violas fitted with a piezoelectric pickup and specialized electric violas, which have little or no body. While traditional acoustic violas are typically only available in historically used earth tones (e.g., brown, reddish-brown, blonde), electric violas may be traditional colors or they may use bright colors, such as red, blue or green. Some electric violas are made of materials other than wood.

Most electric instruments with lower strings are violin-sized, as they use the amp and speaker to create a big sound, so they do not need a large soundbox. Indeed, some electric violas have little or no soundbox, and thus rely entirely on amplification. Fewer electric violas are available than electric violins. It can be hard for violists who prefer a physical size or familiar touch references of a viola-sized instrument, when they must use an electric viola that uses a smaller violin-sized body. Cale, formerly of The Velvet Underground, is one of the more notable users of such an electric viola and he has used them both for melodies in his solo work and for drones in his work with The Velvet Underground (e.g. &quot;Venus in Furs&quot;). Other notable players of the electric viola are Geoffrey Richardson of Caravan and Ramsey.

Instruments may be built with an internal preamplifier, or may put out an unbuffered transducer signal. While such signals may be fed directly to an amplifier or mixing board, they often benefit from an external preamp/equalizer on the end of a short cable, before being fed to the sound system. In rock and other loud styles, the electric viola player may use effects units such as reverb or overdrive.

== See also ==
* Amati violas
* Garrod&#x27;s pad
* Lionel Tertis International Viola Competition
* Maurice Vieux International Viola Competition
* Viola jokes

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Chapman, Eric. &quot;Joseph Curtin and the Evia&quot;. &quot;Journal of the American Viola Society&quot;, vol. 20, no. 1, Spring 2004, pp. 41–42.

== External links ==

* Primrose International Viola Archive library website
* International Viola Society website
* &quot;Evia&quot; 1999 prototype, Joseph Curtin&#x27;s experimental viola model
* History of the Viola
* Viola in music – The role of viola in music. Information, description of works, videos, free sheet music, MIDI files, RSS update
* Anechoic Recordings of Viola Tones – University of Iowa Electronic Music Studios
* Dr. Lindsay Aitkenhead&#x27;s folk viola research page </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q80284" start="4" end="9" title="Viola" label="viola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798603" start="21" end="38" title="string instrument" label="string instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365097" start="46" end="59" title="violin family" label="violin family"/>
<link wikidata="Q204948" start="76" end="81" title="bow (music)" label="bowed"/>
<link wikidata="Q8355" start="127" end="133" title="violin" label="violin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983813" start="221" end="225" title="alto" label="alto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365097" start="239" end="252" title="violin family" label="violin family"/>
<link wikidata="Q12372854" start="291" end="304" title="perfect fifth" label="perfect fifth"/>
<link wikidata="Q8371" start="321" end="326" title="cello" label="cello"/>
<link wikidata="Q386025" start="346" end="352" title="octave" label="octave"/>
<link wikidata="Q3362265" start="413" end="431" title="scientific pitch notation" label="C3, G3, D4, and A4"/>
<link wikidata="Q570544" start="605" end="621" title="viola da braccio" label="viola da braccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q27914" start="929" end="934" title="tenor" label="tenor"/>
<link wikidata="Q184421" start="1061" end="1068" title="harmony" label="harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q170412" start="1166" end="1172" title="melody" label="melody"/>
<link wikidata="Q181040" start="1265" end="1274" title="alto clef" label="alto clef"/>
<link wikidata="Q181040" start="1359" end="1370" title="treble clef" label="treble clef"/>
<link wikidata="Q207338" start="1453" end="1467" title="string quartet" label="string quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q504514" start="1544" end="1557" title="accompaniment" label="accompaniment"/>
<link wikidata="Q271802" start="1671" end="1685" title="symphonic poem" label="symphonic poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q606635" start="1692" end="1703" title="Don Quixote (Strauss)" label="Don Quixote"/>
<link wikidata="Q13894" start="1714" end="1729" title="Richard Strauss" label="Richard Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047892" start="1735" end="1747" title="String Quartet No. 13 (Shostakovich)" label="13th Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q80135" start="1751" end="1770" title="Dmitri Shostakovich" label="Dmitri Shostakovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q976789" start="1817" end="1833" title="Harold en Italie" label="Harold en Italie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151" start="1844" end="1858" title="Hector Berlioz" label="Hector Berlioz"/>
<link wikidata="Q718637" start="2006" end="2019" title="Lionel Tertis" label="Lionel Tertis"/>
<link wikidata="Q541922" start="2024" end="2040" title="William Primrose" label="William Primrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q508953" start="2060" end="2072" title="Arthur Bliss" label="Arthur Bliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365582" start="2074" end="2090" title="Edwin York Bowen" label="Edwin York Bowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896049" start="2092" end="2105" title="Benjamin Dale" label="Benjamin Dale"/>
<link wikidata="Q366636" start="2107" end="2119" title="Frank Bridge" label="Frank Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q150767" start="2121" end="2137" title="Benjamin Britten" label="Benjamin Britten"/>
<link wikidata="Q259670" start="2139" end="2153" title="Rebecca Clarke (composer)" label="Rebecca Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q207947" start="2158" end="2180" title="Ralph Vaughan Williams" label="Ralph Vaughan Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q189201" start="2203" end="2210" title="Chamber music" label="chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q310939" start="2297" end="2311" title="William Walton" label="William Walton"/>
<link wikidata="Q223258" start="2313" end="2329" title="Bohuslav Martinů" label="Bohuslav Martinů"/>
<link wikidata="Q155467" start="2331" end="2345" title="Tōru Takemitsu" label="Tōru Takemitsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071272" start="2347" end="2358" title="Tibor Serly" label="Tibor Serly"/>
<link wikidata="Q158078" start="2360" end="2376" title="Alfred Schnittke" label="Alfred Schnittke"/>
<link wikidata="Q83326" start="2382" end="2393" title="Béla Bartók" label="Béla Bartók"/>
<link wikidata="Q83326" start="2451" end="2457" title="Béla Bartók" label="Bartók"/>
<link wikidata="Q57244" start="2459" end="2473" title="Paul Hindemith" label="Paul Hindemith"/>
<link wikidata="Q157898" start="2475" end="2487" title="Carl Stamitz" label="Carl Stamitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q75854" start="2489" end="2511" title="Georg Philipp Telemann" label="Georg Philipp Telemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q114414878" start="2558" end="2574" title="viola repertoire" label="viola repertoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q57244" start="2576" end="2585" title="Paul Hindemith" label="Hindemith"/>
<link wikidata="Q864573" start="2682" end="2700" title="Der Schwanendreher" label="Der Schwanendreher"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3002" end="3018" title="violin#Sizes" label="half-size violin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415095" start="3353" end="3367" title="Vertical viola" label="Vertical viola"/>
<link wikidata="Q660436" start="3572" end="3581" title="sound box" label="sound box"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612486" start="4197" end="4211" title="Hermann Ritter" label="Hermann Ritter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="4290" end="4296" title="Richard Wagner" label="Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q718637" start="4316" end="4322" title="Lionel Tertis" label="Tertis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647731" start="4941" end="4952" title="A. E. Smith (violin maker)" label="A. E. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506501" start="5115" end="5140" title="Sydney Symphony Orchestra" label="Sydney Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q40125" start="5560" end="5564" title="viol" label="viol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6282398" start="5587" end="5600" title="Joseph Curtin" label="Joseph Curtin"/>
<link wikidata="Q910977" start="5683" end="5695" title="carbon fibre" label="carbon fibre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415095" start="5768" end="5782" title="vertical viola" label="vertical viola"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577" start="5806" end="5816" title="Salvador Dalí" label="&amp;quot;Dalí"/>
<link wikidata="Q201494" start="6100" end="6112" title="Harry Partch" label="Harry Partch"/>
<link wikidata="Q377435" start="7400" end="7407" title="vibrato" label="vibrato"/>
<link wikidata="Q204948" start="7519" end="7522" title="bow (music)" label="bow"/>
<link wikidata="Q204948" start="8343" end="8346" title="bow (music)" label="bow"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8445" end="8449" title="bow (music)#The modern Western bow" label="frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q3362265" start="8742" end="8743" title="Scientific pitch notation" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q386025" start="8748" end="8754" title="octave" label="octave"/>
<link wikidata="Q843813" start="8761" end="8769" title="middle C" label="middle C"/>
<link wikidata="Q303790" start="8983" end="8986" title="Tuning peg" label="peg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9364" end="9375" title="Tuning mechanisms for stringed instruments#Screw-and-lever tuners" label="fine tuners"/>
<link wikidata="Q896967" start="9512" end="9521" title="tailpiece" label="tailpiece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186738" start="9851" end="9854" title="Nut (instrumental)" label="nut"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="10366" end="10381" title="European classical music" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053427" start="10421" end="10431" title="scordatura" label="scordatura"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="10451" end="10455" title="Folk music" label="folk"/>
<link wikidata="Q254" start="10464" end="10470" title="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart" label="Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074060" start="10479" end="10531" title="Sinfonia Concertante for Violin, Viola and Orchestra" label="Sinfonia Concertante for Violin, Viola and Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487481" start="10788" end="10808" title="Cello Concerto (Elgar)" label="Elgar cello concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q57244" start="11100" end="11114" title="Paul Hindemith" label="Paul Hindemith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449037" start="11119" end="11135" title="Vadim Borisovsky" label="Vadim Borisovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q6054209" start="11314" end="11341" title="International Viola Society" label="International Viola Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745340" start="11468" end="11490" title="American Viola Society" label="American Viola Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243674" start="11660" end="11700" title="Primrose International Viola Competition" label="Primrose International Viola Competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q332498" start="12320" end="12344" title="Brigham Young University" label="Brigham Young University"/>
<link wikidata="Q181040" start="12611" end="12620" title="alto clef" label="alto clef"/>
<link wikidata="Q756843" start="13053" end="13077" title="Cello Suites (Bach)" label="Bach&amp;#x27;s Cello Suites"/>
<link wikidata="Q184421" start="13532" end="13541" title="harmony" label="harmonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q170412" start="13560" end="13567" title="melody" label="melodic"/>
<link wikidata="Q208224" start="13746" end="13767" title="Brandenburg Concertos" label="Brandenburg Concertos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="13787" end="13797" title="Johann Sebastian Bach" label="J. S. Bach"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14099" end="14125" title="Brandenburg concertos#Concerto No. 6 in B-flat major, BWV 1051" label="Brandenburg Concerto No. 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q40125" start="14190" end="14205" title="Viola da gamba" label="violas da gamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552990" start="14325" end="14380" title="Gleichwie der Regen und Schnee vom Himmel fällt, BWV 18" label="Gleichwie der Regen und Schnee vom Himmel fällt, BWV 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q124835" start="14388" end="14424" title="Mein Herze schwimmt im Blut, BWV 199" label="Mein Herze schwimmt im Blut, BWV 199"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="14493" end="14500" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q17723" start="14505" end="14514" title="Classical Music Era" label="Classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q75854" start="14542" end="14564" title="Georg Philipp Telemann" label="Georg Philipp Telemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q3686161" start="14570" end="14584" title="Viola Concerto in G major (Telemann)" label="for solo viola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3686134" start="14643" end="14657" title="Concerto for Two Violas (Telemann)" label="for two violas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143613" start="14660" end="14676" title="Alessandro Rolla" label="Alessandro Rolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q706138" start="14678" end="14701" title="Franz Anton Hoffmeister" label="Franz Anton Hoffmeister"/>
<link wikidata="Q157898" start="14706" end="14718" title="Carl Stamitz" label="Carl Stamitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q189201" start="14758" end="14771" title="chamber music" label="chamber music"/>
<link wikidata="Q937364" start="14839" end="14853" title="string quintet" label="string quintet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074060" start="15066" end="15086" title="Sinfonia Concertante for Violin, Viola and Orchestra (Mozart)" label="Sinfonia Concertante"/>
<link wikidata="Q600378" start="15137" end="15152" title="Kegelstatt Trio" label="Kegelstatt Trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q46096" start="15195" end="15212" title="Felix Mendelssohn" label="Felix Mendelssohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q54080" start="15234" end="15257" title="Viola Sonata (Mendelssohn)" label="Viola Sonata in C minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351" start="15303" end="15318" title="Robert Schumann" label="Robert Schumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q494872" start="15335" end="15348" title="Märchenbilder" label="Märchenbilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957384" start="15449" end="15467" title="Märchenerzählungen" label="Märchenerzählungen"/>
<link wikidata="Q106434" start="15476" end="15485" title="Max Bruch" label="Max Bruch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991777" start="15745" end="15788" title="Concerto for Clarinet, Viola, and Orchestra" label="Concerto for Clarinet, Viola, and Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294" start="15939" end="15945" title="Johannes Brahms" label="Brahms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490257" start="16183" end="16190" title="Clarinet Sonatas (Brahms)" label="sonatas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613456" start="16304" end="16313" title="Horn Trio (Brahms)" label="Horn Trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813732" start="16387" end="16423" title="Two Songs for Voice, Viola and Piano" label="Two Songs for Voice, Viola and Piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q159976" start="16611" end="16625" title="Joseph Joachim" label="Joseph Joachim"/>
<link wikidata="Q86910" start="16640" end="16646" title="Amalie Joachim" label="Amalie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298" start="16648" end="16654" title="Antonín Dvořák" label="Dvořák"/>
<link wikidata="Q170217" start="16793" end="16798" title="Czechs" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q48173" start="16810" end="16825" title="Bedřich Smetana" label="Bedřich Smetana"/>
<link wikidata="Q184933" start="16830" end="16842" title="Leoš Janáček" label="Leoš Janáček"/>
<link wikidata="Q742180" start="16901" end="16919" title="viola d&amp;#x27;amore" label="viola d&amp;#x27;amore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141125" start="16945" end="16957" title="String Quartet No. 1 (Smetana)" label="From My Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623927" start="16974" end="16990" title="Intimate Letters" label="Intimate Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q13894" start="17266" end="17281" title="Richard Strauss" label="Richard Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q606635" start="17304" end="17315" title="Don Quixote (Strauss)" label="Don Quixote"/>
<link wikidata="Q179631" start="17417" end="17429" title="Edward Elgar" label="Edward Elgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q934028" start="17443" end="17460" title="Enigma Variations" label="Enigma Variations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149748" start="17499" end="17521" title="In the South (Alassio)" label="In the South (Alassio)"/>
<link wikidata="Q909781" start="17539" end="17550" title="pas de deux" label="pas de deux"/>
<link wikidata="Q189544" start="17577" end="17589" title="Adolphe Adam" label="Adolphe Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q827436" start="17603" end="17610" title="Giselle" label="Giselle"/>
<link wikidata="Q207951" start="17657" end="17668" title="Léo Delibes" label="Léo Delibes"/>
<link wikidata="Q831852" start="17689" end="17697" title="Coppélia" label="Coppélia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811459" start="17764" end="17771" title="Requiem (Fauré)" label="Requiem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6207877" start="18431" end="18442" title="Jodi Levitz" label="Jodi Levitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q508953" start="18770" end="18782" title="Arthur Bliss" label="Arthur Bliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365582" start="18784" end="18800" title="Edwin York Bowen" label="Edwin York Bowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896049" start="18802" end="18815" title="Benjamin Dale" label="Benjamin Dale"/>
<link wikidata="Q207947" start="18821" end="18843" title="Ralph Vaughan Williams" label="Ralph Vaughan Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q310939" start="18892" end="18906" title="William Walton" label="William Walton"/>
<link wikidata="Q223258" start="18908" end="18924" title="Bohuslav Martinů" label="Bohuslav Martinů"/>
<link wikidata="Q83326" start="18930" end="18941" title="Béla Bartók" label="Béla Bartók"/>
<link wikidata="Q4700" start="19096" end="19110" title="Claude Debussy" label="Claude Debussy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485662" start="19118" end="19150" title="Sonata for flute, viola and harp (Debussy)" label="Sonata for flute, viola and harp"/>
<link wikidata="Q961861" start="19236" end="19252" title="Charles Wuorinen" label="Charles Wuorinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q318835" start="19330" end="19344" title="Elliott Carter" label="Elliott Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q123234" start="19486" end="19498" title="Ernest Bloch" label="Ernest Bloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q65119145" start="19664" end="19679" title="Suite Hébraïque" label="Suite Hébraïque"/>
<link wikidata="Q259670" start="19716" end="19730" title="Rebecca Helferich Clarke" label="Rebecca Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q25872" start="19937" end="19955" title="Alexander Glazunov" label="Alexander Glazunov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178" start="20023" end="20036" title="Maurice Ravel" label="Maurice Ravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q319396" start="20251" end="20263" title="Miklós Rózsa" label="Miklós Rózsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q222741" start="20265" end="20276" title="Revol Bunin" label="Revol Bunin"/>
<link wikidata="Q158078" start="20278" end="20294" title="Alfred Schnittke" label="Alfred Schnittke"/>
<link wikidata="Q165668" start="20296" end="20313" title="Sofia Gubaidulina" label="Sofia Gubaidulina"/>
<link wikidata="Q348652" start="20315" end="20328" title="Giya Kancheli" label="Giya Kancheli"/>
<link wikidata="Q153469" start="20333" end="20353" title="Krzysztof Penderecki" label="Krzysztof Penderecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q715123" start="20368" end="20382" title="viola concerto" label="viola concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q316427" start="20407" end="20421" title="Morton Feldman" label="Morton Feldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136846" start="20503" end="20514" title="concertante" label="concertante"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245902" start="20531" end="20545" title="spectral music" label="spectral music"/>
<link wikidata="Q548149" start="20689" end="20702" title="Gérard Grisey" label="Gérard Grisey"/>
<link wikidata="Q708501" start="20704" end="20718" title="Tristan Murail" label="Tristan Murail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235832" start="20724" end="20741" title="Horațiu Rădulescu" label="Horațiu Rădulescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159794" start="20869" end="20883" title="Robin Holloway" label="Robin Holloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q21898078" start="20925" end="20940" title="Peter Seabourne" label="Peter Seabourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q21063940" start="20999" end="21016" title="Airat Ichmouratov" label="Airat Ichmouratov"/>
<link wikidata="Q122964011" start="21017" end="21037" title="Viola Concerto No.1 (Ichmouratov)" label="Viola Concerto No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q123027395" start="21049" end="21092" title="Three Romances for Viola, Strings, and Harp" label="Three Romances for Viola, Strings, and Harp"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="21207" end="21218" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q45909" start="21220" end="21229" title="John Cale" label="John Cale"/>
<link wikidata="Q103550" start="21233" end="21255" title="The Velvet Underground" label="The Velvet Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="21305" end="21321" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q163819" start="21327" end="21341" title="10,000 Maniacs" label="10,000 Maniacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q391348" start="21343" end="21358" title="Imagine Dragons" label="Imagine Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6217433" start="21369" end="21384" title="John &amp;amp; Mary" label="John &amp;amp; Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q920131" start="21386" end="21403" title="British Sea Power" label="British Sea Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q678410" start="21431" end="21440" title="Marillion" label="Marillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="21498" end="21502" title="Jazz" label="Jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q604683" start="21999" end="22012" title="Antonio Rolla" label="Antonio Rolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q567065" start="22014" end="22028" title="Chrétien Urhan" label="Chrétien Urhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048804" start="22030" end="22041" title="Casimir Ney" label="Casimir Ney"/>
<link wikidata="Q13610955" start="22043" end="22063" title="Louis van Waefelghem" label="Louis van Waefelghem"/>
<link wikidata="Q541922" start="22142" end="22158" title="William Primrose" label="William Primrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430607" start="22171" end="22188" title="Théophile Laforge" label="Théophile Laforge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055931" start="22190" end="22205" title="Cecil Aronowitz" label="Cecil Aronowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1911471" start="22207" end="22220" title="Maurice Vieux" label="Maurice Vieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223240" start="22234" end="22247" title="Lillian Fuchs" label="Lillian Fuchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q930494" start="22249" end="22262" title="Dino Asciolla" label="Dino Asciolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394459" start="22264" end="22280" title="Frederick Riddle" label="Frederick Riddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979818" start="22282" end="22297" title="Walter Trampler" label="Walter Trampler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5395180" start="22299" end="22314" title="Ernst Wallfisch" label="Ernst Wallfisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q105320412" start="22364" end="22408" title="Carl Flesch International Violin Competition" label="Carl Flesch International Violin Competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008845" start="22414" end="22427" title="Emanuel Vardi" label="Emanuel Vardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209178" start="22461" end="22484" title="24 Caprices for Solo Violin (Paganini)" label="24 Caprices by Paganini"/>
<link wikidata="Q312857" start="22587" end="22599" title="Eugène Ysaÿe" label="Eugène Ysaÿe"/>
<link wikidata="Q156814" start="22601" end="22615" title="Yehudi Menuhin" label="Yehudi Menuhin"/>
<link wikidata="Q47120" start="22617" end="22631" title="David Oistrakh" label="David Oistrakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q346204" start="22633" end="22649" title="Pinchas Zukerman" label="Pinchas Zukerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q441388" start="22651" end="22665" title="Maxim Vengerov" label="Maxim Vengerov"/>
<link wikidata="Q78796" start="22667" end="22681" title="Julian Rachlin" label="Julian Rachlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261877" start="22683" end="22694" title="James Ehnes" label="James Ehnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q159978" start="22700" end="22713" title="Nigel Kennedy" label="Nigel Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="22843" end="22863" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Ludwig van Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349" start="22951" end="22963" title="Joseph Haydn" label="Joseph Haydn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312" start="22965" end="22979" title="Franz Schubert" label="Franz Schubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q150767" start="23006" end="23022" title="Benjamin Britten" label="Benjamin Britten"/>
<link wikidata="Q259670" start="23080" end="23094" title="Rebecca Clarke (composer)" label="Rebecca Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6389318" start="23146" end="23157" title="Kenji Bunch" label="Kenji Bunch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437269" start="23159" end="23171" title="Scott Slapin" label="Scott Slapin"/>
<link wikidata="Q195817" start="23177" end="23188" title="Lev Zhurbin" label="Lev Zhurbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q572648" start="23286" end="23292" title="pickup (music technology)" label="pickup"/>
<link wikidata="Q107008558" start="23297" end="23317" title="instrument amplifier" label="instrument amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q104531076" start="23363" end="23380" title="graphic equalizer" label="graphic equalizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q183759" start="23589" end="23602" title="piezoelectric" label="piezoelectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q893474" start="24636" end="24642" title="drone (music)" label="drones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606951" start="24695" end="24708" title="Venus in Furs (song)" label="Venus in Furs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2158452" start="24765" end="24784" title="Geoffrey Richardson (musician)" label="Geoffrey Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q767871" start="24788" end="24795" title="Caravan (band)" label="Caravan"/>
<link wikidata="Q399804" start="24851" end="24863" title="preamplifier" label="preamplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q978470" start="24883" end="24893" title="buffer amplifier" label="unbuffered"/>
<link wikidata="Q215928" start="24894" end="24904" title="transducer" label="transducer"/>
<link wikidata="Q174984" start="24905" end="24911" title="Signal (electrical engineering)" label="signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q654117" start="24971" end="24983" title="mixing board" label="mixing board"/>
<link wikidata="Q104531076" start="25028" end="25037" title="Equalization (audio)" label="equalizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051241" start="25091" end="25103" title="public address" label="sound system"/>
<link wikidata="Q862880" start="25170" end="25182" title="effects unit" label="effects unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q468809" start="25192" end="25198" title="reverb" label="reverb"/>
<link wikidata="Q899871" start="25202" end="25211" title="Distortion (music)" label="overdrive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25231" end="25243" title="Amati#Violas" label="Amati violas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524074" start="25246" end="25263" title="Garrod&amp;#x27;s pad" label="Garrod&amp;#x27;s pad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6125268" start="25266" end="25311" title="Lionel Tertis International Viola Competition" label="Lionel Tertis International Viola Competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793518" start="25314" end="25359" title="Maurice Vieux International Viola Competition" label="Maurice Vieux International Viola Competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q899753" start="25362" end="25373" title="Viola jokes" label="Viola jokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6282398" start="25437" end="25450" title="Joseph Curtin" label="Joseph Curtin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745340" start="25492" end="25514" title="American Viola Society" label="American Viola Society"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="32601" wikidata="Q638022" url="?curid=32601" title="Vegetarian cuisine">
<text>Vegetarian cuisine is based on food that meets vegetarian standards by not including meat and animal tissue products (such as gelatin or animal-derived rennet).

==Common vegetarian foods==

Vegetarian cuisine includes consumption of foods containing vegetable protein, vitamin B12, and other nutrients. Food regarded as suitable for all vegetarians (including vegans) typically includes:
* Cereals/grains: barley, buckwheat, corn, fonio, hempseed, maize, millet, oats, quinoa, rice, rye, sorghum, triticale, wheat; derived products such as flour (dough, bread, baked goods, cornflakes, dumplings, granola, Muesli, pasta etc.).
* Vegetables (fresh, canned, frozen, pureed, dried or pickled); derived products such as vegetable sauces like chili sauce and vegetable oils.
* Edible fungi (fresh, canned, dried or pickled). Edible fungi include some mushrooms and cultured microfungi which can be involved in fermentation of food (yeasts and moulds) such as &quot;Aspergillus oryzae&quot; and &quot;Fusarium venenatum&quot;, although fungi is rarely considered non-vegetarian due to it not being a plant.
* Fruit (fresh, canned, frozen, pureed, candied or dried); derived products such as jam and marmalade.
* Legumes: beans (including soybeans and soy products such as miso, edamame, soy milk, soy yogurt, tempeh, tofu and TVP), chickpeas, lentils, peas, peanuts; derived products such as peanut butter.
* Tree nuts and seeds; derived products such as nut butter.
* Herbs, spices and wild greens such as dandelion, sorrel or nettle.
* Meat analogues, which mimic the taste, texture, and appearance of meat and are often used in recipes that traditionally contained meat.
* Other foods such as seaweed-derived products such as agar, which has the same function as animal-bone-derived gelatin.
* Beverages such as beer, coffee, hot chocolate, lemonade, tea or wine—although some beers and wines may have elements of animal products as fining agents including fish bladders, egg whites, gelatin and skim milk.
Foods not suitable for vegans, but acceptable for some other types of vegetarians:
* Dairy products (butter, cheese (except for cheese containing rennet of animal origin), milk, yogurt (excluding yogurt made with gelatin) etc.) –eaten by lacto-ovo vegetarians and lacto vegetarians.
* Eggs – eaten by lacto-ovo vegetarians and ovo-vegetarians
* Honey

Vegetarians by definition cannot consume meat or animal tissue products, with no other universally adopted change in their diet. However, in practice, compared to non-vegetarians, vegetarians on average have an increased consumption of:

* Fruits
* Vegetables
* Avocados
* Non-fried potatoes
* Whole grains
* Legumes
* Soy foods
* Nuts
* Seeds

In comparison to non-vegetarians, practicing vegetarians on average have a decreased consumption of:

* Dairy products
* Eggs
* Refined grains
* Added fats
* Sweets
* Snacks
* Non-water (often sweetened) beverages

This difference is observed, but is not required to be vegetarian. Nevertheless, it is relevant when considering research into the health effects of adopting a vegetarian diet. A diet consisting only of sugar candies, for example, while technically also vegetarian, would be expected to have a much different outcome for health compared to what is called &quot;a vegetarian diet&quot; culturally and what is most commonly adopted by vegetarians. It is also important to note that overeating occurs because of a misconception of hunger. By changing your perspective on calories verses nutrients, it becomes much easier to adapt to the healthier lifestyle of vegetarianism.

== Traditional vegetarian cuisine ==

These are some of the most common dishes that vegetarians eat without substitution of ingredients. Such dishes include, from breakfasts to dinnertime desserts:
* Traditionally, Brahmin cuisines in most part of India, except Jammu and Kashmir, Odisha and West Bengal, are strictly vegetarian. Onion and garlic is not eaten in a strict sattvic and lacto vegetarian diet.
* Gujarati cuisine and Rajasthani cuisine from the states of Gujarat and Rajasthan are predominantly vegetarian.
* Many bean, pasta, potato, rice, and bulgur/couscous dishes, stews, soups and stir-fries.
* Cereals and oatmeal, granola bars, etc.
* Fresh fruit and most salads
* Potato salad, baba ganoush, pita-wraps or burrito -wraps, vegetable pilafs, baked potatoes or fried potato-skins with various toppings, corn on the cob, smoothies
* Many sandwiches, such as cheese on toast, and cold sandwiches including roasted eggplant, mushrooms, bell peppers, cheeses, avocado and other sandwich ingredients
* Numerous side dishes, such as mashed potatoes, scalloped potatoes, some bread stuffing, seasoned rice, and macaroni and cheese.
* Classical Buddhist cuisine in Asia served at temples and restaurants with a green sign indicating vegetarian food only near temples. Onion and garlic is not eaten in a strict Buddhist diet.

===National cuisines===
* Chinese (and other East Asian) dishes based on the main ingredients being mushroom, noodles, eggplant, string beans, broccoli, rice, tofu, most tong sui or mixed vegetables.
* Georgian cuisine contains some vegetarian dishes. Lobio, lobiani, ajapsandali, mchadi, pkhali and khinkali with mushroom filling are all examples of Georgian dishes that are vegetarian. Eggplant (called badrijani or badrijnis in Georgian) is used to make vegetarian dishes such as nigvzinai badrijani (fried eggplant stuffed with walnut paste), badrijnis borani (chopped and fried eggplant), badrijnis khizilala (chopped eggplant with pomegranate seeds) and badrijani mtsvanilit (fried eggplant with fresh herbs).
* Indian cuisine in Asia is replete with vegetarian dishes, many of which can be traced to religious traditions (such as Jain and Hindu). Gujarati cuisine of India is predominantly vegetarian among other Indian cuisines: Gujarati thali is very famous among Indians. There are many vegetarian Indian foods such as pakora, samosa, khichris, Pulao, raitas, rasam, bengain bharta, chana masala, some kormas, sambar, jalfrezis, saag aloo, subjis (vegetable dishes) such as bindi subji, gobi subji, Punjabi chole, aloo matar and much South Indian food such as dosas, idlis and vadas. Chapati and other wheat/maida based breads like naan, roti parathas are often stuffed with vegetarian items to make it a satisfying meal. Many Indian dishes also qualify as vegan, though many others use honey or dairy.
**South Indian foods like sambar, rasam, koottu, karembadu, upma, palya or taalimpu, kozhambu or koora, aviyal, olan, Kadala curry, Theeyal, pulihora or puliyogare, Chammandi, Chutney, Chitranna, Bisi Bele Bath, and breads like Appam, Puttu, pathiri, dosa, idli and vada.

* In Indonesia, vegetarianism is well served and represented, as there are plenty selection of vegetarian dishes and meat substitutes. Dishes such as gado-gado, karedok, ketoprak, pecel, urap, rujak and asinan are vegetarian. However, for dishes that use peanut sauce, such as &quot;gado-gado, karedok&quot; or &quot;ketoprak&quot;, might contains small amount of shrimp paste for flavor. Served solely, &quot;gudeg&quot; can be considered a vegetarian food, since it consists of unripe jackfruit and coconut milk. Fermented soy products, such as tempeh, tofu and &quot;oncom&quot; are prevalent as meat substitutes, as the source of protein. Most of Indonesians do not practice strict vegetarianism and only consume vegetables or vegetarian dishes for their taste, preference, economic and health reasons. Nevertheless, there are small numbers of Indonesian Buddhists who practice vegetarianism for religious reason.
* Japanese foods such as castella, dorayaki, edamame, name kojiru, mochi, taiyaki, tempura, vegetable sushi and wagashi. Miso soup is made from fermented white or red soy bean paste, garnished with scallions or seaweed. Although most traditional versions are made from fish stock (dashi), it can be made with vegetable stock as well.
* Korean cuisine has some dishes that are often vegetarian. One example is bibimbap, which is rice with mixed vegetables. Sometimes this dish contains beef or other non-vegetarian ingredients. Another Korean food which is sometimes vegetarian is jeon, in which ingredients (most commonly vegetables and/or seafood) are coated in a flour and egg batter and then pan-fried in oil.

* Cuisine of the Mediterranean such as tumbet and many polentas and tapas dishes.
* Mexican foods such as salsa and guacamole with chips, rice and bean burritos (without lard in the refried beans or chicken fat in the rice), huevos rancheros, veggie burrito, many quesadillas, bean tacos, some chilaquiles and bean-pies, chili sin carne, black beans with rice, some chiles rellenos, cheese enchiladas and vegetable fajitas.
* Italian foods such as most pastas, many pizzas, bruschetta, caponata, crostini, eggplant parmigiana, Polenta and many risottos.
* Continental cuisine such as braised leeks with olives and parsley, ratatouille, many quiches, sauteed Brussels sprouts with mushrooms, sauteed Swiss chard, squash and vegetable-stuffed mushrooms.
* In Germany, Frankfurt green sauce, Klöße with vegetarian sauces (e.g., Chanterelle), cheese or vegetable stuffed Maultaschen, combinations of quark, spinach, potatoes and herbs provide some traditional vegetarian summer dishes. Traditionally on Fridays, southern Germany broad variety of sweet dishes may be served as a main course, such as Germknödel and Dampfnudel. Potato soup and plum cake are traditional Friday dishes in the Palatinate. Brenntar in Swabia, it is made of roasted flour, usually spelt flour or oat flour.
* Many Greek and Balkan dishes, such as briam, dolmas (when made without minced meat), fasolada, gemista, vegetable based moussaka and spanakopita.

* Russian cuisine developed a significant vegetarian tradition in czarist time, based on the example of Leo Tolstoy. The orthodox tradition of separating meat and vegetables and as well between specific meals for fasting and other holidays contributed to a rich variety of vegetarian dishes in Russia and Slavic countries, such as soups (vegetable borscht, shchi, okroshka), pirogi, blini, vareniki, kasha, buckwheat, fermented and pickled vegetables, etc.
* Many Ethiopian dishes such as injeera or Ethiopian vegetable sauces or chillies.
* Mideastern food such as falafel, hummus (mashed chick peas), tahini (ground sesame seeds), minted-yogurts, and couscous.
** Egyptian cuisine in particular is rich in vegetarian foods. For reasons ranging from economics to the religious practices of the Coptic Orthodox Church, most Egyptian dishes rely on beans and vegetables: the national dishes, kushari and ful medames, are entirely vegetarian, as are usually the assorted vegetable casseroles that characterize the typical Egyptian meal.
* Many dishes in Thai cuisine can be made vegetarian if the main protein element is substituted by a vegetarian alternative such as tofu. This includes dishes such as &quot;phat khi mao&quot; and, if a vegetarian shrimp paste and fish sauce substitute is used, many Thai curries. Venues serving vegetarian Buddhist cuisine (&quot;ahan che&quot;; ) can be found all over Thailand.
* Creole and Southern foods such as hush puppies, okra patties, rice and beans, or sauteed kale or collards, if not cooked with the traditional pork fat or meat stock.
* Some Welsh recipes, including Glamorgan sausages, laverbread and Welsh rarebit.
===Desserts and sweets===
Most desserts, including pies, cobblers, cakes, brownies, cookies, truffles, Rice Krispie treats (from gelatin-free marshmallows or marshmallow fluff), peanut butter treats, pudding, rice pudding, ice cream, crème brulée, etc., are free of meat and fish and are suitable for ovo-lacto vegetarians. Eastern confectionery and desserts, such as halva and Turkish delight, are mostly vegan, while others such as baklava (which often contains butter) are lacto vegetarian. Indian desserts and sweets are mostly vegetarian like peda, barfi, gulab jamun, shrikhand, basundi, kaju katri, rasgulla, cham cham, rajbhog, etc. Indian sweets are mostly made from milk products and are thus lacto vegetarian; dry fruit-based sweets are vegan.

== Meat analogues ==
== Commercial products ==

Commercial products marketed towards vegetarians are available in most countries, though their quantity and variety can vary. For example, in Australia, a wide range of vegetarian products are available in most supermarkets. Furthermore, a vegetarian shopping guide is provided by Vegetarian/Vegan Society of Queensland. The largest market for vegetarian foods is India, with official governmental laws regulating the &quot;vegetarian&quot; and &quot;non vegetarian&quot; labels.

== Health research==
Vegetarian diets are under preliminary research for their possible effects on long-term health. Dietary patterns were evaluated along with their relationship with metabolic risk factors and metabolic syndrome. A cross-sectional analysis of 773 subjects including 35% vegetarians, 16% semi-vegetarians, and 49% non-vegetarians found that a vegetarian dietary pattern is associated significantly with lower means for all metabolic risk factors except HDL, and a lower risk of metabolic syndromes when compared to non-vegetarian diets. Metabolic risk factors include HDL, triglycerides, glucose, systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood pressure, waist circumference, and body mass index. Adventist Study 2 (AHS-2) compared mean consumption of each food group for vegetarian patterns compared to non-vegetarian patterns.

==See also==
* Indian vegetarian cuisine
* Chinese Buddhist cuisine
* Korean vegetarian cuisine
* Veganism
* List of meat substitutes
* List of vegetable dishes
* List of vegetarian restaurants
* List of vegetarian and vegan companies
* &quot;South Asian Veggie Table&quot; – Vegetarian cooking television show
* &quot;Vegetarian Cooking for Everyone&quot;
* Vegetarian and vegan symbolism
== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q638022" start="0" end="18" title="Vegetarian cuisine" label="Vegetarian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095" start="31" end="35" title="food" label="food"/>
<link wikidata="Q83364" start="47" end="67" title="Vegetarianism" label="vegetarian standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q10990" start="85" end="89" title="meat" label="meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q179254" start="126" end="133" title="gelatin" label="gelatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q326900" start="152" end="158" title="rennet" label="rennet"/>
<link wikidata="Q21296145" start="261" end="268" title="protein (nutrient)" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q187706" start="270" end="281" title="vitamin B12" label="vitamin B12"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="391" end="397" title="Cereal" label="Cereal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995529" start="399" end="404" title="grain" label="grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="407" end="413" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q132734" start="415" end="424" title="buckwheat" label="buckwheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q18966" start="426" end="430" title="Sweet corn" label="corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439809" start="432" end="437" title="fonio" label="fonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150699" start="439" end="447" title="hempseed" label="hempseed"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="449" end="454" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q259438" start="456" end="462" title="millet" label="millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q12104" start="464" end="467" title="oat" label="oat"/>
<link wikidata="Q139925" start="470" end="476" title="quinoa" label="quinoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="478" end="482" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q12099" start="484" end="487" title="rye" label="rye"/>
<link wikidata="Q332062" start="489" end="496" title="sorghum" label="sorghum"/>
<link wikidata="Q380329" start="498" end="507" title="triticale" label="triticale"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="509" end="514" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q36465" start="541" end="546" title="flour" label="flour"/>
<link wikidata="Q178024" start="548" end="553" title="dough" label="dough"/>
<link wikidata="Q7802" start="555" end="560" title="bread" label="bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q720398" start="562" end="573" title="Baking" label="baked goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q327115" start="575" end="585" title="cornflakes" label="cornflakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854639" start="587" end="595" title="dumpling" label="dumpling"/>
<link wikidata="Q119203" start="598" end="605" title="granola" label="granola"/>
<link wikidata="Q52406" start="607" end="613" title="Muesli" label="Muesli"/>
<link wikidata="Q178" start="615" end="620" title="pasta" label="pasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q11004" start="630" end="639" title="Vegetable" label="Vegetable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503967" start="682" end="689" title="Pickling" label="pickled"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098942" start="739" end="750" title="chili sauce" label="chili sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739805" start="755" end="768" title="vegetable oil" label="vegetable oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="780" end="785" title="fungi" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q654236" start="842" end="856" title="Edible mushroom" label="some mushrooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q41760" start="906" end="918" title="fermentation" label="fermentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q45422" start="928" end="934" title="yeasts" label="yeasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q22662068" start="961" end="979" title="Aspergillus oryzae" label="Aspergillus oryzae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401756" start="996" end="1014" title="Fusarium venenatum" label="Fusarium venenatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314483" start="1104" end="1109" title="Fruit" label="Fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q636056" start="1134" end="1140" title="Purée" label="pureed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163138" start="1142" end="1149" title="Candied fruit" label="candied"/>
<link wikidata="Q234901" start="1153" end="1158" title="Dried fruit" label="dried"/>
<link wikidata="Q74048276" start="1186" end="1189" title="jam" label="jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5834964" start="1194" end="1203" title="marmalade" label="marmalade"/>
<link wikidata="Q145909" start="1207" end="1213" title="Legume" label="Legume"/>
<link wikidata="Q379813" start="1216" end="1220" title="bean" label="bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q11006" start="1233" end="1240" title="soybean" label="soybean"/>
<link wikidata="Q235169" start="1267" end="1271" title="miso" label="miso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377879" start="1273" end="1280" title="edamame" label="edamame"/>
<link wikidata="Q192199" start="1282" end="1290" title="soy milk" label="soy milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757352" start="1292" end="1302" title="soy yogurt" label="soy yogurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q120096" start="1304" end="1310" title="tempeh" label="tempeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q177378" start="1312" end="1316" title="tofu" label="tofu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120234" start="1321" end="1324" title="Textured vegetable protein" label="TVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q81375" start="1327" end="1335" title="chickpea" label="chickpea"/>
<link wikidata="Q131226" start="1338" end="1344" title="lentil" label="lentil"/>
<link wikidata="Q25237" start="1347" end="1350" title="pea" label="pea"/>
<link wikidata="Q37383" start="1353" end="1359" title="peanut" label="peanut"/>
<link wikidata="Q147651" start="1387" end="1400" title="peanut butter" label="peanut butter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11009" start="1404" end="1413" title="Nut (fruit)" label="Tree nuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q16915422" start="1418" end="1423" title="List of edible seeds" label="seeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q10752679" start="1450" end="1460" title="nut butter" label="nut butter"/>
<link wikidata="Q207123" start="1464" end="1468" title="Herb" label="Herb"/>
<link wikidata="Q42527" start="1471" end="1476" title="spice" label="spice"/>
<link wikidata="Q30024" start="1502" end="1511" title="dandelion" label="dandelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q26297" start="1513" end="1519" title="sorrel" label="sorrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16872290" start="1523" end="1529" title="nettle" label="nettle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343997" start="1533" end="1546" title="Meat analogue" label="Meat analogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q219239" start="1626" end="1632" title="recipe" label="recipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q796185" start="1691" end="1698" title="Edible seaweed" label="seaweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q177998" start="1724" end="1728" title="agar" label="agar"/>
<link wikidata="Q179254" start="1781" end="1788" title="gelatin" label="gelatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="1810" end="1814" title="beer" label="beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8486" start="1816" end="1822" title="coffee" label="coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q13261" start="1824" end="1837" title="hot chocolate" label="hot chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q893" start="1839" end="1847" title="lemonade" label="lemonade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6097" start="1849" end="1852" title="tea" label="tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q282" start="1856" end="1860" title="wine" label="wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q185217" start="2090" end="2103" title="Dairy product" label="Dairy product"/>
<link wikidata="Q34172" start="2106" end="2112" title="butter" label="butter"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="2114" end="2120" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q326900" start="2151" end="2157" title="rennet" label="rennet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8495" start="2177" end="2181" title="milk" label="milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q13317" start="2183" end="2189" title="yogurt" label="yogurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q179254" start="2218" end="2225" title="gelatin" label="gelatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544800" start="2243" end="2264" title="Lacto-ovo vegetarianism" label="lacto-ovo vegetarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496076" start="2269" end="2287" title="Lacto vegetarianism" label="lacto vegetarians."/>
<link wikidata="Q93189" start="2290" end="2294" title="Egg (food)" label="Eggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544800" start="2306" end="2327" title="Lacto-ovo vegetarianism" label="lacto-ovo vegetarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543760" start="2332" end="2347" title="Ovo vegetarianism" label="ovo-vegetarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q10987" start="2350" end="2355" title="Honey" label="Honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q83364" start="2357" end="2368" title="Vegetarianism" label="Vegetarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314483" start="2597" end="2602" title="Fruit" label="Fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11004" start="2606" end="2615" title="Vegetable" label="Vegetable"/>
<link wikidata="Q37153" start="2619" end="2626" title="Avocado" label="Avocado"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="2640" end="2646" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938952" start="2651" end="2662" title="Whole grain" label="Whole grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q145909" start="2666" end="2672" title="Legume" label="Legume"/>
<link wikidata="Q21068226" start="2676" end="2685" title="List of soy-based foods" label="Soy foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q185217" start="2806" end="2819" title="Dairy product" label="Dairy product"/>
<link wikidata="Q93189" start="2823" end="2827" title="Eggs as food" label="Eggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307204" start="2830" end="2844" title="Refined grains" label="Refined grains"/>
<link wikidata="Q185583" start="2860" end="2866" title="Candy" label="Sweets"/>
<link wikidata="Q749316" start="2869" end="2874" title="Snack" label="Snack"/>
<link wikidata="Q165947" start="3445" end="3451" title="hunger" label="hunger"/>
<link wikidata="Q130964" start="3485" end="3492" title="calorie" label="calorie"/>
<link wikidata="Q181394" start="3501" end="3509" title="nutrient" label="nutrient"/>
<link wikidata="Q83364" start="3574" end="3587" title="vegetarianism" label="vegetarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q47140" start="3805" end="3812" title="Brahmin" label="Brahmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q66278313" start="3852" end="3869" title="Jammu and Kashmir (union territory)" label="Jammu and Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q22048" start="3871" end="3877" title="Odisha" label="Odisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="3882" end="3893" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3472164" start="3962" end="3969" title="Sattvic diet" label="sattvic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496076" start="3974" end="3990" title="Lacto vegetarianism" label="lacto vegetarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732159" start="3999" end="4015" title="Gujarati cuisine" label="Gujarati cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595467" start="4020" end="4038" title="Rajasthani cuisine" label="Rajasthani cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="4058" end="4065" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437" start="4070" end="4079" title="Rajasthan" label="Rajasthan"/>
<link wikidata="Q379813" start="4117" end="4121" title="bean" label="bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q178" start="4123" end="4128" title="pasta" label="pasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="4130" end="4136" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="4138" end="4142" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q250432" start="4148" end="4154" title="bulgur" label="bulgur"/>
<link wikidata="Q76605" start="4155" end="4163" title="couscous" label="couscous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920963" start="4172" end="4176" title="stew" label="stew"/>
<link wikidata="Q41415" start="4179" end="4183" title="soup" label="soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q8980672" start="4189" end="4199" title="Stir frying" label="stir-fries"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="4203" end="4209" title="Cereal" label="Cereal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089240" start="4215" end="4222" title="oatmeal" label="oatmeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q119203" start="4224" end="4235" title="granola bar" label="granola bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314483" start="4251" end="4256" title="fruit" label="fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q9266" start="4266" end="4271" title="salad" label="salad"/>
<link wikidata="Q152964" start="4275" end="4287" title="Potato salad" label="Potato salad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072192" start="4289" end="4301" title="baba ganoush" label="baba ganoush"/>
<link wikidata="Q211340" start="4303" end="4307" title="pita" label="pita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1599125" start="4308" end="4313" title="Wrap (food)" label="wraps"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4317" end="4324" title="Burrito#Veggie burrito" label="burrito"/>
<link wikidata="Q11004" start="4333" end="4342" title="vegetable" label="vegetable"/>
<link wikidata="Q485796" start="4343" end="4348" title="pilaf" label="pilaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="4357" end="4363" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q300472" start="4369" end="4374" title="frying" label="fried"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="4375" end="4381" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q171187" start="4382" end="4387" title="Peel (fruit)" label="skins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171058" start="4411" end="4426" title="corn on the cob" label="corn on the cob"/>
<link wikidata="Q13290" start="4428" end="4436" title="smoothie" label="smoothie"/>
<link wikidata="Q28803" start="4445" end="4453" title="sandwich" label="sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q861293" start="4465" end="4480" title="cheese on toast" label="cheese on toast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540" start="4520" end="4528" title="eggplant" label="eggplant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548030" start="4541" end="4552" title="bell pepper" label="bell pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q37153" start="4564" end="4571" title="avocado" label="avocado"/>
<link wikidata="Q322787" start="4635" end="4648" title="mashed potato" label="mashed potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326339" start="4745" end="4761" title="Buddhist cuisine" label="Buddhist cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="4765" end="4769" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44539" start="4780" end="4786" title="temple" label="temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707" start="4792" end="4802" title="restaurant" label="restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876842" start="4952" end="4959" title="Chinese cuisine" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="4971" end="4981" title="East Asian" label="East Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q192874" start="5036" end="5042" title="noodle" label="noodle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2987371" start="5055" end="5066" title="string bean" label="string bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q47722" start="5069" end="5077" title="broccoli" label="broccoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="5079" end="5083" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718625" start="5096" end="5104" title="tong sui" label="tong sui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199026" start="5128" end="5144" title="Georgian cuisine" label="Georgian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858518" start="5178" end="5183" title="Lobio" label="Lobio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16909052" start="5185" end="5192" title="lobiani" label="lobiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078349" start="5194" end="5205" title="ajapsandali" label="ajapsandali"/>
<link wikidata="Q12838065" start="5207" end="5213" title="mchadi" label="mchadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q14920495" start="5215" end="5221" title="pkhali" label="pkhali"/>
<link wikidata="Q971820" start="5226" end="5234" title="khinkali" label="khinkali"/>
<link wikidata="Q799687" start="5409" end="5428" title="Badrijani" label="nigvzinai badrijani"/>
<link wikidata="Q192087" start="5644" end="5658" title="Indian cuisine" label="Indian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="5662" end="5666" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="5763" end="5767" title="Jain" label="Jain"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="5772" end="5777" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732159" start="5780" end="5796" title="Gujarati cuisine" label="Gujarati cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642148" start="5872" end="5877" title="thali" label="thali"/>
<link wikidata="Q192087" start="5934" end="5946" title="Cuisine of India" label="Indian foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126275" start="5955" end="5961" title="pakora" label="pakora"/>
<link wikidata="Q491517" start="5963" end="5969" title="samosa" label="samosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478703" start="5971" end="5979" title="Khichdi" label="khichris"/>
<link wikidata="Q485796" start="5981" end="5986" title="Pilaf" label="Pulao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483397" start="5988" end="5994" title="raita (condiment)" label="raitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472937" start="5996" end="6001" title="Rasam (dish)" label="rasam"/>
<link wikidata="Q154872" start="6003" end="6017" title="Baingan bharta" label="bengain bharta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061604" start="6019" end="6031" title="chana masala" label="chana masala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979684" start="6038" end="6043" title="korma" label="korma"/>
<link wikidata="Q188420" start="6046" end="6052" title="Sambar (dish)" label="sambar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11684396" start="6054" end="6062" title="jalfrezi" label="jalfrezi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748359" start="6065" end="6074" title="saag aloo" label="saag aloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q192087" start="6076" end="6082" title="Indian cuisine" label="subjis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839299" start="6150" end="6160" title="Aloo mutter" label="aloo matar"/>
<link wikidata="Q920940" start="6196" end="6200" title="Dosa (food)" label="dosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q956595" start="6203" end="6207" title="idli" label="idli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723131" start="6213" end="6218" title="Vada (food)" label="vadas"/>
<link wikidata="Q752006" start="6220" end="6227" title="Chapati" label="Chapati"/>
<link wikidata="Q689950" start="6268" end="6272" title="naan" label="naan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2204450" start="6274" end="6278" title="roti" label="roti"/>
<link wikidata="Q59707" start="6279" end="6286" title="paratha" label="paratha"/>
<link wikidata="Q181138" start="6393" end="6398" title="vegan" label="vegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="6441" end="6453" title="South Indian" label="South Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q188420" start="6465" end="6471" title="Sambar (dish)" label="sambar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472937" start="6473" end="6478" title="Rasam (dish)" label="rasam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198836" start="6480" end="6486" title="koottu" label="koottu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721584" start="6499" end="6503" title="upma" label="upma"/>
<link wikidata="Q951525" start="6543" end="6549" title="aviyal" label="aviyal"/>
<link wikidata="Q13110866" start="6551" end="6555" title="Olan (dish)" label="olan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777747" start="6571" end="6578" title="Theeyal" label="Theeyal"/>
<link wikidata="Q275650" start="6615" end="6622" title="Chutney" label="Chutney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5102345" start="6624" end="6633" title="Chitranna" label="Chitranna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918174" start="6635" end="6649" title="Bisi Bele Bath" label="Bisi Bele Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q7802" start="6655" end="6660" title="bread" label="bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548021" start="6667" end="6672" title="Appam" label="Appam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520287" start="6674" end="6679" title="Puttu" label="Puttu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595628" start="6681" end="6688" title="pathiri" label="pathiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q920940" start="6690" end="6694" title="Dosa (food)" label="dosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q956595" start="6696" end="6700" title="idli" label="idli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723131" start="6705" end="6709" title="vada (food)" label="vada"/>
<link wikidata="Q787497" start="6717" end="6726" title="Indonesian cuisine" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q209304" start="6862" end="6871" title="gado-gado" label="gado-gado"/>
<link wikidata="Q4203530" start="6873" end="6880" title="karedok" label="karedok"/>
<link wikidata="Q6395436" start="6882" end="6890" title="ketoprak (food)" label="ketoprak"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261363" start="6892" end="6897" title="pecel" label="pecel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4206002" start="6899" end="6903" title="urap" label="urap"/>
<link wikidata="Q720230" start="6905" end="6910" title="rujak" label="rujak"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807004" start="6915" end="6921" title="asinan" label="asinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480049" start="6967" end="6979" title="peanut sauce" label="peanut sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127705" start="7076" end="7088" title="shrimp paste" label="shrimp paste"/>
<link wikidata="Q980840" start="7122" end="7127" title="gudeg" label="gudeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q45757" start="7199" end="7208" title="jackfruit" label="jackfruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11006" start="7237" end="7240" title="soy" label="soy"/>
<link wikidata="Q120096" start="7259" end="7265" title="tempeh" label="tempeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q177378" start="7267" end="7271" title="tofu" label="tofu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4192299" start="7282" end="7287" title="oncom" label="oncom"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="7346" end="7353" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q234138" start="7632" end="7640" title="Cuisine of Japan" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q87590" start="7655" end="7663" title="castella" label="castella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051482" start="7665" end="7673" title="dorayaki" label="dorayaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377879" start="7675" end="7682" title="edamame" label="edamame"/>
<link wikidata="Q470519" start="7697" end="7702" title="mochi" label="mochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q181195" start="7704" end="7711" title="taiyaki" label="taiyaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q328709" start="7713" end="7720" title="tempura" label="tempura"/>
<link wikidata="Q46383" start="7732" end="7737" title="sushi" label="sushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063096" start="7742" end="7749" title="wagashi" label="wagashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q471866" start="7751" end="7760" title="Miso soup" label="Miso soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q851746" start="7911" end="7916" title="dashi" label="dashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q647500" start="7966" end="7980" title="Korean cuisine" label="Korean cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q648352" start="8039" end="8047" title="bibimbap" label="bibimbap"/>
<link wikidata="Q192628" start="8115" end="8119" title="beef" label="beef"/>
<link wikidata="Q133817" start="8210" end="8214" title="jeon (food)" label="jeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q934309" start="8346" end="8374" title="Cuisine of the Mediterranean" label="Cuisine of the Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133335" start="8383" end="8389" title="tumbet" label="tumbet"/>
<link wikidata="Q131607" start="8399" end="8406" title="polenta" label="polenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q220964" start="8412" end="8417" title="tapas" label="tapas"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="8428" end="8435" title="Mexico" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q249114" start="8450" end="8455" title="salsa (sauce)" label="salsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q207968" start="8460" end="8469" title="guacamole" label="guacamole"/>
<link wikidata="Q175641" start="8475" end="8480" title="Tortilla chip" label="chips"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="8482" end="8486" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q390823" start="8491" end="8503" title="bean burrito" label="bean burrito"/>
<link wikidata="Q596215" start="8526" end="8539" title="refried beans" label="refried beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096296" start="8543" end="8554" title="chicken fat" label="chicken fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2681008" start="8569" end="8585" title="huevos rancheros" label="huevos rancheros"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8587" end="8601" title="Burrito#Veggie burrito" label="veggie burrito"/>
<link wikidata="Q865325" start="8608" end="8618" title="quesadilla" label="quesadilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963582" start="8638" end="8649" title="chilaquiles" label="chilaquiles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8665" end="8680" title="Chili con carne#Variations" label="chili sin carne"/>
<link wikidata="Q15062992" start="8682" end="8693" title="black turtle bean" label="black beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098719" start="8710" end="8725" title="chiles rellenos" label="chiles rellenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="8727" end="8733" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q876096" start="8734" end="8743" title="enchilada" label="enchilada"/>
<link wikidata="Q871272" start="8759" end="8765" title="fajita" label="fajita"/>
<link wikidata="Q192786" start="8770" end="8777" title="Italian cuisine" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q178" start="8797" end="8802" title="pasta" label="pasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q177" start="8810" end="8815" title="pizza" label="pizza"/>
<link wikidata="Q614448" start="8818" end="8828" title="bruschetta" label="bruschetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034806" start="8830" end="8838" title="caponata" label="caponata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141574" start="8840" end="8848" title="crostini" label="crostini"/>
<link wikidata="Q973455" start="8859" end="8869" title="parmigiana" label="parmigiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q131607" start="8871" end="8878" title="Polenta" label="Polenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q208105" start="8888" end="8895" title="risotto" label="risotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="8900" end="8911" title="Europe" label="Continental"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807269" start="8936" end="8940" title="leek" label="leek"/>
<link wikidata="Q37083" start="8947" end="8952" title="olive" label="olive"/>
<link wikidata="Q25284" start="8958" end="8965" title="parsley" label="parsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q183095" start="8967" end="8978" title="ratatouille" label="ratatouille"/>
<link wikidata="Q722595" start="8985" end="8991" title="quiche" label="quiche"/>
<link wikidata="Q150463" start="9002" end="9017" title="Brussels sprout" label="Brussels sprout"/>
<link wikidata="Q157954" start="9043" end="9054" title="Swiss chard" label="Swiss chard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339301" start="9056" end="9062" title="Squash (fruit)" label="squash"/>
<link wikidata="Q654236" start="9085" end="9094" title="Edible mushroom" label="mushrooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q699382" start="9120" end="9131" title="green sauce" label="green sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q158382" start="9133" end="9138" title="Klöße" label="Klöße"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942018" start="9169" end="9180" title="Chanterelle" label="Chanterelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q20055" start="9211" end="9222" title="Maultaschen" label="Maultaschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q259642" start="9240" end="9245" title="Quark (cheese)" label="quark"/>
<link wikidata="Q701327" start="9439" end="9449" title="Germknödel" label="Germknödel"/>
<link wikidata="Q22976" start="9454" end="9464" title="Dampfnudel" label="Dampfnudel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3906768" start="9482" end="9491" title="plum cake" label="plum cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715200" start="9541" end="9549" title="Brenntar" label="Brenntar"/>
<link wikidata="Q805060" start="9641" end="9647" title="Balkan cuisine" label="Balkan"/>
<link wikidata="Q183095" start="9664" end="9669" title="briam" label="briam"/>
<link wikidata="Q339193" start="9671" end="9676" title="dolma" label="dolma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1913489" start="9711" end="9719" title="fasolada" label="fasolada"/>
<link wikidata="Q339193" start="9721" end="9728" title="gemista" label="gemista"/>
<link wikidata="Q206918" start="9746" end="9754" title="moussaka" label="moussaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q124389227" start="9759" end="9770" title="spanakopita" label="spanakopita"/>
<link wikidata="Q12505" start="9775" end="9790" title="Russian cuisine" label="Russian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="9877" end="9888" title="Leo Tolstoy" label="Leo Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="9894" end="9912" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="orthodox tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q44602" start="9986" end="9993" title="fasting" label="fasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551" start="10121" end="10128" title="borscht" label="borscht"/>
<link wikidata="Q34292" start="10130" end="10135" title="shchi" label="shchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q611164" start="10137" end="10145" title="okroshka" label="okroshka"/>
<link wikidata="Q697800" start="10148" end="10154" title="Pierogi" label="pirogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q815898" start="10156" end="10161" title="blini" label="blini"/>
<link wikidata="Q697800" start="10163" end="10171" title="vareniki" label="vareniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q10379618" start="10173" end="10178" title="kasha" label="kasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q132734" start="10180" end="10189" title="buckwheat" label="buckwheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q257508" start="10237" end="10253" title="Ethiopian cuisine" label="Ethiopian dishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q935807" start="10262" end="10269" title="injeera" label="injeera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="10315" end="10325" title="Middle East" label="Mideastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q188788" start="10339" end="10346" title="falafel" label="falafel"/>
<link wikidata="Q241987" start="10348" end="10354" title="hummus" label="hummus"/>
<link wikidata="Q383389" start="10376" end="10382" title="tahini" label="tahini"/>
<link wikidata="Q47859" start="10406" end="10412" title="mentha" label="minted"/>
<link wikidata="Q13317" start="10413" end="10419" title="yogurt" label="yogurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q76605" start="10426" end="10434" title="couscous" label="couscous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346230" start="10439" end="10455" title="Egyptian cuisine" label="Egyptian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q198998" start="10568" end="10590" title="Coptic Orthodox Church" label="Coptic Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391582" start="10647" end="10660" title="national dish" label="national dish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197104" start="10664" end="10671" title="kushari" label="kushari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473422" start="10676" end="10687" title="ful medames" label="ful medames"/>
<link wikidata="Q841984" start="10825" end="10829" title="Cuisine of Thailand" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144927" start="11074" end="11086" title="Thai curry" label="Thai curries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326339" start="11114" end="11130" title="Buddhist cuisine" label="Buddhist cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q85430164" start="11190" end="11196" title="Creole cuisine" label="Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638936" start="11224" end="11236" title="Hushpuppy" label="hush puppies"/>
<link wikidata="Q379813" start="11261" end="11265" title="bean" label="bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q45989" start="11279" end="11283" title="kale" label="kale"/>
<link wikidata="Q14879985" start="11287" end="11295" title="collards" label="collards"/>
<link wikidata="Q191768" start="11332" end="11336" title="pork" label="pork"/>
<link wikidata="Q127980" start="11337" end="11340" title="fat" label="fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075310" start="11349" end="11354" title="Stock (food)" label="stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066586" start="11363" end="11376" title="Welsh cuisine" label="Welsh recipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397246" start="11388" end="11405" title="Glamorgan sausage" label="Glamorgan sausage"/>
<link wikidata="Q60483094" start="11408" end="11418" title="laverbread" label="laverbread"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210230" start="11423" end="11436" title="Welsh rarebit" label="Welsh rarebit"/>
<link wikidata="Q182940" start="11469" end="11476" title="dessert" label="dessert"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360264" start="11489" end="11492" title="pie" label="pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q503494" start="11495" end="11503" title="Cobbler (food)" label="cobblers"/>
<link wikidata="Q13276" start="11505" end="11509" title="cake" label="cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q503129" start="11512" end="11520" title="chocolate brownie" label="brownies"/>
<link wikidata="Q13266" start="11522" end="11528" title="cookie" label="cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063560" start="11531" end="11539" title="Chocolate truffle" label="truffles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940375" start="11541" end="11559" title="Rice Krispie treat" label="Rice Krispie treat"/>
<link wikidata="Q272198" start="11580" end="11591" title="marshmallow" label="marshmallow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915519" start="11596" end="11613" title="marshmallow fluff" label="marshmallow fluff"/>
<link wikidata="Q147651" start="11616" end="11629" title="peanut butter" label="peanut butter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9053" start="11638" end="11645" title="pudding" label="pudding"/>
<link wikidata="Q19029" start="11647" end="11659" title="rice pudding" label="rice pudding"/>
<link wikidata="Q13233" start="11661" end="11670" title="ice cream" label="ice cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q312839" start="11672" end="11684" title="crème brulée" label="crème brulée"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159627" start="11770" end="11783" title="confectionery" label="confectionery"/>
<link wikidata="Q183599" start="11806" end="11811" title="halva" label="halva"/>
<link wikidata="Q182339" start="11816" end="11831" title="Turkish delight" label="Turkish delight"/>
<link wikidata="Q187495" start="11872" end="11879" title="baklava" label="baklava"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723794" start="11986" end="11990" title="peda" label="peda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187319" start="11992" end="11997" title="barfi" label="barfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554207" start="11999" end="12010" title="gulab jamun" label="gulab jamun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341683" start="12012" end="12021" title="shrikhand" label="shrikhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722375" start="12023" end="12030" title="basundi" label="basundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6349050" start="12032" end="12042" title="Kaju katli" label="kaju katri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349224" start="12044" end="12052" title="rasgulla" label="rasgulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="12384" end="12393" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545437" start="12606" end="12611" title="Vegetarianism in India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q410020" start="13193" end="13196" title="Hdl cholesterol" label="HDL"/>
<link wikidata="Q186319" start="13313" end="13325" title="triglyceride" label="triglyceride"/>
<link wikidata="Q82642" start="13337" end="13360" title="systolic blood pressure" label="systolic blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q82642" start="13362" end="13386" title="diastolic blood pressure" label="diastolic blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q131191" start="13413" end="13428" title="body mass index" label="body mass index"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067254" start="13578" end="13603" title="Indian vegetarian cuisine" label="Indian vegetarian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326339" start="13606" end="13630" title="Chinese Buddhist cuisine" label="Chinese Buddhist cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q647500" start="13633" end="13658" title="Korean vegetarian cuisine" label="Korean vegetarian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q181138" start="13661" end="13669" title="Veganism" label="Veganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17082218" start="13672" end="13696" title="List of meat substitutes" label="List of meat substitutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q18349713" start="13699" end="13723" title="List of vegetable dishes" label="List of vegetable dishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q18355820" start="13726" end="13756" title="List of vegetarian restaurants" label="List of vegetarian restaurants"/>
<link wikidata="Q30680961" start="13759" end="13797" title="List of vegetarian and vegan companies" label="List of vegetarian and vegan companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566047" start="13806" end="13830" title="South Asian Veggie Table" label="South Asian Veggie Table"/>
<link wikidata="Q28450722" start="13882" end="13913" title="Vegetarian Cooking for Everyone" label="Vegetarian Cooking for Everyone"/>
<link wikidata="Q39086756" start="13922" end="13952" title="Vegetarian and vegan symbolism" label="Vegetarian and vegan symbolism"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="32603" wikidata="Q5582" url="?curid=32603" title="Vincent van Gogh">
<text>Vincent Willem van Gogh (; 30 March 185329 July 1890) was a Dutch Post-Impressionist painter who is among the most famous and influential figures in the history of Western art. In just over a decade, he created approximately 2,100 artworks, including around 860 oil paintings, most of them in the last two years of his life. His oeuvre includes landscapes, still lifes, portraits, and self-portraits, most of which are characterised by bold colours and dramatic brushwork that contributed to the rise of expressionism in modern art. Van Gogh&#x27;s work was only beginning to gain critical attention before he died from a self-inflicted gunshot at age 37. During his lifetime, only one of Van Gogh&#x27;s paintings, &quot;The Red Vineyard&quot;, was sold. 

Born into an upper-middle-class family, Van Gogh drew as a child and was serious, quiet and thoughtful, but showed signs of mental instability. As a young man, he worked as an art dealer, often travelling, but became depressed after he was transferred to London. He turned to religion and spent time as a missionary in southern Belgium. Later he drifted into ill-health and solitude. He was keenly aware of modernist trends in art and, while back with his parents, took up painting in 1881. His younger brother, Theo, supported him financially, and the two of them maintained a long correspondence.

Van Gogh&#x27;s early works consist of mostly still lifes and depictions of peasant labourers. In 1886, he moved to Paris, where he met members of the artistic &quot;avant-garde&quot;, including Émile Bernard and Paul Gauguin, who were seeking new paths beyond Impressionism. Frustrated in Paris and inspired by a growing spirit of artistic change and collaboration, in February 1888 Van Gogh moved to Arles in southern France to establish an artistic retreat and commune. Once there, his paintings grew brighter and he turned his attention to the natural world, depicting local olive groves, wheat fields and sunflowers. Van Gogh invited Gauguin to join him in Arles and eagerly anticipated Gauguin&#x27;s arrival in late 1888.

Van Gogh suffered from psychotic episodes and delusions. He worried about his mental stability, and often neglected his physical health, did not eat properly and drank heavily. His friendship with Gauguin ended after a confrontation with a razor when, in a rage, he mutilated his left ear. Van Gogh spent time in psychiatric hospitals, including a period at Saint-Rémy. After he discharged himself and moved to the Auberge Ravoux in Auvers-sur-Oise near Paris, he came under the care of the homeopathic doctor Paul Gachet. His depression persisted, and on 29 July 1890 Van Gogh died from his injuries after shooting himself in the chest with a revolver.

Van Gogh&#x27;s work began to attract critical artistic attention in the last year of his life. After his death, his art and life story captured public imagination as an emblem of misunderstood genius, due in large part to the efforts of his widowed sister-in-law Johanna van Gogh-Bonger. His bold use of colour, expressive line and thick application of paint inspired avant-garde artistic groups like the Fauves and German Expressionists in the early 20th century. Van Gogh&#x27;s work gained widespread critical and commercial success in the following decades, and he has become a lasting icon of the romantic ideal of the tortured artist. Today, Van Gogh&#x27;s works are among the world&#x27;s most expensive paintings ever sold. His legacy is celebrated by the Van Gogh Museum in Amsterdam, which holds the world&#x27;s largest collection of his paintings and drawings.

==Letters==

The most comprehensive primary source on Van Gogh is his correspondence with his younger brother, Theo. Their lifelong friendship, and most of what is known of Vincent&#x27;s thoughts and theories of art, are recorded in the hundreds of letters they exchanged from 1872 until 1890. Theo van Gogh was an art dealer and provided his brother with financial and emotional support as well as access to influential people on the contemporary art scene.

Theo kept all of Vincent&#x27;s letters to him; but Vincent kept only a few of the letters he received. After both had died, Theo&#x27;s widow Jo Bonger-van Gogh arranged for the publication of some of their letters. A few appeared in 1906 and 1913; the majority were published in 1914. Vincent&#x27;s letters are eloquent and expressive, have been described as having a &quot;diary-like intimacy&quot;, and read in parts like autobiography. Translator Arnold Pomerans wrote that their publication adds a &quot;fresh dimension to the understanding of Van Gogh&#x27;s artistic achievement, an understanding granted to us by virtually no other painter&quot;.

There are more than 600 letters from Vincent to Theo and around 40 from Theo to Vincent. There are 22 to his sister Wil, 58 to the painter Anthon van Rappard, 22 to Émile Bernard as well as individual letters to Paul Signac, Paul Gauguin, and the critic Albert Aurier. Some are illustrated with sketches. Many are undated, but art historians have been able to place most in chronological order. Problems in transcription and dating remain, mainly with those posted from Arles. While there, Vincent wrote around 200 letters in Dutch, French, and English. There is a gap in the record when he lived in Paris as the brothers lived together and had no need to correspond.

The highly paid contemporary artist Jules Breton was frequently mentioned in Vincent&#x27;s letters. In 1875 letters to Theo, Vincent mentions he saw Breton, discusses the Breton paintings he saw at a Salon, and discusses sending one of Breton&#x27;s books but only on condition that it be returned. In a March 1884 letter to Rappard he discusses one of Breton&#x27;s poems that had inspired one of his paintings. In 1885 he describes Breton&#x27;s famous work &quot;The Song of the Lark&quot; as being &quot;fine&quot;. In March 1880, roughly midway between these letters, Van Gogh set out on an 80-kilometre trip on foot to meet Breton in the village of Courrières; he was intimidated by Breton&#x27;s success and the high wall around his estate, and returned without making his presence known.
 It appears Breton was unaware of Van Gogh or his attempted visit. There are no known letters between the two artists and Van Gogh is not one of the contemporary artists discussed by Breton in his 1891 autobiography &quot;Life of an Artist&quot;.

==Life==
===Early years===

Vincent Willem van Gogh was born on 30 March 1853 in Groot-Zundert, in the predominantly Catholic province of North Brabant in the Netherlands. He was the oldest surviving child of Theodorus van Gogh (1822–1885), a minister of the Dutch Reformed Church, and his wife, Anna Cornelia Carbentus (1819–1907). Van Gogh was given the name of his grandfather and of a brother stillborn exactly a year before his birth. His grandfather, Vincent (1789–1874), was a prominent art dealer and a theology graduate from the University of Leiden in 1811. This Vincent had six sons, three of whom became art dealers, and may have been named after his great-uncle, a sculptor (1729–1802).

Van Gogh&#x27;s mother came from a prosperous family in The Hague. His father was the youngest son of a minister. The two met when Anna&#x27;s younger sister, Cornelia, married Theodorus&#x27;s older brother Vincent (Cent). Van Gogh&#x27;s parents married in May 1851 and moved to Zundert. His brother Theo was born on 1 May 1857. There was another brother, Cor, and three sisters: Elisabeth, Anna, and Willemina (known as &quot;Wil&quot;). In later life, Van Gogh remained in touch only with Willemina and Theo. Theodorus&#x27;s salary as a minister was modest, but the Church also supplied the family with a house, a maid, two cooks, a gardener, a carriage and horse; his mother Anna instilled in the children a duty to uphold the family&#x27;s high social position.

Van Gogh was a serious and thoughtful child. He was taught at home by his mother and a governess, and in 1860, was sent to the village school. In 1864, he was placed in a boarding school at Zevenbergen, where he felt abandoned, and he campaigned to come home. Instead, in 1866, his parents sent him to the middle school in Tilburg, where he was also deeply unhappy. His interest in art began at a young age. He was encouraged to draw as a child by his mother, and his early drawings are expressive, but do not approach the intensity of his later work. Constant Cornelis Huijsmans, who had been a successful artist in Paris, taught the students at Tilburg. His philosophy was to reject technique in favour of capturing the impressions of things, particularly nature or common objects. Van Gogh&#x27;s profound unhappiness seems to have overshadowed the lessons, which had little effect. In March 1868, he abruptly returned home. He later wrote that his youth was &quot;austere and cold, and sterile&quot;.

In July 1869, Van Gogh&#x27;s uncle Cent obtained a position for him at the art dealers Goupil &amp; Cie in The Hague. After completing his training in 1873, he was transferred to Goupil&#x27;s London branch on Southampton Street, and took lodgings at 87 Hackford Road, Stockwell. This was a happy time for Van Gogh; he was successful at work and, at 20, was earning more than his father. Theo&#x27;s wife, Jo van Gogh-Bonger, later remarked that this was the best year of Vincent&#x27;s life. He became infatuated with his landlady&#x27;s daughter, Eugénie Loyer, but she rejected him after he confessed his feelings; she was secretly engaged to a former lodger. He grew more isolated and religiously fervent. His father and uncle arranged a transfer to Paris in 1875, where he became resentful of issues such as the degree to which the art dealers commodified art, and he was dismissed a year later.

In April 1876, he returned to England to take unpaid work as a supply teacher in a small boarding school in Ramsgate. When the proprietor moved to Isleworth in Middlesex, Van Gogh went with him. The arrangement was not successful; he left to become a Methodist minister&#x27;s assistant. His parents had meanwhile moved to Etten; in 1876 he returned home at Christmas for six months and took work at a bookshop in Dordrecht. He was unhappy in the position, and spent his time doodling or translating passages from the Bible into English, French, and German. He immersed himself in Christianity and became increasingly pious and monastic. According to his flatmate of the time, Paulus van Görlitz, Van Gogh ate frugally, avoiding meat.

To support his religious conviction and his desire to become a pastor, in 1877, the family sent him to live with his uncle Johannes Stricker, a respected theologian, in Amsterdam. Van Gogh prepared for the University of Amsterdam theology entrance examination; he failed the exam and left his uncle&#x27;s house in July 1878. He undertook, but also failed, a three-month course at a Protestant missionary school in Laken, near Brussels.

In January 1879, he took up a post as a missionary at Petit-Wasmes in the working class, coal-mining district of Borinage in Belgium. To show support for his impoverished congregation, he gave up his comfortable lodgings at a bakery to a homeless person and moved to a small hut, where he slept on straw. His humble living conditions did not endear him to church authorities, who dismissed him for &quot;undermining the dignity of the priesthood&quot;. He then walked the to Brussels, returned briefly to Cuesmes in the Borinage, but he gave in to pressure from his parents to return home to Etten. He stayed there until around March 1880, which caused concern and frustration for his parents. His father was especially frustrated and advised that his son be committed to the lunatic asylum in Geel.

Van Gogh returned to Cuesmes in August 1880, where he lodged with a miner until October. He became interested in the people and scenes around him, and he recorded them in drawings after Theo&#x27;s suggestion that he take up art in earnest. He travelled to Brussels later in the year, to follow Theo&#x27;s recommendation that he study with the Dutch artist Willem Roelofs, who persuaded him – in spite of his dislike of formal schools of art – to attend the . He registered at the Académie in November 1880, where he studied anatomy and the standard rules of modelling and perspective.
===Etten, Drenthe and The Hague===

Van Gogh returned to Etten in April 1881 for an extended stay with his parents. He continued to draw, often using his neighbours as subjects. In August 1881, his recently widowed cousin, Cornelia &quot;Kee&quot; Vos-Stricker, daughter of his mother&#x27;s older sister Willemina and Johannes Stricker, arrived for a visit. He was thrilled and took long walks with her. Kee was seven years older than he was and had an eight-year-old son. Van Gogh surprised everyone by declaring his love to her and proposing marriage. She refused with the words &quot;No, nay, never&quot; (&quot;nooit, neen, nimmer&quot;). After Kee returned to Amsterdam, Van Gogh went to The Hague to try to sell paintings and to meet with his second cousin, Anton Mauve. Mauve was the successful artist Van Gogh longed to be. Mauve invited him to return in a few months and suggested he spend the intervening time working in charcoal and pastels; Van Gogh returned to Etten and followed this advice.

Late in November 1881, Van Gogh wrote a letter to Johannes Stricker, one which he described to Theo as an attack. Within days he left for Amsterdam. Kee would not meet him, and her parents wrote that his &quot;persistence is &quot;disgusting&quot;&quot;. In despair, he held his left hand in the flame of a lamp, with the words: &quot;Let me see her for as long as I can keep my hand in the flame.&quot; He did not recall the event well, but later assumed that his uncle had blown out the flame. Kee&#x27;s father made it clear that her refusal should be heeded and that the two would not marry, largely because of Van Gogh&#x27;s inability to support himself.

Mauve took Van Gogh on as a student and introduced him to watercolour, which he worked on for the next month before returning home for Christmas. He quarrelled with his father, refusing to attend church, and left for The Hague. In January 1882, Mauve introduced him to painting in oil and lent him money to set up a studio. Within a month Van Gogh and Mauve fell out, possibly over the viability of drawing from plaster casts. Van Gogh could only afford to hire people from the street as models, a practice of which Mauve seems to have disapproved. In June, Van Gogh suffered a bout of gonorrhoea and spent three weeks in hospital. Soon after, he first painted in oils, bought with money borrowed from Theo. He liked the medium, and he spread the paint liberally, scraping from the canvas and working back with the brush. He wrote that he was surprised at how good the results were.

By March 1882, Mauve appeared to have gone cold towards Van Gogh, and stopped replying to his letters. He had learned of Van Gogh&#x27;s new domestic arrangement with an alcoholic prostitute, Clasina Maria &quot;Sien&quot; Hoornik (1850–1904), and her young daughter. Van Gogh had met Sien towards the end of January 1882, when she had a five-year-old daughter and was pregnant. She had previously borne two children who died, but Van Gogh was unaware of this. On 2 July, she gave birth to a baby boy, Willem. When Van Gogh&#x27;s father discovered the details of their relationship, he put pressure on his son to abandon Sien and her two children. Vincent at first defied him, and considered moving the family out of the city, but in late 1883, he left Sien and the children.

Poverty may have pushed Sien back into prostitution; the home became less happy and Van Gogh may have felt family life was irreconcilable with his artistic development. Sien gave her daughter to her mother and baby Willem to her brother. Willem remembered visiting Rotterdam when he was about 12, when an uncle tried to persuade Sien to marry to legitimise the child. He believed Van Gogh was his father, but the timing of his birth makes this unlikely. Sien drowned herself in the River Scheldt in 1904.

In September 1883, Van Gogh moved to Drenthe in the northern Netherlands. In December, driven by loneliness, he went to live with his parents, then in Nuenen, North Brabant.

===Emerging artist===
====Nuenen and Antwerp (1883–1886)====
In Nuenen, Van Gogh focused on painting and drawing. Working outside and very quickly, he completed sketches and paintings of weavers and their cottages. Van Gogh also completed &quot;The Parsonage Garden at Nuenen&quot;, which was stolen from the Singer Laren in March 2020. From August 1884, Margot Begemann, a neighbour&#x27;s daughter ten years his senior, joined him on his forays; she fell in love and he reciprocated, though less enthusiastically. They wanted to marry, but neither side of their families approved. Margot was distraught and took an overdose of strychnine, but survived after Van Gogh rushed her to a nearby hospital. On 26 March 1885, his father died of a heart attack.

Van Gogh painted several groups of still lifes in 1885. During his two-year stay in Nuenen, he completed numerous drawings and watercolours and nearly 200 oil paintings. His palette consisted mainly of sombre earth tones, particularly dark brown, and showed no sign of the vivid colours that distinguished his later work.

There was interest from a dealer in Paris early in 1885. Theo asked Vincent if he had paintings ready to exhibit. In May, Van Gogh responded with his first major work, &quot;The Potato Eaters&quot;, and a series of &quot;peasant character studies&quot; which were the culmination of several years of work. When he complained that Theo was not making enough effort to sell his paintings in Paris, his brother responded that they were too dark and not in keeping with the bright style of Impressionism. In August his work was publicly exhibited for the first time, in the shop windows of the dealer Leurs in The Hague. One of his young peasant sitters became pregnant in September 1885; Van Gogh was accused of forcing himself upon her, and the village priest forbade parishioners to model for him.

He moved to Antwerp that November and rented a room above a paint dealer&#x27;s shop in the rue des Images (&quot;Lange Beeldekensstraat&quot;). He lived in poverty and ate poorly, preferring to spend the money Theo sent on painting materials and models. Bread, coffee and tobacco became his staple diet. In February 1886, he wrote to Theo that he could only remember eating six hot meals since the previous May. His teeth became loose and painful. In Antwerp he applied himself to the study of colour theory and spent time in museumsparticularly studying the work of Peter Paul Rubensand broadened his palette to include carmine, cobalt blue and emerald green. Van Gogh bought Japanese ukiyo-e woodcuts in the docklands, later incorporating elements of their style into the background of some of his paintings. He was drinking heavily again, and was hospitalised between February and March 1886, when he was possibly also treated for syphilis.

After his recovery, despite his antipathy towards academic teaching, he took the higher-level admission exams at the Academy of Fine Arts in Antwerp and, in January 1886, matriculated in painting and drawing. He became ill and run down by overwork, poor diet and excessive smoking. He started to attend drawing classes after plaster models at the Antwerp Academy on 18 January 1886. He quickly got into trouble with Charles Verlat, the director of the academy and teacher of a painting class, because of his unconventional painting style. Van Gogh had also clashed with the instructor of the drawing class Franz Vinck. Van Gogh finally started to attend the drawing classes after antique plaster models given by Eugène Siberdt. Soon Siberdt and Van Gogh came into conflict when the latter did not comply with Siberdt&#x27;s requirement that drawings express the contour and concentrate on the line. When Van Gogh was required to draw the &quot;Venus de Milo&quot; during a drawing class, he produced the limbless, naked torso of a Flemish peasant woman. Siberdt regarded this as defiance against his artistic guidance and made corrections to Van Gogh&#x27;s drawing with his crayon so vigorously that he tore the paper. Van Gogh then flew into a violent rage and shouted at Siberdt: &#x27;You clearly do not know what a young woman is like, &quot;God damn it!&quot; A woman must have hips, buttocks, a pelvis in which she can carry a baby!&#x27; According to some accounts, this was the last time Van Gogh attended classes at the academy and he left later for Paris. On 31 March 1886, which was about a month after the confrontation with Siberdt, the teachers of the academy decided that 17 students, including Van Gogh, had to repeat a year. The story that Van Gogh was expelled from the academy by Siberdt is therefore unfounded.

====Paris (1886–1888)====
Van Gogh moved to Paris in March 1886 where he shared Theo&#x27;s rue Laval apartment in Montmartre and studied at Fernand Cormon&#x27;s studio. In June the brothers took a larger flat at 54 rue Lepic. In Paris, Vincent painted portraits of friends and acquaintances, still life paintings, views of Le Moulin de la Galette, scenes in Montmartre, Asnières and along the Seine. In 1885 in Antwerp he had become interested in Japanese ukiyo-e woodblock prints and had used them to decorate the walls of his studio; while in Paris he collected hundreds of them. He tried his hand at Japonaiserie, tracing a figure from a reproduction on the cover of the magazine &quot;Paris Illustre&quot;, &quot;The Courtesan or Oiran&quot; (1887), after Keisai Eisen, which he then graphically enlarged in a painting.

After seeing the portrait of Adolphe Monticelli at the Galerie Delareybarette, Van Gogh adopted a brighter palette and a bolder attack, particularly in paintings such as his &quot;Seascape at Saintes-Maries&quot; (1888). Two years later, Vincent and Theo paid for the publication of a book on Monticelli paintings, and Vincent bought some of Monticelli&#x27;s works to add to his collection.

Van Gogh learned about Fernand Cormon&#x27;s atelier from Theo. He worked at the studio in April and May 1886, where he frequented the circle of the Australian artist John Russell, who painted his portrait in 1886. Van Gogh also met fellow students Émile Bernard, Louis Anquetin and Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec – who painted a portrait of him in pastel. They met at Julien &quot;Père&quot; Tanguy&#x27;s paint shop, (which was, at that time, the only place where Paul Cézanne&#x27;s paintings were displayed). In 1886, two large exhibitions were staged there, showing Pointillism and Neo-impressionism for the first time and bringing attention to Georges Seurat and Paul Signac. Theo kept a stock of Impressionist paintings in his gallery on boulevard Montmartre, but Van Gogh was slow to acknowledge the new developments in art.

Conflicts arose between the brothers. At the end of 1886 Theo found living with Vincent to be &quot;almost unbearable&quot;. By early 1887, they were again at peace, and Vincent had moved to Asnières, a northwestern suburb of Paris, where he got to know Signac. He adopted elements of Pointillism, a technique in which a multitude of small coloured dots are applied to the canvas so that when seen from a distance they create an optical blend of hues. The style stresses the ability of complementary colours – including blue and orange – to form vibrant contrasts.

While in Asnières Van Gogh painted parks, restaurants and the Seine, including &quot;Bridges across the Seine at Asnières&quot;. In November 1887, Theo and Vincent befriended Paul Gauguin who had just arrived in Paris. Towards the end of the year, Vincent arranged an exhibition alongside Bernard, Anquetin, and probably Toulouse-Lautrec, at the Grand-Bouillon Restaurant du Chalet, 43 avenue de Clichy, Montmartre. In a contemporary account, Bernard wrote that the exhibition was ahead of anything else in Paris. There, Bernard and Anquetin sold their first paintings, and Van Gogh exchanged work with Gauguin. Discussions on art, artists, and their social situations started during this exhibition, continued and expanded to include visitors to the show, like Camille Pissarro and his son Lucien, Signac and Seurat. In February 1888, feeling worn out from life in Paris, Van Gogh left, having painted more than 200 paintings during his two years there. Hours before his departure, accompanied by Theo, he paid his only visit to Seurat in his studio.

===Artistic breakthrough===

====Arles (1888–89)====

Ill from drink and suffering from smoker&#x27;s cough, in February 1888, Van Gogh sought refuge in Arles. He seems to have moved with thoughts of founding an art colony. The Danish artist Christian Mourier-Petersen was his companion for two months and at first, Arles appeared exotic to Van Gogh. In a letter, he described it as a foreign country: &quot;The Zouaves, the brothels, the adorable little Arlésienne going to her First Communion, the priest in his surplice, who looks like a dangerous rhinoceros, the people drinking absinthe, all seem to me creatures from another world.&quot;

The time in Arles was one of Van Gogh&#x27;s more prolific periods: he completed 200 paintings and more than 100 drawings and watercolours. He was energised by the local countryside and light; his works from this period are rich in yellow, ultramarine and mauve. They include harvests, wheat fields and general rural landmarks from the area, including &quot;The Old Mill&quot; (1888), one of seven canvases sent to Pont-Aven on 4 October 1888 in an exchange of works with Paul Gauguin, Émile Bernard, Charles Laval and others. 

In March 1888, Van Gogh created landscapes using a gridded &quot;perspective frame&quot; and three of those works were shown at the annual exhibition of the Société des Artistes Indépendants. In April, he was visited by the American artist Dodge MacKnight, who was living nearby at Fontvieille. 

On 1 May 1888, Van Gogh signed a lease for four rooms at 2 Place Lamartine, Arles, which he later painted in &quot;The Yellow House&quot;. The rooms cost 15 francs per month, unfurnished; they had been uninhabited for months. Because the Yellow House had to be furnished before he could fully move in, Van Gogh moved from the Hôtel Carrel to the Café de la Gare on 7 May 1888. He had befriended the Yellow House&#x27;s proprietors, Joseph and Marie Ginoux, and was able to use it as a studio. Van Gogh wanted a gallery to display his work and started a series of paintings that eventually included &quot;Van Gogh&#x27;s Chair&quot; (1888), &quot;Bedroom in Arles&quot; (1888), &quot;The Night Café&quot; (1888), &quot;Café Terrace at Night&quot; (September 1888), &quot;Starry Night Over the Rhone&quot; (1888), and &quot;Still Life: Vase with Twelve Sunflowers&quot; (1888), all intended for the decoration for the Yellow House.

Van Gogh wrote that with &quot;The Night Café&quot; he tried &quot;to express the idea that the café is a place where one can ruin oneself, go mad, or commit a crime&quot;. When he visited Saintes-Maries-de-la-Mer in June, he gave lessons to a Zouave second lieutenant – Paul-Eugène Milliet – and painted boats on the sea and the village. MacKnight introduced Van Gogh to Eugène Boch, a Belgian painter who sometimes stayed in Fontvieille, and the two exchanged visits in July.

====Gauguin&#x27;s visit (1888)====


When Gauguin agreed to visit Arles in 1888, Van Gogh hoped for friendship and to realise his idea of an artists&#x27; collective. Van Gogh prepared for Gauguin&#x27;s arrival by painting four versions of &quot;Sunflowers&quot; in one week. &quot;In the hope of living in a studio of our own with Gauguin,&quot; he wrote in a letter to Theo, &quot;I&#x27;d like to do a decoration for the studio. &quot;Nothing but large Sunflowers&quot;.&quot; 

When Boch visited again, Van Gogh painted a portrait of him, as well as the study &quot;The Poet Against a Starry Sky&quot;.

In preparation for Gauguin&#x27;s visit, Van Gogh bought two beds on advice from the station&#x27;s postal supervisor Joseph Roulin, whose portrait he painted. On 17 September, he spent his first night in the still sparsely furnished Yellow House. When Gauguin consented to work and live in Arles with him, Van Gogh started to work on the &quot;Décoration for the Yellow House&quot;, probably the most ambitious effort he ever undertook. He completed two chair paintings: &quot;Van Gogh&#x27;s Chair&quot; and &quot;Gauguin&#x27;s Chair.&quot;

After much pleading from Van Gogh, Gauguin arrived in Arles on 23 October and, in November, the two painted together. Gauguin depicted Van Gogh in his &quot;The Painter of Sunflowers&quot;; Van Gogh painted pictures from memory, following Gauguin&#x27;s suggestion. Among these &quot;imaginative&quot; paintings is &quot;Memory of the Garden at Etten&quot;. Their first joint outdoor venture was at the Alyscamps, when they produced the pendants &quot;Les Alyscamps&quot;. The single painting Gauguin completed during his visit was his portrait of Van Gogh.

Van Gogh and Gauguin visited Montpellier in December 1888, where they saw works by Courbet and Delacroix in the Musée Fabre. Their relationship began to deteriorate; Van Gogh admired Gauguin and wanted to be treated as his equal, but Gauguin was arrogant and domineering, which frustrated Van Gogh. They often quarrelled; Van Gogh increasingly feared that Gauguin was going to desert him, and the situation, which Van Gogh described as one of &quot;excessive tension&quot;, rapidly headed towards crisis point.

====Hospital in Arles (December 1888)====


The exact sequence that led to the mutilation of Van Gogh&#x27;s ear is not known. Gauguin said, fifteen years later, that the night followed several instances of physically threatening behaviour. Their relationship was complex and Theo may have owed money to Gauguin, who suspected the brothers were exploiting him financially. It seems likely that Vincent realised that Gauguin was planning to leave. The following days saw heavy rain, leading to the two men being shut in the Yellow House. Gauguin recalled that Van Gogh followed him after he left for a walk and &quot;rushed towards me, an open razor in his hand&quot;. This account is uncorroborated; Gauguin was almost certainly absent from the Yellow House that night, most likely staying in a hotel.

After an altercation on the evening of 23 December 1888, Van Gogh returned to his room where he seemingly heard voices and either wholly or in part severed his left ear with a razor causing severe bleeding. He bandaged the wound, wrapped the ear in paper and delivered the package to a woman at a brothel Van Gogh and Gauguin both frequented. Van Gogh was found unconscious the next morning by a policeman and taken to hospital, where he was treated by Félix Rey, a young doctor still in training. The ear was brought to the hospital, but Rey did not attempt to reattach it as too much time had passed. Van Gogh researcher and art historian Bernadette Murphy discovered the true identity of the woman named Gabrielle Berlatier, who died in Arles at the age of 80 in 1952, and whose descendants still lived (as of 2020) just outside Arles. Gabrielle, known in her youth as &quot;Gaby&quot;, was a 17-year-old cleaning girl at the brothel and other local establishments at the time Van Gogh presented her with his ear.

Van Gogh had no recollection of the event, suggesting that he may have suffered an acute mental breakdown. The hospital diagnosis was &quot;acute mania with generalised delirium&quot;, and within a few days, the local police ordered that he be placed in hospital care. Gauguin immediately notified Theo, who, on 24 December, had proposed marriage to his old friend Andries Bonger&#x27;s sister Johanna. That evening, Theo rushed to the station to board a night train to Arles. He arrived on Christmas Day and comforted Vincent, who seemed to be semi-lucid. That evening, he left Arles for the return trip to Paris.

During the first days of his treatment, Van Gogh repeatedly and unsuccessfully asked for Gauguin, who asked a policeman attending the case to &quot;be kind enough, Monsieur, to awaken this man with great care, and if he asks for me tell him I have left for Paris; the sight of me might prove fatal for him.&quot; Gauguin fled Arles, never to see Van Gogh again. They continued to correspond, and in 1890, Gauguin proposed they form a studio in Antwerp. Meanwhile, other visitors to the hospital included Marie Ginoux and Roulin.

Despite a pessimistic diagnosis, Van Gogh recovered and returned to the Yellow House on 7 January 1889. He spent the following month between hospital and home, suffering from hallucinations and delusions of poisoning. In March, the police closed his house after a petition by 30 townspeople (including the Ginoux family) who described him as &quot;le fou roux&quot; &quot;the redheaded madman&quot;; Van Gogh returned to hospital. Paul Signac visited him twice in March; in April, Van Gogh moved into rooms owned by Rey after floods damaged paintings in his own home. Two months later, he left Arles and voluntarily entered an asylum in Saint-Rémy-de-Provence. Around this time, he wrote, &quot;Sometimes moods of indescribable anguish, sometimes moments when the veil of time and fatality of circumstances seemed to be torn apart for an instant.&quot;

Van Gogh gave his 1889 &quot;Portrait of Doctor Rey&quot; to Rey. The doctor was not fond of the painting and used it to repair a chicken coop, then gave it away. In 2016, the portrait was housed at the Pushkin Museum of Fine Arts and estimated to be worth over $50 million.


====Saint-Rémy (May 1889 – May 1890)====

Van Gogh entered the Saint-Paul-de-Mausole asylum on 8 May 1889, accompanied by his caregiver, Frédéric Salles, a Protestant clergyman. Saint-Paul was a former monastery in Saint-Rémy, located less than from Arles, and it was run by a former naval doctor, Théophile Peyron. Van Gogh had two cells with barred windows, one of which he used as a studio. The clinic and its garden became the main subjects of his paintings. He made several studies of the hospital&#x27;s interiors, such as &quot;Vestibule of the Asylum&quot; and &quot;Saint-Rémy (September 1889)&quot;, and its gardens, such as &quot;Lilacs&quot; (May 1889). Some of his works from this time are characterised by swirls, such as &quot;The Starry Night&quot;. He was allowed short supervised walks, during which time he painted cypresses and olive trees, including &quot;Valley with Ploughman Seen from Above&quot;, &quot;Olive Trees with the Alpilles in the Background 1889&quot;, &quot;Cypresses 1889&quot;, &quot;Cornfield with Cypresses&quot; (1889), &quot;Country road in Provence by Night&quot; (1890). In September 1889, he produced two further versions of &quot;Bedroom in Arles&quot; and &quot;The Gardener&quot;.

Limited access to life outside the clinic resulted in a shortage of subject matter. Van Gogh instead worked on interpretations of other artist&#x27;s paintings, such as Millet&#x27;s &quot;The Sower&quot; and &quot;Noonday Rest&quot;, and variations on his own earlier work. Van Gogh was an admirer of the Realism of Jules Breton, Gustave Courbet and Millet, and he compared his copies to a musician&#x27;s interpreting Beethoven.

His &quot;Prisoners&#x27; Round (after Gustave Doré)&quot; (1890) was painted after an engraving by Gustave Doré (1832–1883). Tralbaut suggests that the face of the prisoner in the centre of the painting looking towards the viewer is Van Gogh himself; Jan Hulsker discounts this.

Between February and April 1890, Van Gogh suffered a severe relapse. Depressed and unable to bring himself to write, he was still able to paint and draw a little during this time, and he later wrote to Theo that he had made a few small canvases &quot;from memory ... reminisces of the North&quot;. Among these was &quot;Two Peasant Women Digging in a Snow-Covered Field at Sunset&quot;. Hulsker believes that this small group of paintings formed the nucleus of many drawings and study sheets depicting landscapes and figures that Van Gogh worked on during this time. He comments that this short period was the only time that Van Gogh&#x27;s illness had a significant effect on his work. Van Gogh asked his mother and his brother to send him drawings and rough work he had done in the early 1880s so he could work on new paintings from his old sketches. Belonging to this period is &quot;Sorrowing Old Man (&quot;At Eternity&#x27;s Gate&quot;)&quot;, a colour study Hulsker describes as &quot;another unmistakable remembrance of times long past&quot;. His late paintings show an artist at the height of his abilities, according to the art critic Robert Hughes, &quot;longing for concision and grace&quot;.

After the birth of his nephew, Van Gogh wrote, &quot;I started right away to make a picture for him, to hang in their bedroom, branches of white almond blossom against a blue sky.&quot;

====1890 Exhibitions and recognition====

Albert Aurier praised his work in the &quot;Mercure de France&quot; in January 1890 and described him as &quot;a genius&quot;. In February, Van Gogh painted five versions of &quot;L&#x27;Arlésienne (Madame Ginoux)&quot;, based on a charcoal sketch Gauguin had produced when she sat for both artists in November 1888. Also in February, Van Gogh was invited by &quot;Les XX&quot;, a society of avant-garde painters in Brussels, to participate in their annual exhibition. At the opening dinner a &quot;Les XX&quot; member, Henry de Groux, insulted Van Gogh&#x27;s work. Toulouse-Lautrec demanded satisfaction, and Signac declared he would continue to fight for Van Gogh&#x27;s honour if Lautrec surrendered. De Groux apologised for the slight and left the group.

From 20 March to 27 April 1890, Van Gogh was included in the sixth exhibition of the Société des Artistes Indépendants in the Pavillon de la Ville de Paris on the Champs-Elysées. Van Gogh exhibited ten paintings. While the exhibition was on display with the Artistes Indépendants in Paris, Claude Monet said that Van Gogh&#x27;s work was the best in the show.

====Auvers-sur-Oise (May–July 1890)====

In May 1890, Van Gogh left the clinic in Saint-Rémy to move nearer to both Dr Paul Gachet in the Paris suburb of Auvers-sur-Oise and to Theo. Gachet was an amateur painter and had treated several other artists – Camille Pissarro had recommended him. Van Gogh&#x27;s first impression was that Gachet was &quot;iller than I am, it seemed to me, or let&#x27;s say just as much.&quot;

The painter Charles Daubigny moved to Auvers in 1861 and in turn drew other artists there, including Camille Corot and Honoré Daumier. In July 1890, Van Gogh completed two paintings of &quot;Daubigny&#x27;s Garden&quot;, one of which is likely his final work.
During his last weeks at Saint-Rémy, his thoughts returned to &quot;memories of the North&quot;, and several of the approximately 70 oils, painted during as many days in Auvers-sur-Oise, are reminiscent of northern scenes. In June 1890, he painted several portraits of his doctor, including &quot;Portrait of Dr Gachet&quot;, and his only etching. In each the emphasis is on Gachet&#x27;s melancholic disposition. There are other paintings which are probably unfinished, including &quot;Thatched Cottages by a Hill.&quot;

In July, Van Gogh wrote that he had become absorbed &quot;in the immense plain against the hills, boundless as the sea, delicate yellow&quot;. He had first become captivated by the fields in May, when the wheat was young and green. In July, he described to Theo &quot;vast fields of wheat under turbulent skies&quot;.

He wrote that they represented his &quot;sadness and extreme loneliness&quot; and that the &quot;canvases will tell you what I cannot say in words, that is, how healthy and invigorating I find the countryside&quot;. &quot;Wheatfield with Crows&quot;, although not his last oil work, is from July 1890 and Hulsker discusses it as being associated with &quot;melancholy and extreme loneliness&quot;. Hulsker identifies seven oil paintings from Auvers that follow the completion of &quot;Wheatfield with Crows&quot;. Hulsker also expressed concern about the number of paintings attributed to Van Gogh from the period.

===Death===

On 27 July 1890 (Sunday), aged 37, Van Gogh shot himself in the chest with a revolver. The shooting may have taken place in the wheat field in which he had been painting, or in a local barn. The bullet was deflected by a rib and passed through his chest without doing apparent damage to internal organs – possibly stopped by his spine. He was able to walk back to the Auberge Ravoux, where he was attended to by two doctors. One of them, Dr Gachet, had served as a war surgeon in the 1870 Franco-Prussian War and had extensive knowledge of gunshots. Vincent was possibly attended to during the night by Dr Gachet&#x27;s son Paul Louis Gachet and the innkeeper, Arthur Ravoux. The following morning, Theo rushed to his brother&#x27;s side, finding him in good spirits but within hours Vincent&#x27;s health began to fail, suffering from an infection resulting from the wound. He died in the early hours of Tuesday, 29 July. According to Theo, Vincent&#x27;s last words were: &quot;The sadness will last forever&quot;.
Van Gogh was buried on 30 July, in the municipal cemetery of Auvers-sur-Oise. The funeral was attended by Theo van Gogh, Andries Bonger, Charles Laval, Lucien Pissarro, Émile Bernard, Julien Tanguy and Paul Gachet, among twenty family members, friends and locals. Theo suffered from syphilis, and his health began to decline further after his brother&#x27;s death. Weak and unable to come to terms with Vincent&#x27;s absence, he died on 25 January 1891 at Den Dolder and was buried in Utrecht. In 1914, Johanna van Gogh-Bonger had Theo&#x27;s body exhumed and moved from Utrecht to be re-buried alongside Vincent&#x27;s at Auvers-sur-Oise.

There have been numerous debates as to the nature of Van Gogh&#x27;s illness and its effect on his work, and many retrospective diagnoses have been proposed. The consensus is that Van Gogh had an episodic condition with periods of normal functioning. Perry was the first to suggest bipolar disorder in 1947, and this has been supported by the psychiatrists Hemphill and Blumer. Biochemist Wilfred Arnold has countered that the symptoms are more consistent with acute intermittent porphyria, noting that the popular link between bipolar disorder and creativity might be spurious. Temporal lobe epilepsy with bouts of depression has also been suggested. Whatever the diagnosis, his condition was likely worsened by malnutrition, overwork, insomnia and alcohol.

==Style and works==

===Artistic development===
Van Gogh drew and painted with watercolours while at school, but only a few examples survive and the authorship of some has been challenged. When he took up art as an adult, he began at an elementary level. In early 1882, his uncle, Cornelis Marinus, owner of a well-known gallery of contemporary art in Amsterdam, asked for drawings of The Hague. Van Gogh&#x27;s work did not live up to expectations. Marinus offered a second commission, specifying the subject matter in detail, but was again disappointed with the result. Van Gogh persevered; he experimented with lighting in his studio using variable shutters and different drawing materials. For more than a year he worked on single figures – highly elaborate studies in black and white, which at the time gained him only criticism. Later, they were recognised as early masterpieces.

In August 1882, Theo gave Vincent money to buy materials for working &quot;en plein air&quot;. Vincent wrote that he could now &quot;go on painting with new vigour&quot;. From early 1883, he worked on multi-figure compositions. He had some of them photographed, but when his brother remarked that they lacked liveliness and freshness, he destroyed them and turned to oil painting. Van Gogh turned to well-known Hague School artists like Weissenbruch and Blommers, and he received technical advice from them as well as from painters like De Bock and van der Weele, both of the Hague School&#x27;s second generation. He moved to Nuenen after a short period in Drenthe and began work on several large paintings but destroyed most of them. &quot;The Potato Eaters&quot; and its companion pieces are the only ones to have survived. Following a visit to the Rijksmuseum Van Gogh wrote of his admiration for the quick, economical brushwork of the Dutch Masters, especially Rembrandt and Frans Hals. He was aware many of his faults were due to lack of experience and technical expertise, so in November 1885 he travelled to Antwerp and later Paris to learn and develop his skills.

Theo criticised &quot;The Potato Eaters&quot; for its dark palette, which he thought unsuitable for a modern style. During Van Gogh&#x27;s stay in Paris between 1886 and 1887, he tried to master a new, lighter palette. His &quot;Portrait of Père Tanguy&quot; (1887) shows his success with the brighter palette and is evidence of an evolving personal style. Charles Blanc&#x27;s treatise on colour interested him greatly and led him to work with complementary colours. Van Gogh came to believe that the effect of colour went beyond the descriptive; he said that &quot;colour expresses something in itself&quot;. According to Hughes, Van Gogh perceived colour as having a &quot;psychological and moral weight&quot;, as exemplified in the garish reds and greens of &quot;The Night Café&quot;, a work he wanted to &quot;express the terrible passions of humanity&quot;. Yellow meant the most to him, because it symbolised emotional truth. He used yellow as a symbol for sunlight, life, and God.

Van Gogh strove to be a painter of rural life and nature; during his first summer in Arles he used his new palette to paint landscapes and traditional rural life. His belief that a power existed behind the natural led him to try to capture a sense of that power, or the essence of nature in his art, sometimes through the use of symbols. His renditions of the sower, at first copied from Jean-François Millet, reflect the influence of Thomas Carlyle and Friedrich Nietzsche&#x27;s thoughts on the heroism of physical labour, as well as Van Gogh&#x27;s religious beliefs: the sower as Christ sowing life beneath the hot sun. These were themes and motifs he returned to often to rework and develop. His paintings of flowers are filled with symbolism, but rather than use traditional Christian iconography he made up his own, where life is lived under the sun and work is an allegory of life. In Arles, having gained confidence after painting spring blossoms and learning to capture bright sunlight, he was ready to paint &quot;The Sower&quot;.
Van Gogh stayed within what he called the &quot;guise of reality&quot; and was critical of overly stylised works. He wrote afterwards that the abstraction of &quot;Starry Night&quot; had gone too far and that reality had &quot;receded too far in the background&quot;. Hughes describes it as a moment of extreme visionary ecstasy: the stars are in a great whirl, reminiscent of Hokusai&#x27;s &quot;Great Wave&quot;, the movement in the heaven above is reflected by the movement of the cypress on the earth below, and the painter&#x27;s vision is &quot;translated into a thick, emphatic plasma of paint&quot;.

Between 1885 and his death in 1890, Van Gogh appears to have been building an &quot;oeuvre&quot;, a collection that reflected his personal vision and could be commercially successful. He was influenced by Blanc&#x27;s definition of style, that a true painting required optimal use of colour, perspective and brushstrokes. Van Gogh applied the word &quot;purposeful&quot; to paintings he thought he had mastered, as opposed to those he thought of as studies. He painted many series of studies; most of which were still lifes, many executed as colour experiments or as gifts to friends. The work in Arles contributed considerably to his &quot;oeuvre&quot;: those he thought the most important from that time were &quot;The Sower&quot;, &quot;Night Cafe&quot;, &quot;Memory of the Garden in Etten&quot; and &quot;Starry Night&quot;. With their broad brushstrokes, inventive perspectives, colours, contours and designs, these paintings represent the style he sought.

===Major series===

Van Gogh&#x27;s stylistic developments are usually linked to the periods he spent living in different places across Europe. He was inclined to immerse himself in local cultures and lighting conditions, although he maintained a highly individual visual outlook throughout. His evolution as an artist was slow and he was aware of his painterly limitations. Van Gogh moved home often, perhaps to expose himself to new visual stimuli, and through exposure develop his technical skill. Art historian Melissa McQuillan believes the moves also reflect later stylistic changes and that Van Gogh used the moves to avoid conflict, and as a coping mechanism for when the idealistic artist was faced with the realities of his then current situation.

====Portraits====
Van Gogh said portraiture was his greatest interest. &quot;What I&#x27;m most passionate about, much much more than all the rest in my profession&quot;, he wrote in 1890, &quot;is the portrait, the modern portrait.&quot; It is &quot;the only thing in painting that moves me deeply and that gives me a sense of the infinite.&quot; He wrote to his sister that he wished to paint portraits that would endure, and that he would use colour to capture their emotions and character rather than aiming for photographic realism. Those closest to Van Gogh are mostly absent from his portraits; he rarely painted Theo, van Rappard or Bernard. The portraits of his mother were from photographs.

Van Gogh painted Arles&#x27; postmaster Joseph Roulin and his family repeatedly. In five versions of &quot;La Berceuse&quot; (&quot;The Lullaby&quot;), Van Gogh painted Augustine Roulin quietly holding a rope that rocks the unseen cradle of her infant daughter. Van Gogh had planned for it to be the central image of a triptych, flanked by paintings of sunflowers.


====Self-portraits====

Van Gogh created more than 43 self-portraits between 1885 and 1889. They were usually completed in series, such as those painted in Paris in mid-1887, and continued until shortly before his death. Generally the portraits were studies, created during periods when he was reluctant to mix with others or when he lacked models and painted himself.

Van Gogh&#x27;s self-portraits reflect a high degree of self-scrutiny. Often they were intended to mark important periods in his life; for example, the mid-1887 Paris series were painted at the point where he became aware of Claude Monet, Paul Cézanne and Signac. In &quot;Self-Portrait with Grey Felt Hat&quot;, heavy strains of paint spread outwards across the canvas. It is one of his most renowned self-portraits of that period, &quot;with its highly organised rhythmic brushstrokes, and the novel halo derived from the Neo-impressionist repertoire was what Van Gogh himself called a &#x27;purposeful&#x27; canvas&quot;.

They contain a wide array of physiognomical representations. Van Gogh&#x27;s mental and physical condition is usually apparent; he may appear unkempt, unshaven or with a neglected beard, with deeply sunken eyes, a weak jaw, or having lost teeth. Some show him with full lips, a long face or prominent skull, or sharpened, alert features. His hair is sometimes depicted in a vibrant reddish hue and at other times ash coloured.

Van Gogh&#x27;s self-portraits vary stylistically. In those painted after December 1888, the strong contrast of vivid colours highlight the haggard pallor of his skin. Some depict the artist with a beard, others without. He can be seen with bandages in portraits executed just after he mutilated his ear. In only a few does he depict himself as a painter. Those painted in Saint-Rémy show the head from the right, the side opposite his damaged ear, as he painted himself reflected in his mirror.

====Flowers====

Van Gogh painted several landscapes with flowers, including roses, lilacs, irises, and sunflowers. Some reflect his interests in the language of colour, and also in Japanese ukiyo-e. There are two series of dying sunflowers. The first was painted in Paris in 1887 and shows flowers lying on the ground. The second set was completed a year later in Arles and is of bouquets in a vase positioned in early morning light. Both are built from thickly layered paintwork, which, according to the London National Gallery, evokes the &quot;texture of the seed-heads&quot;.

In these series, Van Gogh was not preoccupied by his usual interest in filling his paintings with subjectivity and emotion; rather, the two series are intended to display his technical skill and working methods to Gauguin, who was about to visit. The 1888 paintings were created during a rare period of optimism for the artist. Vincent wrote to Theo in August 1888:
The sunflowers were painted to decorate the walls in anticipation of Gauguin&#x27;s visit, and Van Gogh placed individual works around the &quot;Yellow House&#x27;s guest room&quot; in Arles. Gauguin was deeply impressed and later acquired two of the Paris versions. After Gauguin&#x27;s departure, Van Gogh imagined the two major versions of the sunflowers as wings of the &quot;Berceuse Triptych&quot;, and included them in his &quot;Les XX&quot; in Brussels exhibit. Today the major pieces of the series are among his best known, celebrated for the sickly connotations of the colour yellow and its tie-in with the Yellow House, the expressionism of the brush strokes, and their contrast against often dark backgrounds.


====Cypresses and olives====

Fifteen canvases depict cypresses, a tree he became fascinated with in Arles. He brought life to the trees, which were traditionally seen as emblematic of death. The series of cypresses he began in Arles featured the trees in the distance, as windbreaks in fields; when he was at Saint-Rémy he brought them to the foreground. Vincent wrote to Theo in May 1889: &quot;Cypresses still preoccupy me, I should like to do something with them like my canvases of sunflowers&quot;; he went on to say, &quot;They are beautiful in line and proportion like an Egyptian obelisk.&quot;

In mid-1889, and at his sister Wil&#x27;s request, Van Gogh painted several smaller versions of &quot;Wheat Field with Cypresses&quot;. The works are characterised by swirls and densely painted impasto, and include &quot;The Starry Night&quot;, in which cypresses dominate the foreground. In addition to this, other notable works on cypresses include &quot;Cypresses&quot; (1889), &quot;Cypresses with Two Figures&quot; (1889–90), and &quot;Road with Cypress and Star&quot; (1890).

During the last six or seven months of the year 1889, he had also created at least fifteen paintings of olive trees, a subject which he considered as demanding and compelling. Among these works are &quot;Olive Trees with the Alpilles in the Background&quot; (1889), about which in a letter to his brother Van Gogh wrote, &quot;At last I have a landscape with olives&quot;. While in Saint-Rémy, Van Gogh spent time outside the asylum, where he painted trees in the olive groves. In these works, natural life is rendered as gnarled and arthritic as if a personification of the natural world, which are, according to Hughes, filled with &quot;a continuous field of energy of which nature is a manifestation&quot;.

====Orchards====
The &quot;Flowering Orchards&quot; (also the &quot;Orchards in Blossom&quot;) are among the first groups of work completed after Van Gogh&#x27;s arrival in Arles in February 1888. The 14 paintings are optimistic, joyous and visually expressive of the burgeoning spring. They are delicately sensitive and unpopulated. He painted swiftly, and although he brought to this series a version of Impressionism, a strong sense of personal style began to emerge during this period. The transience of the blossoming trees, and the passing of the season, seemed to align with his sense of impermanence and belief in a new beginning in Arles. During the blossoming of the trees that spring, he found &quot;a world of motifs that could not have been more Japanese&quot;. Vincent wrote to Theo on 21 April 1888 that he had 10 orchards and &quot;one big [painting] of a cherry tree, which I&#x27;ve spoiled&quot;.

During this period Van Gogh mastered the use of light by subjugating shadows and painting the trees as if they are the source of light – almost in a sacred manner. Early the following year he painted another smaller group of orchards, including &quot;View of Arles, Flowering Orchards&quot;. Van Gogh was enthralled by the landscape and vegetation of the south of France, and often visited the farm gardens near Arles. In the vivid light of the Mediterranean climate his palette significantly brightened.

==== Wheat fields ====

Van Gogh made several painting excursions during visits to the landscape around Arles. He made paintings of harvests, wheat fields and other rural landmarks of the area, including &quot;The Old Mill&quot; (1888); a good example of a picturesque structure bordering the wheat fields beyond. At various points, Van Gogh painted the view from his window – at The Hague, Antwerp, and Paris. These works culminated in &quot;The Wheat Field&quot; series, which depicted the view from his cells in the asylum at Saint-Rémy.

Many of the late paintings are sombre but essentially optimistic and, right up to the time of Van Gogh&#x27;s death, reflect his desire to return to lucid mental health. Yet some of his final works reflect his deepening concerns. Writing in July 1890, from Auvers, Van Gogh said that he had become absorbed &quot;in the immense plain against the hills, boundless as the sea, delicate yellow&quot;.

Van Gogh was captivated by the fields in May when the wheat was young and green. His &quot;Wheatfields at Auvers with White House&quot; shows a more subdued palette of yellows and blues, which creates a sense of idyllic harmony.

About 10 July 1890, Van Gogh wrote to Theo of &quot;vast fields of wheat under troubled skies&quot;. &quot;Wheatfield with Crows&quot; shows the artist&#x27;s state of mind in his final days; Hulsker describes the work as a &quot;doom-filled painting with threatening skies and ill-omened crows&quot;. Its dark palette and heavy brushstrokes convey a sense of menace.

== Reputation and legacy ==

After Van Gogh&#x27;s first exhibitions in the late 1880s, his reputation grew steadily among artists, art critics, dealers and collectors. In 1887, André Antoine hung Van Gogh&#x27;s alongside works of Georges Seurat and Paul Signac, at the Théâtre Libre in Paris; some were acquired by Julien Tanguy. In 1889, his work was described in the journal &quot;Le Moderniste Illustré&quot; by Albert Aurier as characterised by &quot;fire, intensity, sunshine&quot;. Ten paintings were shown at the Société des Artistes Indépendants, in Brussels in January 1890. French president Marie François Sadi Carnot was said to have been impressed by Van Gogh&#x27;s work.

After Van Gogh&#x27;s death, memorial exhibitions were held in Brussels, Paris, The Hague and Antwerp. His work was shown in several high-profile exhibitions, including six works at &quot;Les XX&quot;; in 1891 there was a retrospective exhibition in Brussels. In 1892, Octave Mirbeau wrote that Van Gogh&#x27;s suicide was an &quot;infinitely sadder loss for art ... even though the populace has not crowded to a magnificent funeral, and poor Vincent van Gogh, whose demise means the extinction of a beautiful flame of genius, has gone to his death as obscure and neglected as he lived.&quot;

Theo died in January 1891, removing Vincent&#x27;s most vocal and well-connected champion. Theo&#x27;s widow Johanna van Gogh-Bonger was a Dutchwoman in her twenties who had not known either her husband or her brother-in-law very long and who suddenly had to take care of several hundreds of paintings, letters and drawings, as well as her infant son, Vincent Willem van Gogh. Gauguin was not inclined to offer assistance in promoting Van Gogh&#x27;s reputation, and Johanna&#x27;s brother Andries Bonger also seemed lukewarm about his work. Aurier, one of Van Gogh&#x27;s earliest supporters among the critics, died of typhoid fever in 1892 at the age of 27.

In 1892, Émile Bernard organised a small solo show of Van Gogh&#x27;s paintings in Paris, and Julien Tanguy exhibited his Van Gogh paintings with several consigned from Johanna van Gogh-Bonger. In April 1894, the Durand-Ruel Gallery in Paris agreed to take 10 paintings on consignment from Van Gogh&#x27;s estate. In 1896, the Fauvist painter Henri Matisse, then an unknown art student, visited John Russell on Belle Île off Brittany. Russell had been a close friend of Van Gogh; he introduced Matisse to the Dutchman&#x27;s work, and gave him a Van Gogh drawing. Influenced by Van Gogh, Matisse abandoned his earth-coloured palette for bright colours.

In Paris in 1901, a large Van Gogh retrospective was held at the Bernheim-Jeune Gallery, which excited André Derain and Maurice de Vlaminck, and contributed to the emergence of Fauvism. Important group exhibitions took place with the Sonderbund artists in Cologne in 1912, the Armory Show, New York in 1913, and Berlin in 1914. Henk Bremmer was instrumental in teaching and talking about Van Gogh, and introduced Helene Kröller-Müller to Van Gogh&#x27;s art; she became an avid collector of his work. The early figures in German Expressionism such as Emil Nolde acknowledged a debt to Van Gogh&#x27;s work. Bremmer assisted Jacob Baart de la Faille, whose &quot;catalogue raisonné&quot; &quot;L&#x27;Oeuvre de Vincent van Gogh&quot; appeared in 1928. Van Gogh&#x27;s fame reached its first peak in Austria and Germany before World War I, helped by the publication of his letters in three volumes in 1914. His letters are expressive and literate, and have been described as among the foremost 19th-century writings of their kind. These began a compelling mythology of Van Gogh as an intense and dedicated painter who suffered for his art and died young. In 1934, the novelist Irving Stone wrote a biographical novel of Van Gogh&#x27;s life titled &quot;Lust for Life&quot;, based on Van Gogh&#x27;s letters to Theo. This novel and the 1956 film further enhanced his fame, especially in the United States where Stone surmised only a few hundred people had heard of Van Gogh prior to his surprise best-selling book.

In 1957, Francis Bacon based a series of paintings on reproductions of Van Gogh&#x27;s &quot;The Painter on the Road to Tarascon&quot;, the original of which was destroyed during the Second World War. Bacon was inspired by an image he described as &quot;haunting&quot;, and regarded Van Gogh as an alienated outsider, a position which resonated with him. Bacon identified with Van Gogh&#x27;s theories of art and quoted lines written to Theo: &quot;[R]eal painters do not paint things as they are ... [T]hey paint them as &quot;they themselves&quot; feel them to be.&quot;

Don McLean composed a song, &quot;Vincent&quot;, about Van Gogh after reading a biography of the artist. The 1971 song is also known by its opening line, &quot;Starry, Starry Night&quot;.

Van Gogh&#x27;s works are among the world&#x27;s most expensive paintings. Those sold for over US$100 million (today&#x27;s equivalent) include &quot;Portrait of Dr Gachet&quot;,&quot; Portrait of Joseph Roulin&quot; and &quot;Irises&quot;. The Metropolitan Museum of Art acquired a copy of &quot;Wheat Field with Cypresses&quot; in 1993 for $57 million by using funds donated by publisher, diplomat and philanthropist Walter Annenberg. In 2015, &quot;L&#x27;Allée des Alyscamps&quot; sold for $66.3 million at Sotheby&#x27;s, New York, exceeding its reserve of $40 million.

Minor planet 4457 Van Gogh is named in his honour.

In October 2022, two Just Stop Oil activists protesting against the effects of the fossil fuel industry on climate change threw a can of tomato soup on Van Gogh&#x27;s &quot;Sunflowers&quot; in the National Gallery, London, and then glued their hands to the gallery wall. As the painting was covered by glass it was not damaged.

===Van Gogh Museum===

Van Gogh&#x27;s nephew and namesake, (1890–1978), inherited the estate after his mother&#x27;s death in 1925. During the early 1950s he arranged for the publication of a complete edition of the letters presented in four volumes and several languages. He then began negotiations with the Dutch government to subsidise a foundation to purchase and house the entire collection. Theo&#x27;s son participated in planning the project in the hope that the works would be exhibited under the best possible conditions. The project began in 1963; architect Gerrit Rietveld was commissioned to design it, and after his death in 1964 Kisho Kurokawa took charge. Work progressed throughout the 1960s, with 1972 as the target for its grand opening.

The Van Gogh Museum opened in the Museumplein in Amsterdam in 1973. It became the second most popular museum in the Netherlands, after the Rijksmuseum, regularly receiving more than 1.5 million visitors a year. In 2015 it had a record 1.9 million. Eighty-five percent of the visitors come from other countries.

== Nazi-looted art ==
During the Nazi period (1933–1945) a great number of artworks by Van Gogh changed hands, many of them looted from Jewish collectors who were forced into exile or murdered. Some of these works have disappeared into private collections. Others have since resurfaced in museums, or at auction, or have been reclaimed, often in high-profile lawsuits, by their former owners. The German Lost Art Foundation still lists dozens of missing Van Goghs and the American Alliance of Museums lists 73 Van Goghs on the Nazi Era Provenance Internet Portal.

==Notes ==
== References ==
== Sources ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Other editions: (German); (Dutch)
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* ; (Hungarian)
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==

* The Vincent van Gogh Gallery, the complete works and letters of Van Gogh
* Vincent van Gogh The letters, the complete letters of Van Gogh (translated into English and annotated)
* Vincent van Gogh, teaching resource on Van Gogh
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5582" start="0" end="23" title="Vincent van Gogh" label="Vincent Willem van Gogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q166713" start="66" end="84" title="Post-Impressionist" label="Post-Impressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q174705" start="262" end="274" title="oil painting" label="oil painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837720" start="345" end="355" title="Trees and Undergrowth (Van Gogh series)" label="landscapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617209" start="357" end="368" title="Still life paintings by Vincent van Gogh (Paris)" label="still lifes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232361" start="370" end="379" title="Portraits by Vincent van Gogh" label="portraits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972676" start="385" end="399" title="Portraits of Vincent van Gogh" label="self-portraits"/>
<link wikidata="Q174219" start="462" end="471" title="Paintwork" label="brushwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="504" end="517" title="expressionism" label="expressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q38166" start="521" end="531" title="modern art" label="modern art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926628" start="722" end="738" title="The Red Vineyard" label="The Red Vineyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="882" end="900" title="mental instability" label="mental instability"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="975" end="984" title="Depression (mood)" label="depressed"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="1165" end="1174" title="modernist" label="modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q317188" start="1270" end="1274" title="Theo van Gogh (art dealer)" label="Theo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747016" start="1334" end="1355" title="The Letters of Vincent van Gogh" label="a long correspondence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617208" start="1404" end="1415" title="Still life paintings by Vincent van Gogh (Netherlands)" label="still lifes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7158404" start="1434" end="1451" title="Peasant Character Studies (Van Gogh series)" label="peasant labourers"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="1524" end="1535" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q264193" start="1553" end="1566" title="Émile Bernard" label="Émile Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q37693" start="1571" end="1583" title="Paul Gauguin" label="Paul Gauguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q40415" start="1619" end="1632" title="Impressionism" label="Impressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q48292" start="1760" end="1765" title="Arles" label="Arles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237299" start="1769" end="1784" title="southern France" label="southern France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087213" start="1937" end="1949" title="Olive Trees (Van Gogh series)" label="olive groves"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991819" start="1951" end="1963" title="Wheat Fields" label="wheat fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q157541" start="1968" end="1978" title="Sunflowers (Van Gogh series)" label="sunflowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q170082" start="2111" end="2129" title="Psychosis" label="psychotic episodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q189643" start="2134" end="2142" title="delusion" label="delusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q221507" start="2446" end="2456" title="Saint-Rémy-de-Provence" label="Saint-Rémy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819026" start="2503" end="2517" title="Auberge Ravoux" label="Auberge Ravoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q212406" start="2521" end="2536" title="Auvers-sur-Oise" label="Auvers-sur-Oise"/>
<link wikidata="Q81058" start="2579" end="2590" title="homeopathic" label="homeopathic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369513" start="2598" end="2609" title="Paul Gachet" label="Paul Gachet"/>
<link wikidata="Q170382" start="2732" end="2740" title="revolver" label="revolver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554450" start="3007" end="3030" title="Johanna van Gogh-Bonger" label="Johanna van Gogh-Bonger"/>
<link wikidata="Q166593" start="3149" end="3155" title="Fauvism" label="Fauves"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="3160" end="3181" title="Expressionism" label="German Expressionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827380" start="3368" end="3383" title="tortured artist" label="tortured artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368268" start="3428" end="3475" title="List of most expensive paintings" label="world&amp;#x27;s most expensive paintings ever sold"/>
<link wikidata="Q224124" start="3509" end="3524" title="Van Gogh Museum" label="Van Gogh Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q317188" start="3730" end="3734" title="Theo van Gogh (art dealer)" label="Theo"/>
<link wikidata="Q173950" start="3935" end="3945" title="art dealer" label="art dealer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554450" start="4223" end="4241" title="Johanna van Gogh-Bonger" label="Jo Bonger-van Gogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q26213648" start="4533" end="4548" title="Arnold Pomerans" label="Arnold Pomerans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4140958" start="4854" end="4857" title="Wil van Gogh" label="Wil"/>
<link wikidata="Q24150" start="4877" end="4895" title="Anthon van Rappard" label="Anthon van Rappard"/>
<link wikidata="Q264193" start="4903" end="4916" title="Émile Bernard" label="Émile Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q151573" start="4950" end="4961" title="Paul Signac" label="Paul Signac"/>
<link wikidata="Q37693" start="4963" end="4975" title="Paul Gauguin" label="Paul Gauguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714600" start="4992" end="5005" title="Albert Aurier" label="Albert Aurier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5078274" start="5033" end="5041" title="sketch (drawing)" label="sketches"/>
<link wikidata="Q282043" start="5443" end="5455" title="Jules Breton" label="Jules Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q262478" start="5608" end="5613" title="Salon (Paris)" label="Salon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9883" start="6533" end="6546" title="Zundert" label="Groot-Zundert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101" start="6590" end="6603" title="North Brabant" label="North Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q515880" start="6711" end="6732" title="Dutch Reformed Church" label="Dutch Reformed Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q156598" start="6990" end="7010" title="University of Leiden" label="University of Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="7209" end="7218" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q4140958" start="7556" end="7565" title="Wil van Gogh" label="Willemina"/>
<link wikidata="Q76960" start="8113" end="8124" title="Zevenbergen" label="Zevenbergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q26430" start="8246" end="8253" title="Tilburg" label="Tilburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q26936772" start="8475" end="8502" title="Constant Cornelis Huijsmans" label="Constant Cornelis Huijsmans"/>
<link wikidata="Q942370" start="9017" end="9033" title="Goupil &amp;amp; Cie" label="Goupil &amp;amp; Cie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569158" start="9140" end="9158" title="Southampton Street, London" label="Southampton Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959654" start="9181" end="9197" title="87 Hackford Road (Van Gogh)" label="87 Hackford Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q146891" start="9199" end="9208" title="Stockwell" label="Stockwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301537" start="9895" end="9909" title="supply teacher" label="supply teacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q269770" start="9921" end="9936" title="boarding school" label="boarding school"/>
<link wikidata="Q736439" start="9940" end="9948" title="Ramsgate" label="Ramsgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432955" start="9979" end="9988" title="Isleworth" label="Isleworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="10083" end="10092" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9833" start="10155" end="10160" title="Etten-Leur" label="Etten"/>
<link wikidata="Q26421" start="10246" end="10255" title="Dordrecht" label="Dordrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790917" start="10691" end="10708" title="Johannes Stricker" label="Johannes Stricker"/>
<link wikidata="Q214341" start="10774" end="10797" title="University of Amsterdam" label="University of Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="10798" end="10806" title="theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="10951" end="10961" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q730506" start="10983" end="10988" title="Laken" label="Laken"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178381" start="11060" end="11072" title="Petit Wasmes" label="Petit-Wasmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q182920" start="11119" end="11127" title="Borinage" label="Borinage"/>
<link wikidata="Q131327" start="11244" end="11252" title="homeless" label="homeless"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269644" start="11511" end="11518" title="Cuesmes" label="Cuesmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q464454" start="11800" end="11804" title="Geel" label="Geel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372280" start="12165" end="12179" title="Willem Roelofs" label="Willem Roelofs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191981" start="12367" end="12376" title="Shading" label="modelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900281" start="12381" end="12392" title="Perspective (graphical)" label="perspective"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790917" start="12713" end="12730" title="Johannes Stricker" label="Johannes Stricker"/>
<link wikidata="Q591907" start="13159" end="13170" title="Anton Mauve" label="Anton Mauve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424515" start="13326" end="13334" title="charcoal (art)" label="charcoal"/>
<link wikidata="Q189085" start="13339" end="13345" title="pastel" label="pastel"/>
<link wikidata="Q174705" start="14333" end="14348" title="oil painting" label="painting in oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3325510" start="14476" end="14488" title="plaster cast" label="plaster cast"/>
<link wikidata="Q101896" start="14650" end="14660" title="gonorrhea" label="gonorrhoea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4499795" start="15140" end="15178" title="Sien (Van Gogh series)" label="Clasina Maria &amp;quot;Sien&amp;quot; Hoornik"/>
<link wikidata="Q34370" start="15991" end="16000" title="Rotterdam" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q37620" start="16208" end="16221" title="Scheldt" label="River Scheldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q772" start="16269" end="16276" title="Drenthe" label="Drenthe"/>
<link wikidata="Q153516" start="16383" end="16389" title="Nuenen" label="Nuenen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16581" end="16601" title="Peasant Character Studies (Van Gogh series)#The weaver" label="paintings of weavers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175552" start="16606" end="16620" title="Cottages (Van Gogh series)" label="their cottages"/>
<link wikidata="Q26220165" start="16652" end="16682" title="The Parsonage Garden at Nuenen" label="The Parsonage Garden at Nuenen"/>
<link wikidata="Q431431" start="16716" end="16728" title="Singer Laren" label="Singer Laren"/>
<link wikidata="Q194406" start="17036" end="17046" title="strychnine" label="strychnine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617208" start="17198" end="17209" title="Still life paintings by Vincent van Gogh (Netherlands)" label="still lifes"/>
<link wikidata="Q154469" start="17660" end="17677" title="The Potato Eaters" label="The Potato Eaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7158404" start="17707" end="17732" title="Peasant Character Studies (Van Gogh series)" label="peasant character studies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18114" end="18135" title="Peasant Character Studies (Van Gogh series)#Woman" label="young peasant sitters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7212330" start="18557" end="18564" title="tobacco smoking" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520130" start="18779" end="18792" title="colour theory" label="colour theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599" start="18852" end="18869" title="Peter Paul Rubens" label="Peter Paul Rubens"/>
<link wikidata="Q320617" start="18906" end="18913" title="carmine" label="carmine"/>
<link wikidata="Q425278" start="18915" end="18926" title="cobalt blue" label="cobalt blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q339657" start="18931" end="18944" title="Paris green" label="emerald green"/>
<link wikidata="Q185905" start="18971" end="18978" title="ukiyo-e" label="ukiyo-e"/>
<link wikidata="Q41083" start="19219" end="19227" title="syphilis" label="syphilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746779" start="19347" end="19367" title="Royal Academy of Fine Arts (Antwerp)" label="Academy of Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q175257" start="19646" end="19660" title="Charles Verlat" label="Charles Verlat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533962" start="19836" end="19847" title="Franz Vinck" label="Franz Vinck"/>
<link wikidata="Q18202016" start="19942" end="19956" title="Eugène Siberdt" label="Eugène Siberdt"/>
<link wikidata="Q151952" start="20174" end="20187" title="Venus de Milo" label="Venus de Milo"/>
<link wikidata="Q186115" start="21178" end="21188" title="Montmartre" label="Montmartre"/>
<link wikidata="Q457098" start="21204" end="21218" title="Fernand Cormon" label="Fernand Cormon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3448845" start="21280" end="21289" title="rue Lepic" label="rue Lepic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278818" start="21317" end="21355" title="Agostina Segatori Sitting in the Café du Tambourin" label="portraits of friends and acquaintances"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617209" start="21357" end="21377" title="Still life paintings by Vincent van Gogh (Paris)" label="still life paintings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6507323" start="21388" end="21411" title="Le Moulin de la Galette (Van Gogh series)" label="Le Moulin de la Galette"/>
<link wikidata="Q6906074" start="21413" end="21433" title="Montmartre (Van Gogh series)" label="scenes in Montmartre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807462" start="21435" end="21443" title="Asnières (Van Gogh series)" label="Asnières"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446844" start="21458" end="21463" title="Seine (Van Gogh series)" label="Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6159323" start="21668" end="21680" title="Japonaiserie (Van Gogh)" label="Japonaiserie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21782" end="21804" title="Copies by Vincent van Gogh#Copy after Keisai Eisen" label="The Courtesan or Oiran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046492" start="21825" end="21837" title="Keisai Eisen" label="Keisai Eisen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152965" start="21919" end="21937" title="Adolphe Monticelli" label="Adolphe Monticelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q7402375" start="22070" end="22096" title="Saintes-Maries (Van Gogh series)" label="Seascape at Saintes-Maries"/>
<link wikidata="Q457098" start="22306" end="22320" title="Fernand Cormon" label="Fernand Cormon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072285" start="22328" end="22335" title="atelier" label="atelier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365633" start="22450" end="22462" title="John Russell (Australian painter)" label="John Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q19838007" start="22476" end="22488" title="Vincent van Gogh (Russell painting)" label="his portrait"/>
<link wikidata="Q264193" start="22532" end="22545" title="Émile Bernard" label="Émile Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q287524" start="22547" end="22561" title="Louis Anquetin" label="Louis Anquetin"/>
<link wikidata="Q82445" start="22566" end="22591" title="Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec" label="Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q56239082" start="22606" end="22623" title="Portrait of Vincent van Gogh (1887)" label="a portrait of him"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512019" start="22647" end="22677" title="Julien Tanguy (art dealer)" label="Julien &amp;quot;Père&amp;quot; Tanguy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35548" start="22744" end="22756" title="Paul Cézanne" label="Paul Cézanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q200034" start="22849" end="22860" title="Pointillism" label="Pointillism"/>
<link wikidata="Q150091" start="22865" end="22882" title="Neo-impressionism" label="Neo-impressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q34013" start="22928" end="22942" title="Georges Seurat" label="Georges Seurat"/>
<link wikidata="Q191415" start="23303" end="23311" title="Asnières-sur-Seine" label="Asnières"/>
<link wikidata="Q373984" start="23598" end="23618" title="complementary colour" label="complementary colour"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23713" end="23718" title="Asnières (Van Gogh series)#Parks" label="parks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23720" end="23731" title="Asnières (Van Gogh series)#Restaurants" label="restaurants"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446844" start="23740" end="23745" title="Seine (Van Gogh series)" label="Seine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23763" end="23799" title="Seine (Van Gogh series)#Bridges across the Seine at Asnières" label="Bridges across the Seine at Asnières"/>
<link wikidata="Q134741" start="24440" end="24456" title="Camille Pissarro" label="Camille Pissarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q964608" start="24469" end="24475" title="Lucien Pissarro" label="Lucien"/>
<link wikidata="Q48292" start="24884" end="24889" title="Arles" label="Arles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558054" start="24943" end="24953" title="art colony" label="art colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q12306100" start="24973" end="24999" title="Christian Mourier-Petersen" label="Christian Mourier-Petersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q13638325" start="25143" end="25149" title="Zouave" label="Zouave"/>
<link wikidata="Q170210" start="25314" end="25322" title="absinthe" label="absinthe"/>
<link wikidata="Q219660" start="25616" end="25627" title="ultramarine" label="ultramarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q604079" start="25632" end="25637" title="mauve" label="mauve"/>
<link wikidata="Q238377" start="25791" end="25800" title="Pont-Aven" label="Pont-Aven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249621" start="25877" end="25890" title="Charles Laval" label="Charles Laval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420385" start="26062" end="26095" title="Société des Artistes Indépendants" label="Société des Artistes Indépendants"/>
<link wikidata="Q2728934" start="26145" end="26160" title="Dodge MacKnight" label="Dodge MacKnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q499246" start="26187" end="26198" title="Fontvieille, Bouches-du-Rhône" label="Fontvieille"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200610" start="26317" end="26333" title="The Yellow House" label="The Yellow House"/>
<link wikidata="Q184172" start="26359" end="26365" title="French franc" label="francs"/>
<link wikidata="Q602980" start="26645" end="26657" title="L&amp;#x27;Arlésienne (painting)" label="Marie Ginoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118295" start="26806" end="26827" title="Van Gogh&amp;#x27;s Chair" label="Van Gogh&amp;#x27;s Chair"/>
<link wikidata="Q724377" start="26848" end="26864" title="Bedroom in Arles" label="Bedroom in Arles"/>
<link wikidata="Q674846" start="26885" end="26899" title="The Night Café" label="The Night Café"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025704" start="26920" end="26941" title="Café Terrace at Night" label="Café Terrace at Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464531" start="26972" end="26999" title="Starry Night Over the Rhone" label="Starry Night Over the Rhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q157541" start="27024" end="27063" title="Sunflowers (series of paintings)" label="Still Life: Vase with Twelve Sunflowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7932134" start="27099" end="27130" title="décoration for the Yellow House" label="decoration for the Yellow House"/>
<link wikidata="Q330920" start="27322" end="27346" title="Saintes-Maries-de-la-Mer" label="Saintes-Maries-de-la-Mer"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27404" end="27423" title="Portrait of Paul-Eugène Milliet#The Lover: Paul-Eugène Milliet" label="Paul-Eugène Milliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7402375" start="27438" end="27470" title="Saintes-Maries (Van Gogh series)" label="boats on the sea and the village"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373445" start="27505" end="27516" title="Eugène Boch" label="Eugène Boch"/>
<link wikidata="Q157541" start="27860" end="27870" title="Sunflowers (Van Gogh series)" label="Sunflowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399534" start="28340" end="28353" title="The Roulin Family (Van Gogh series)" label="Joseph Roulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7932134" start="28567" end="28598" title="Décoration for the Yellow House" label="Décoration for the Yellow House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093283" start="28924" end="28949" title="The Painter of Sunflowers" label="The Painter of Sunflowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126322" start="29088" end="29117" title="Memory of the Garden at Etten (Ladies of Arles)" label="Memory of the Garden at Etten"/>
<link wikidata="Q450348" start="29170" end="29179" title="Alyscamps" label="Alyscamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924524" start="29219" end="29232" title="Les Alyscamps" label="Les Alyscamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6441" start="29355" end="29366" title="Montpellier" label="Montpellier"/>
<link wikidata="Q34618" start="29409" end="29416" title="Gustave Courbet" label="Courbet"/>
<link wikidata="Q33477" start="29421" end="29430" title="Eugène Delacroix" label="Delacroix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519002" start="29438" end="29449" title="Musée Fabre" label="Musée Fabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054088" start="30753" end="30759" title="auditory hallucination" label="voices"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155005" start="32024" end="32038" title="Andries Bonger" label="Andries Bonger"/>
<link wikidata="Q189643" start="32999" end="33007" title="delusion" label="delusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q221507" start="33442" end="33464" title="Saint-Rémy-de-Provence" label="Saint-Rémy-de-Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269788" start="33688" end="33710" title="Portrait of Doctor Rey" label="Portrait of Doctor Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872" start="33862" end="33889" title="Pushkin Museum of Fine Arts" label="Pushkin Museum of Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q334199" start="33999" end="34027" title="Monastery of Saint-Paul de Mausole" label="Saint-Paul-de-Mausole asylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526684" start="34234" end="34250" title="Théophile Peyron" label="Théophile Peyron"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34345" end="34355" title="Saint-Paul Asylum, Saint-Rémy (Van Gogh series)#The garden" label="its garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3832428" start="34577" end="34583" title="Lilacs (painting)" label="Lilacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q45585" start="34678" end="34694" title="The Starry Night" label="The Starry Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q146911" start="34770" end="34779" title="Cupressus" label="cypresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q11694587" start="34813" end="34850" title="Valley with Ploughman Seen from Above" label="Valley with Ploughman Seen from Above"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087213" start="34858" end="34922" title="Olive Trees (Van Gogh series)" label="&amp;quot;Olive Trees with the Alpilles in the Background 1889&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q867510" start="34930" end="34944" title="Cypresses (Metropolitan Museum of Art)" label="Cypresses 1889"/>
<link wikidata="Q3794118" start="35139" end="35163" title="The Gardener (painting)" label="&amp;quot;The Gardener&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168586" start="35277" end="35325" title="Copies by Vincent van Gogh" label="interpretations of other artist&amp;#x27;s paintings"/>
<link wikidata="Q148458" start="35335" end="35341" title="Jean-François Millet" label="Millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q20540661" start="35355" end="35364" title="The Sower (Millet)" label="The Sower"/>
<link wikidata="Q10857409" start="35472" end="35479" title="Realism (visual art)" label="Realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q282043" start="35483" end="35495" title="Jules Breton" label="Jules Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q34618" start="35497" end="35512" title="Gustave Courbet" label="Gustave Courbet"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="35586" end="35595" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132723" start="35608" end="35650" title="Prisoners&amp;#x27; Round (after Gustave Doré)" label="Prisoners&amp;#x27; Round (after Gustave Doré)"/>
<link wikidata="Q139106" start="35685" end="35694" title="engraving" label="engraving"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682" start="35698" end="35710" title="Gustave Doré" label="Gustave Doré"/>
<link wikidata="Q395240" start="35850" end="35861" title="Jan Hulsker" label="Jan Hulsker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36146" end="36169" title="Houses at Auvers#&amp;quot;Reminisces of the North&amp;quot;" label="reminisces of the North"/>
<link wikidata="Q500554" start="36766" end="36821" title="At Eternity&amp;#x27;s Gate" label="Sorrowing Old Man (&amp;quot;At Eternity&amp;#x27;s Gate&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811222" start="37024" end="37037" title="Robert Hughes (critic)" label="Robert Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q131406490" start="37224" end="37244" title="Almond Blossoms" label="white almond blossom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714600" start="37314" end="37327" title="Albert Aurier" label="Albert Aurier"/>
<link wikidata="Q186225" start="37358" end="37375" title="Mercure de France" label="Mercure de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q602980" start="37494" end="37511" title="L&amp;#x27;Arlésienne (painting)" label="L&amp;#x27;Arlésienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q463283" start="37679" end="37685" title="Les XX" label="Les XX"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="37706" end="37717" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q7932135" start="37758" end="37781" title="Vincent van Gogh&amp;#x27;s display at Les XX, 1890" label="their annual exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q450114" start="37834" end="37848" title="Henry de Groux" label="Henry de Groux"/>
<link wikidata="Q296" start="38365" end="38377" title="Claude Monet" label="Claude Monet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369513" start="38552" end="38566" title="Paul Gachet" label="Dr Paul Gachet"/>
<link wikidata="Q212406" start="38590" end="38605" title="Auvers-sur-Oise" label="Auvers-sur-Oise"/>
<link wikidata="Q134741" start="38689" end="38705" title="Camille Pissarro" label="Camille Pissarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q252357" start="38871" end="38887" title="Charles-François Daubigny" label="Charles Daubigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q148475" start="38960" end="38973" title="Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot" label="Camille Corot"/>
<link wikidata="Q187506" start="38978" end="38992" title="Honoré Daumier" label="Honoré Daumier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335084" start="39050" end="39072" title="Daubigny&amp;#x27;s Garden" label="Daubigny&amp;#x27;s Garden"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39187" end="39208" title="Houses at Auvers#&amp;quot;Reminisces of the North&amp;quot;" label="memories of the North"/>
<link wikidata="Q17023954" start="39416" end="39437" title="Portrait of Dr. Gachet" label="Portrait of Dr Gachet"/>
<link wikidata="Q186986" start="39458" end="39465" title="etching" label="etching"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695962" start="39606" end="39633" title="Farms near Auvers (Van Gogh)" label="Thatched Cottages by a Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q634122" start="40183" end="40204" title="Wheatfield with Crows" label="Wheatfield with Crows"/>
<link wikidata="Q170382" start="40667" end="40675" title="revolver" label="revolver"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819026" start="40958" end="40972" title="Auberge Ravoux" label="Auberge Ravoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="41079" end="41098" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155005" start="41728" end="41742" title="Andries Bonger" label="Andries Bonger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249621" start="41744" end="41757" title="Charles Laval" label="Charles Laval"/>
<link wikidata="Q964608" start="41759" end="41774" title="Lucien Pissarro" label="Lucien Pissarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q41083" start="41890" end="41898" title="syphilis" label="syphilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q517423" start="42064" end="42074" title="Den Dolder" label="Den Dolder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554450" start="42111" end="42134" title="Johanna van Gogh-Bonger" label="Johanna van Gogh-Bonger"/>
<link wikidata="Q331055" start="42156" end="42163" title="exhumation" label="exhumed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7932136" start="42302" end="42325" title="Vincent van Gogh&amp;#x27;s health" label="Van Gogh&amp;#x27;s illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q652476" start="42363" end="42386" title="retrospective diagnosis" label="retrospective diagnoses"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="42531" end="42547" title="bipolar disorder" label="bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q424247" start="42710" end="42738" title="acute intermittent porphyria" label="acute intermittent porphyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q616667" start="42828" end="42850" title="Temporal lobe epilepsy" label="Temporal lobe epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q50030" start="43088" end="43100" title="watercolour painting" label="watercolours"/>
<link wikidata="Q829298" start="43971" end="43983" title="en plein air" label="en plein air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232633" start="44307" end="44319" title="Hague School" label="Hague School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691988" start="44333" end="44345" title="Johan Hendrik Weissenbruch" label="Weissenbruch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580663" start="44350" end="44358" title="Bernard Blommers" label="Blommers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066624" start="44433" end="44440" title="Théophile de Bock" label="De Bock"/>
<link wikidata="Q777961" start="44445" end="44458" title="Herman Johannes van der Weele" label="van der Weele"/>
<link wikidata="Q190804" start="44748" end="44759" title="Rijksmuseum" label="Rijksmuseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352880" start="44836" end="44849" title="Dutch Masters" label="Dutch Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598" start="44862" end="44871" title="Rembrandt" label="Rembrandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q167654" start="44876" end="44886" title="Frans Hals" label="Frans Hals"/>
<link wikidata="Q13528770" start="45299" end="45322" title="Portrait of Père Tanguy" label="Portrait of Père Tanguy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063751" start="45427" end="45440" title="Charles Blanc" label="Charles Blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q674846" start="45838" end="45852" title="The Night Café" label="The Night Café"/>
<link wikidata="Q148458" start="46449" end="46469" title="Jean-François Millet" label="Jean-François Millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q151403" start="46496" end="46510" title="Thomas Carlyle" label="Thomas Carlyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358" start="46515" end="46534" title="Friedrich Nietzsche" label="Friedrich Nietzsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q208145" start="46852" end="46863" title="iconography" label="iconography"/>
<link wikidata="Q5586" start="47480" end="47487" title="Hokusai" label="Hokusai"/>
<link wikidata="Q252485" start="47501" end="47511" title="The Great Wave off Kanagawa" label="Great Wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126322" start="48477" end="48506" title="Memory of the Garden at Etten (Ladies of Arles)" label="Memory of the Garden in Etten"/>
<link wikidata="Q296" start="51100" end="51112" title="Claude Monet" label="Claude Monet"/>
<link wikidata="Q35548" start="51114" end="51126" title="Paul Cézanne" label="Paul Cézanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q841933" start="51530" end="51544" title="Physiognomy" label="physiognomical"/>
<link wikidata="Q157449" start="52510" end="52515" title="lilac" label="lilac"/>
<link wikidata="Q156901" start="52518" end="52524" title="iris (plant)" label="irises"/>
<link wikidata="Q171497" start="52530" end="52539" title="sunflower" label="sunflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q185905" start="52617" end="52624" title="ukiyo-e" label="ukiyo-e"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545200" start="52881" end="52906" title="impasto" label="thickly layered paintwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q7932134" start="53519" end="53549" title="Décoration for the Yellow House" label="Yellow House&amp;#x27;s guest room"/>
<link wikidata="Q7932135" start="53804" end="53842" title="Vincent van Gogh&amp;#x27;s display at Les XX, 1890" label="&amp;quot;Les XX&amp;quot; in Brussels exhibit"/>
<link wikidata="Q147513" start="54152" end="54161" title="Cupressus sempervirens" label="cypresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271805" start="54805" end="54831" title="Wheat Field with Cypresses" label="Wheat Field with Cypresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930190" start="55144" end="55170" title="Road with Cypress and Star" label="Road with Cypress and Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087213" start="55390" end="55437" title="Olive Trees (Van Gogh series)" label="Olive Trees with the Alpilles in the Background"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555854" start="55925" end="55943" title="Flowering Orchards" label="Flowering Orchards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314658" start="57066" end="57099" title="View of Arles, Flowering Orchards" label="View of Arles, Flowering Orchards"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="57260" end="57281" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774378" start="57764" end="57779" title="The Wheat Field" label="The Wheat Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q634122" start="58599" end="58620" title="Wheatfield with Crows" label="Wheatfield with Crows"/>
<link wikidata="Q529001" start="59039" end="59052" title="André Antoine" label="André Antoine"/>
<link wikidata="Q34013" start="59093" end="59107" title="Georges Seurat" label="Georges Seurat"/>
<link wikidata="Q151573" start="59112" end="59123" title="Paul Signac" label="Paul Signac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317415" start="59132" end="59145" title="Théâtre Libre" label="Théâtre Libre"/>
<link wikidata="Q28154388" start="59246" end="59268" title="Le Moderniste Illustré" label="Le Moderniste Illustré"/>
<link wikidata="Q215778" start="59464" end="59490" title="Marie François Sadi Carnot" label="Marie François Sadi Carnot"/>
<link wikidata="Q463283" start="59737" end="59743" title="Les XX" label="Les XX"/>
<link wikidata="Q23441" start="59818" end="59832" title="Octave Mirbeau" label="Octave Mirbeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="60763" end="60776" title="typhoid fever" label="typhoid fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q649052" start="61017" end="61028" title="Durand-Ruel" label="Durand-Ruel"/>
<link wikidata="Q166593" start="61131" end="61138" title="Fauvist" label="Fauvist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589" start="61147" end="61160" title="Henri Matisse" label="Henri Matisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365633" start="61199" end="61211" title="John Russell (Australian painter)" label="John Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q815838" start="61215" end="61224" title="Belle Île" label="Belle Île"/>
<link wikidata="Q826482" start="61523" end="61537" title="Bernheim-Jeune" label="Bernheim-Jeune"/>
<link wikidata="Q156272" start="61561" end="61573" title="André Derain" label="André Derain"/>
<link wikidata="Q241098" start="61578" end="61597" title="Maurice de Vlaminck" label="Maurice de Vlaminck"/>
<link wikidata="Q824142" start="61692" end="61702" title="Sonderbund westdeutscher Kunstfreunde und Künstler" label="Sonderbund"/>
<link wikidata="Q688909" start="61735" end="61746" title="Armory Show" label="Armory Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298253" start="61786" end="61798" title="Henk Bremmer" label="Henk Bremmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q451774" start="61871" end="61892" title="Helene Kröller-Müller" label="Helene Kröller-Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="61980" end="62000" title="German Expressionism" label="German Expressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q152788" start="62009" end="62019" title="Emil Nolde" label="Emil Nolde"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62082" end="62106" title="Jacob Baart de la Faille" label="Jacob Baart de la Faille"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050259" start="62120" end="62138" title="catalogue raisonné" label="catalogue raisonné"/>
<link wikidata="Q337103" start="62633" end="62645" title="Irving Stone" label="Irving Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643591" start="62710" end="62723" title="Lust for Life (novel)" label="Lust for Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423854" start="62792" end="62801" title="Lust for Life (1956 film)" label="1956 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q154340" start="62981" end="62994" title="Francis Bacon (artist)" label="Francis Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="63155" end="63171" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q57339" start="63546" end="63556" title="Don McLean" label="Don McLean"/>
<link wikidata="Q920366" start="63580" end="63587" title="Vincent (Don McLean song)" label="Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368268" start="63784" end="63808" title="List of most expensive paintings" label="most expensive paintings"/>
<link wikidata="" start="63920" end="63945" title=":File:Vincent van Gogh - Portrait of Joseph Roulin.jpg" label="Portrait of Joseph Roulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q160236" start="63980" end="64006" title="Metropolitan Museum of Art" label="Metropolitan Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271805" start="64032" end="64058" title="Wheat Field with Cypresses" label="Wheat Field with Cypresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750541" start="64154" end="64170" title="Walter Annenberg" label="Walter Annenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924524" start="64187" end="64213" title="Les Alyscamps" label="L&amp;#x27;Allée des Alyscamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q654762" start="64246" end="64260" title="Sotheby&amp;#x27;s" label="Sotheby&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q313541" start="64324" end="64337" title="4457 van Gogh" label="4457 Van Gogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q111950188" start="64384" end="64397" title="Just Stop Oil" label="Just Stop Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q160435" start="65263" end="65278" title="Gerrit Rietveld" label="Gerrit Rietveld"/>
<link wikidata="Q358502" start="65338" end="65352" title="Kisho Kurokawa" label="Kisho Kurokawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q224124" start="65456" end="65471" title="Van Gogh Museum" label="Van Gogh Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q639321" start="65486" end="65497" title="Museumplein" label="Museumplein"/>
<link wikidata="Q190804" start="65591" end="65602" title="Rijksmuseum" label="Rijksmuseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q105760581" start="65786" end="65792" title="Nazi-looted artworks of Vincent van Gogh" label="During"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="65797" end="65808" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi period"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842849" start="66236" end="66264" title="American Alliance of Museums" label="American Alliance of Museums"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="32609" wikidata="Q7939197" url="?curid=32609" title="Vocal loading">
<text>Vocal loading is the stress inflicted on the speech organs when speaking for long periods.

== Background ==
Of the working population, about 13% have professions where their voice is their primary tool. That includes professions such as teachers, sales personnel, actors and singers, and TV and radio reporters. Many of them, especially teachers, suffer from voice-related medical problems. In a larger scope, this involves millions of sick-leave days every year, for example, both in the US and the European Union. Still, research in vocal loading has often been treated as a minor subject.

== Voice organ ==

Voiced speech is produced by air streaming from the lungs through the vocal cords, setting them into an oscillating movement. In every oscillation, the vocal folds are closed for a short period of time. When the folds reopen the pressure under the folds is released. These changes in pressure form the waves called (voiced) speech.

== Loading on tissue in vocal folds ==
The fundamental frequency of speech for an average male is around 110 Hz and for an average female around 220 Hz. That means that for voiced sounds the vocal folds will hit together 110 or 220 times a second, respectively. Suppose then that a female is speaking continuously for an hour. Of this time perhaps five minutes is voiced speech. The folds will then hit together more than 30 thousand times an hour. It is intuitively clear that the vocal fold tissue will experience some tiring due to this large number of hits.

Vocal loading also includes other kinds of strain on the speech organs. These include all kinds of muscular strain in the speech organs, similarly as usage of any other muscles will experience strain if used for an extended period of time. However, researchers&#x27; largest interest lies in stress exerted on the vocal folds.

== Effect of speaking environment ==

Several studies in vocal loading show that the speaking environment does have a significant impact on vocal loading. Still, the exact details are debated. Most scientists agree on the effect of the following environmental properties:

* &quot;air humidity&quot; - dry air is thought to increase the stress experienced in the vocal folds, however, this has not been proven
* &quot;hydration&quot; - dehydration may increase effects of stress inflicted on the vocal folds
* &quot;background noise&quot; - people tend to speak louder when background noise is present, even when it isn&#x27;t necessary. Increasing speaking volume increases stress inflicted on the vocal folds
* &quot;pitch&quot; - Using a higher or lower pitch than normal will also increase laryngeal stress. 
* &quot;voice quality&quot; - Using a vocal quality which differs from that habitually used is thought to increase laryngeal stress. 
In addition, smoking and other types of air pollution might have a negative effect on voice production organs.

== Symptoms ==

Objective evaluation or measurement of vocal loading is very difficult due to the tight coupling of the experienced psychological and physiological stress. However, there are some typical symptoms that can be objectively measured. Firstly, the pitch range of the voice will decrease. Pitch range indicates the possible pitches that can be spoken. When a voice is loaded, the upper pitch limit will decrease and the lower pitch limit will rise. Similarly, the volume range will decrease.

Secondly, an increase in the hoarseness and strain of a voice can often be heard. Unfortunately, both properties are difficult to measure objectively, and only perceptual evaluations can be performed.

== Voice care ==

Regularly, the question arises of how one should use one&#x27;s voice to minimize tiring in the vocal organs. This is encompassed in the study of vocology, the science and practice of voice habilitation. Basically, a normal, relaxed way of speech is the optimal method for voice production, in both speech and singing. Any excess force used when speaking will increase tiring. The speaker should drink enough water and the air humidity level should be normal or higher. No background noise should be present or, if not possible, the voice should be amplified. Smoking is discouraged.

== See also ==
* Human voice
* Vocal rest

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7939197" start="0" end="13" title="Vocal loading" label="Vocal loading"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200775" start="45" end="57" title="speech organ" label="speech organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532980" start="3766" end="3774" title="vocology" label="vocology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390" start="4222" end="4233" title="Human voice" label="Human voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7939200" start="4236" end="4246" title="Vocal rest" label="Vocal rest"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="32610" wikidata="Q12567" url="?curid=32610" title="Vikings">
<text>Vikings were seafaring people originally from Scandinavia (present-day Denmark, Norway, and Sweden), who from the late 8th to the late 11th centuries raided, pirated, traded, and settled throughout parts of Europe. They also voyaged as far as the Mediterranean, North Africa, the Middle East, Greenland, and Vinland (present-day Newfoundland in Canada, North America). In their countries of origin, and some of the countries they raided and settled in, this period is popularly known as the Viking Age, and the term &quot;Viking&quot; also commonly includes the inhabitants of the Scandinavian homelands as a whole. The Vikings had a profound impact on the early medieval history of northern and Eastern Europe, including the political and social development of England (and the English language) and parts of France, and established the embryo of Russia in Kievan Rus&#x27;.

Expert sailors and navigators of their characteristic longships, Vikings established Norse settlements and governments in the British Isles, the Faroe Islands, Iceland, Greenland, Normandy, and the Baltic coast, as well as along the Dnieper and Volga trade routes across Eastern Europe where they were also known as Varangians. The Normans, Norse-Gaels, Rus, Faroese, and Icelanders emerged from these Norse colonies. At one point, a group of Rus Vikings went so far south that, after briefly being bodyguards for the Byzantine emperor, they attacked the Byzantine city of Constantinople. Vikings also voyaged to Iran and Arabia. They were the first Europeans to reach North America, briefly settling in Newfoundland (Vinland). While spreading Norse culture to foreign lands, they simultaneously brought home slaves, concubines, and foreign cultural influences to Scandinavia, influencing the genetic and historical development of both. During the Viking Age, the Norse homelands were gradually consolidated from smaller kingdoms into three larger kingdoms: Denmark, Norway, and Sweden.

The Vikings spoke Old Norse and made inscriptions in runes. For most of the period, they followed the Old Norse religion, but later became Christians. The Vikings had their own laws, art, and architecture. Most Vikings were also farmers, fishermen, craftsmen, and traders. Popular conceptions of the Vikings often strongly differ from the complex, advanced civilisation of the Norsemen that emerges from archaeology and historical sources. A romanticised picture of Vikings as noble savages began to emerge in the 18th century; this developed and became widely propagated during the 19th-century Viking revival. Perceived views of the Vikings as violent, piratical heathens or as intrepid adventurers owe much to conflicting varieties of the modern Viking myth that had taken shape by the early 20th century. Current popular representations of the Vikings are typically based on cultural clichés and stereotypes, complicating modern appreciation of the Viking legacy. These representations are rarely accurate—for example, there is no evidence that they wore horned helmets, a costume element that first appeared in the 19th century.

==Etymology==
The etymology of the word &quot;Viking&quot; has been much debated by academics, with many origin theories being proposed. One theory suggests that the word&#x27;s origin is from the Old English &#x27;settlement&#x27; and the Old Frisian , attested almost 300 years prior. Another less popular theory is that came from the feminine &#x27;creek&#x27;, &#x27;inlet&#x27;, &#x27;small bay&#x27;. The Old Norse word &quot;víkingr&quot; does not appear in written sources until the 12th century, apart from a few runestones.

Another etymology that gained support in the early 21st century derives &quot;Viking&quot; from the same root as Old Norse &#x27;sea mile&#x27;, originally referring to the distance between two shifts of rowers, ultimately from the . This is found in the early Nordic verb *wikan &#x27;to turn&#x27;, similar to Old Icelandic &#x27;to move, to turn&#x27;, with &quot;well-attested nautical usages&quot;, according to Bernard Mees. This theory is better attested linguistically, and the term most likely predates the use of the sail by the Germanic peoples of northwestern Europe.
In the Middle Ages, &quot;viking&quot; came to refer to Scandinavian pirates or raiders. The earliest reference to in English sources is from the Épinal-Erfurt glossary (), about 93 years before the first known attack by Viking raiders in England. The glossary lists the Latin translation for as &#x27;pirate&#x27;. In Old English, the word appears in the Anglo-Saxon poem &quot;Widsith&quot;, probably from the 9th century. The word was not regarded as a reference to nationality, with other terms such as and &#x27;Danes&#x27; being used for that. In Asser&#x27;s Latin work &quot;The Life of King Alfred&quot;, the Danes are referred to as &#x27;pagans&#x27;; historian Janet Nelson states that became &quot;the Vikings&quot; in standard translations of this work, even though there is &quot;clear evidence&quot; that it was used as a synonym, while Eric Christiansen avers that it is a mistranslation made at the insistence of the publisher. The word does not occur in any preserved Middle English texts.

The word &quot;Viking&quot; was introduced into Modern English during the 18th-century Viking revival, at which point it acquired romanticised heroic overtones of &quot;barbarian warrior&quot; or noble savage. During the 20th century, the meaning of the term was expanded to refer not only to seaborne raiders from Scandinavia and other places settled by them (like Iceland and the Faroe Islands), but also any member of the culture that produced the raiders during the period from the late 8th to the mid-11th centuries, or more loosely from about 700 to as late as about 1100. As an adjective, the word is used to refer to ideas, phenomena, or artefacts connected with those people and their cultural life, producing expressions like &quot;Viking age&quot;, &quot;Viking culture&quot;, &quot;Viking art&quot;, &quot;Viking religion&quot;, &quot;Viking ship&quot; and so on.

==History==
===Viking Age===

The Viking Age in Scandinavian history is taken to have been the period from the earliest recorded raids by Norsemen in 793 until the Norman conquest of England in 1066. Vikings used the Norwegian Sea and Baltic Sea for sea routes to the south.

The Normans were descendants of those Vikings who had been given feudal overlordship of areas in northern France, namely the Duchy of Normandy, in the 10th century. In that respect, descendants of the Vikings continued to have an influence in northern Europe. Likewise, King Harold Godwinson, the last Anglo-Saxon king of England, had Danish ancestors. Two Vikings even ascended to the throne of England, with Sweyn Forkbeard claiming the English throne in 1013 until 1014 and his son Cnut the Great being king of England between 1016 and 1035.

Geographically, the Viking Age covered Scandinavian lands (modern Denmark, Norway and Sweden), as well as territories under North Germanic dominance, mainly the Danelaw, including Scandinavian York, the administrative centre of the remains of the Kingdom of Northumbria, parts of Mercia, and East Anglia. Viking navigators opened the road to new lands to the north, west and east, resulting in the foundation of independent settlements in the Shetland, Orkney, and Faroe Islands; Iceland; Greenland; and L&#x27;Anse aux Meadows, a short-lived settlement in Newfoundland, circa 1000. The Greenland settlement was established around 980, during the Medieval Warm Period, and its demise by the mid-15th century may have been partly due to climate change. The semi-legendary Viking Rurik is said to have taken control of Novgorod in 862, while his kinsman Oleg captured Kiev in 882 and made it the capital of the Rus. The Rurik dynasty would rule Russia until 1598.

As early as 839, when Swedish emissaries are first known to have visited Byzantium, Scandinavians served as mercenaries in the service of the Byzantine Empire. In the late 10th century, a new unit of the imperial bodyguard formed. Traditionally containing large numbers of Scandinavians, it was known as the Varangian Guard. The word &quot;Varangian&quot; may have originated in Old Norse, but in Slavic and Greek it could refer either to Scandinavians or Franks. In these years, Swedish men left to enlist in the Byzantine Varangian Guard in such numbers that a medieval Swedish law, the &quot;Västgötalagen&quot;, from Västergötland declared no-one could inherit while staying in &quot;Greece&quot;—the then Scandinavian term for the Byzantine Empire—to stop the emigration, especially as two other European courts simultaneously also recruited Scandinavians: Kievan Rus&#x27; and London 1018–1066 (the Þingalið).

There is archaeological evidence that Vikings reached Baghdad, the centre of the Islamic Empire. The Norse regularly plied the Volga with their trade goods: furs, tusks, seal fat for boat sealant, and slaves. Important trading ports during the period include Birka, Hedeby, Kaupang, Jorvik, Staraya Ladoga, Novgorod, and Kiev.

Scandinavian Norsemen explored Europe by its seas and rivers for trade, raids, colonisation, and conquest. In this period, voyaging from their homelands in Denmark, Norway and Sweden the Norsemen settled in the present-day Faroe Islands, Iceland, Norse Greenland, Newfoundland, the Netherlands, Germany, Normandy, Italy, Scotland, England, Wales, Ireland, the Isle of Man, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Ukraine, Russia and Turkey, as well as initiating the consolidation that resulted in the formation of the present-day Scandinavian countries.

In the Viking Age, the present-day nations of Norway, Sweden and Denmark did not exist, but the peoples who lived in what is now those countries were largely homogeneous and similar in culture and language, although somewhat distinct geographically. The names of Scandinavian kings are reliably known for only the later part of the Viking Age. After the end of the Viking Age, the separate kingdoms gradually acquired distinct identities as nations, which went hand-in-hand with their Christianisation. Thus, the end of the Viking Age for the Scandinavians also marks the start of their relatively brief Middle Ages.

====Intermixing with the Slavs====
Slavic and Viking tribes were &quot;closely linked, fighting one another, intermixing and trading&quot;. In the Middle Ages, goods were transferred from Slavic areas to Scandinavia, and Denmark could be considered &quot;a melting pot of Slavic and Scandinavian elements&quot;. Leszek Gardeła, of the Department of Scandinavian Languages and Literatures at the University of Bonn, posits that the presence of Slavs in Scandinavia is &quot;more significant than previously thought&quot;, while Mats Roslund states that &quot;the Slavs and their interaction with Scandinavia have not been adequately investigated&quot;.

A 10th-century grave of a warrior-woman in Denmark was long thought to belong to a Viking. However, new analyses suggest that the woman may have been a Slav from present-day Poland. The first king of the Swedes, Eric, was married to Gunhild, of the Polish House of Piast. Likewise, his son, Olof, fell in love with Edla, a Slavic woman, and took her as his &quot;frilla&quot; (concubine). They had a son and a daughter: Emund the Old, King of Sweden, and Astrid, Queen of Norway. Cnut the Great, King of Denmark, England and Norway, was the son of a daughter of Mieszko I of Poland, possibly the former Polish queen of Sweden, wife of Eric.

===Expansion===


Colonisation of Iceland by Norwegian Vikings began in the 9th century. The first source mentioning Iceland and Greenland is a papal letter from 1053. Twenty years later, they appear in the &quot;Gesta&quot; of Adam of Bremen. It was not until after 1130, when the islands had become Christianised, that accounts of the history of the islands were written from the point of view of the inhabitants in sagas and chronicles. The Vikings explored the northern islands and coasts of the North Atlantic, ventured south to North Africa, and brought slaves from the Baltic coast and European Russia.

They raided and pillaged, traded, acted as mercenaries and settled colonies over a wide area. Early Vikings probably returned home after their raids. Later in their history, they began to settle in other lands. Vikings under Leif Erikson, heir to Erik the Red, reached North America and set up short-lived settlements in present-day L&#x27;Anse aux Meadows, Newfoundland, Canada. This expansion occurred during the Medieval Warm Period.

Viking expansion into continental Europe was limited. Their realm was bordered by powerful tribes to the south. Early on, it was the Saxons who occupied Old Saxony, located in what is now Northern Germany. The Saxons were a fierce and powerful people and were often in conflict with the Vikings. To counter the Saxon aggression and solidify their own presence, the Danes constructed the huge defence fortification of Danevirke in and around Hedeby.

The Vikings witnessed the violent subduing of the Saxons by Charlemagne, in the thirty-year Saxon Wars of 772–804. The Saxon defeat resulted in their forced christening and the absorption of Old Saxony into the Carolingian Empire. Fear of the Franks led the Vikings to further expand Danevirke, and the defence constructions remained in use throughout the Viking Age and even up until 1864.

The southern coast of the Baltic Sea was ruled by the Obotrites, a federation of Slavic tribes loyal to the Carolingians and later the Frankish empire. The Vikings—led by King Gudfred—destroyed the Obotrite city of Reric on the southern Baltic coast in 808 AD and transferred the merchants and traders to Hedeby. This secured Viking supremacy in the Baltic Sea, which continued throughout the Viking Age.

Because of the expansion of the Vikings across Europe, a comparison of DNA and archeology undertaken by scientists at the University of Cambridge and University of Copenhagen suggested that the term &quot;Viking&quot; may have evolved to become &quot;a job description, not a matter of heredity&quot;, at least in some Viking bands.

====Motives====
The motives driving the Viking expansion are a topic of much debate. The concept that Vikings may have originally started sailing and raiding due to a need to seek out women from foreign lands was expressed in the 11th century by historian Dudo of Saint-Quentin in his semi-imaginary &quot;History of The Normans&quot;. As observed by Adam of Bremen, rich and powerful Viking men tended to have many wives and concubines; and these polygynous relationships may have led to a shortage of women available to the Viking male. Consequently, the average Viking man may have felt compelled to seek wealth and power to have the means to acquire suitable women. Several centuries after Dudo&#x27;s observations, scholars revived this idea, and over time it became a cliché among scholars of the Viking Age. Viking men would often buy or capture women and make them into their wives or concubines; such polygynous marriages increase male-male competition in society because they create a pool of unmarried men who are willing to engage in risky status-elevating and sex-seeking behaviors. The &quot;Annals of Ulster&quot; states that in 821 the Vikings plundered an Irish village and &quot;carried off a great number of women into captivity&quot;.

One common theory posits that Charlemagne &quot;used force and terror to Christianise all pagans&quot;, leading to baptism, conversion or execution, and as a result, Vikings and other pagans resisted and wanted revenge. Professor Rudolf Simek states that &quot;it is not a coincidence if the early Viking activity occurred during the reign of Charlemagne&quot;. The ascendance of Christianity in Scandinavia led to serious conflict, dividing Norway for almost a century. However, this time period did not commence until the 10th century. Norway was never subject to aggression by Charlemagne and the period of strife was due to successive Norwegian kings embracing Christianity after encountering it overseas.
Another explanation is that the Vikings exploited a moment of weakness in the surrounding regions. Contrary to Simek&#x27;s assertion, Viking raids occurred sporadically long before the reign of Charlemagne; but exploded in frequency and size after his death, when his empire fragmented into multiple much weaker entities. England suffered from internal divisions and was a relatively easy prey given the proximity of many towns to the sea or to navigable rivers. Lack of organised naval opposition throughout Western Europe allowed Viking ships to travel freely, raiding or trading as opportunity permitted. The decline in the profitability of old trade routes could also have played a role. Trade between Western Europe and the rest of Eurasia suffered a severe blow when the Western Roman Empire fell in the 5th century. The expansion of Islam in the 7th century had also affected trade with Western Europe.

Raids in Europe, including raids and settlements from Scandinavia, were not unprecedented and had occurred long before the Vikings arrived. The Jutes invaded the British Isles three centuries earlier, from Jutland during the Age of Migrations, before the Danes settled there. The Saxons and the Angles did the same, embarking from mainland Europe. The Viking raids were, however, the first to be documented by eyewitnesses, and they were much larger in scale and frequency than in previous times.

Vikings themselves were expanding; although their motives are unclear, historians believe that scarce resources or a lack of mating opportunities were a factor.

The slave trade was an important part of the Viking economy, with most slaves destined to Scandinavia, although many others were shipped east where they could be sold for large profits. The &quot;Highway of Slaves&quot; was a term for a route that the Vikings found to have a direct pathway from Scandinavia to Constantinople and Baghdad while traveling on the Baltic Sea. With the advancements of their ships during the 9th century, the Vikings were able to sail to Kievan Rus and some northern parts of Europe.

====Jomsborg====
Jomsborg was a semi-legendary Viking stronghold at the southern coast of the Baltic Sea (medieval Wendland, modern Pomerania), that existed between the 960s and 1043. Its inhabitants were known as Jomsvikings. Jomsborg&#x27;s exact location, or its existence, has not yet been established, though it is often maintained that Jomsborg was somewhere on the islands of the Oder estuary.

===End of the Viking Age===
While the Vikings were active beyond their Scandinavian homelands, Scandinavia was itself experiencing new influences and undergoing a variety of cultural changes.

==== Emergence of nation-states and monetary economies ====
By the late 11th century, royal dynasties were legitimised by the Catholic Church (which had had little influence in Scandinavia 300 years earlier) which were asserting their power with increasing authority and ambition, with the three kingdoms of Denmark, Norway, and Sweden taking shape. Towns appeared that functioned as secular and ecclesiastical administrative centres and market sites, and monetary economies began to emerge based on English and German models. By this time the influx of Islamic silver from the East had been absent for more than a century, and the flow of English silver had come to an end in the mid-11th century.

==== Assimilation into Christendom ====
Christianity had taken root in Denmark and Norway with the establishment of dioceses in the 11th century, and the new religion was beginning to organise and assert itself more effectively in Sweden. Foreign churchmen and native elites were energetic in furthering the interests of Christianity, which was now no longer operating only on a missionary footing, and old ideologies and lifestyles were transforming. By 1103, the first archbishopric was founded in Scandinavia, at Lund, Scania, then part of Denmark.

The assimilation of the nascent Scandinavian kingdoms into the cultural mainstream of European Christendom altered the aspirations of Scandinavian rulers and of Scandinavians able to travel overseas, and changed their relations with their neighbours.

One of the primary sources of profit for the Vikings had been slave-taking from other European peoples. The medieval Church held that Christians should not own fellow Christians as slaves, so chattel slavery diminished as a practice throughout northern Europe. This took much of the economic incentive out of raiding, though sporadic slaving activity continued into the 11th century. Scandinavian predation in Christian lands around the North and Irish Seas diminished markedly.

The kings of Norway continued to assert power in parts of northern Britain and Ireland, and raids continued into the 12th century, but the military ambitions of Scandinavian rulers were now directed toward new paths. In 1107, Sigurd I of Norway sailed for the eastern Mediterranean with Norwegian crusaders to fight for the newly established Kingdom of Jerusalem; the kings of Denmark and Sweden participated actively in the Baltic Crusades of the 12th and 13th centuries.

==Culture==
A variety of sources illuminate the culture, activities, and beliefs of the Vikings. Although they were generally a non-literate culture that produced no literary legacy, they had an alphabet and described themselves and their world on runestones. Most contemporary literary and written sources on the Vikings come from other cultures that were in contact with them. Since the mid-20th century, archaeological findings have built a more complete and balanced picture of the lives of the Vikings. The archaeological record is particularly rich and varied, providing knowledge of their rural and urban settlement, crafts and production, ships and military equipment, trading networks, as well as their pagan and Christian religious artefacts and practices.

===Literature and language===

The most important primary sources on the Vikings are contemporary texts from Scandinavia and regions where the Vikings were active. Writing in Latin letters was introduced to Scandinavia with Christianity, so there are few native documentary sources from Scandinavia before the late 11th and early 12th centuries. The Scandinavians did write inscriptions in runes, but these were usually very short and formulaic. Most contemporary documentary sources consist of texts written in Christian and Islamic communities outside Scandinavia, often by authors who had been negatively affected by Viking activity.

Later writings on the Vikings and the Viking Age can also be important for understanding them and their culture, although they need to be treated cautiously. After the consolidation of the church and the assimilation of Scandinavia and its colonies into mainstream medieval Christian culture in the 11th and 12th centuries, native written sources began to appear in Latin and Old Norse. In the Viking colony of Iceland, extraordinary vernacular literature blossomed in the 12th through 14th centuries, and many traditions connected with the Viking Age were written down for the first time in the Icelandic sagas. A literal interpretation of these medieval prose narratives about the Vikings and the Scandinavian past is doubtful, but many specific elements remain worthy of consideration, such as the great quantity of skaldic poetry attributed to court poets of the 10th and 11th centuries, the exposed family trees, the self-images, and the ethical values that are contained in these literary writings.

Indirectly, the Vikings have also left a window open onto their language, culture and activities, through many Old Norse place names and words found in their former sphere of influence. Some of these place names and words are still in direct use today, almost unchanged, and shed light on where they settled and what specific places meant to them. Examples include place names like Egilsay (from &quot;Eigils ey&quot; meaning Eigil&#x27;s Island), Ormskirk (from &quot;Ormr kirkja&quot; meaning Orms Church or Church of the Worm), Meols (from &quot;merl&quot; meaning Sand Dunes), Snaefell (Snow Fell), Ravenscar (Ravens Rock), Vinland (Land of Wine or Land of Winberry), Kaupanger (Market Harbour), Tórshavn (Thor&#x27;s Harbour), and the religious centre of Odense, meaning a place where Odin was worshipped. Viking influence is also evident in concepts like the present-day parliamentary body of the Tynwald on the Isle of Man.

Many common words in everyday English language stem from the Old Norse of the Vikings and give an opportunity to understand their interactions with the people and cultures of the British Isles. In the Northern Isles of Shetland and Orkney, Old Norse completely replaced the local languages and over time evolved into the now extinct Norn language. Some modern words and names only emerge and contribute to our understanding after a more intense research of linguistic sources from medieval or later records, such as York (Horse Bay), Swansea (Sveinn&#x27;s Isle) or some of the place names in Normandy like Tocqueville (Toki&#x27;s farm).

Linguistic and etymological studies continue to provide a vital source of information on the Viking culture, their social structure and history and how they interacted with the people and cultures they met, traded, attacked or lived with in overseas settlements. A lot of Old Norse connections are evident in the modern-day languages of Swedish, Norwegian, Danish, Faroese and Icelandic. Old Norse did not exert any great influence on the Slavic languages in the Viking settlements of Eastern Europe. It has been speculated that the reason for this was the great differences between the two languages, combined with the Rus Vikings&#x27; more peaceful businesses in these areas, and the fact that they were outnumbered. The Norse named some of the rapids on the Dnieper, but this can hardly be seen from modern names.

====Runestones====
The Norse of the Viking Age could read and write and used a non-standardised alphabet, called &quot;runor&quot;, built upon sound values. While there are few remains of runic writing on paper from the Viking era, thousands of stones with runic inscriptions have been found where Vikings lived. They are usually in memory of the dead, though not necessarily placed at graves. The use of &quot;runor&quot; survived into the 15th century, used in parallel with the Latin alphabet.

The runestones are unevenly distributed in Scandinavia: Denmark has 250 runestones, Norway has 50 while Iceland has none. Sweden has as many as between 1,700 and 2,500 depending on the definition. The Swedish district of Uppland has the highest concentration with as many as 1,196 inscriptions in stone, whereas Södermanland is second with 391.

The majority of runic inscriptions from the Viking period are found in Sweden. Many runestones in Scandinavia record the names of participants in Viking expeditions, such as the Kjula runestone that tells of extensive warfare in Western Europe and the Turinge Runestone, which tells of a war band in Eastern Europe. Swedish runestones are mostly from the 11th century and often contain rich inscriptions, such as the Färentuna, Hillersjö, Snottsta and Vreta stones, which provide extensive detail on the life of one family, Gerlög and Inga.

Other runestones mention men who died on Viking expeditions. Among them are the England runestones (Swedish: &quot;Englandsstenarna&quot;), which is a group of about 30 runestones in Sweden which refer to Viking Age voyages to England. They constitute one of the largest groups of runestones that mention voyages to other countries, and they are comparable in number only to the approximately 30 Greece Runestones and the 26 Ingvar Runestones, the latter referring to a Viking expedition to the Middle East. They were engraved in Old Norse with the Younger Futhark. 

The Jelling stones date from between 960 and 985. The older, smaller stone was raised by King Gorm the Old, the last pagan king of Denmark, as a memorial honouring Queen Thyre. The larger stone was raised by his son, Harald Bluetooth, to celebrate the conquest of Denmark and Norway and the conversion of the Danes to Christianity. It has three sides: one with an animal image; one with an image of the crucified Jesus Christ; and a third bearing the following inscription:

Runic inscriptions are also found outside Scandinavia, in places as far as Greenland and Istanbul. Runestones attest to voyages to locations such as Bath, Greece (how the Vikings referred to the Byzantium territories generally), Khwaresm, Jerusalem, Italy (as Langobardland), Serkland (i.e. the Muslim world), England (including London), and various places in Eastern Europe. Viking Age inscriptions have also been discovered on the Manx runestones on the Isle of Man. Not all runestones are from the Viking Age, such as the Kingittorsuaq Runestone in Greenland, which dates to the early 14th century.

====Runic alphabet usage in modern times====
The last known people to use the Runic alphabet were an isolated group of people known as the Elfdalians, that lived in the locality of Älvdalen in the Swedish province of Dalarna. They spoke the language of Elfdalian, the language unique to Älvdalen. The Elfdalian language differentiates itself from the other Scandinavian languages as it evolved much closer to Old Norse. The people of Älvdalen stopped using runes as late as the 1920s. Usage of runes therefore survived longer in Älvdalen than anywhere else in the world. The last known record of the Elfdalian Runes is from 1929; they are a variant of the Dalecarlian runes, runic inscriptions that were also found in Dalarna.

Traditionally regarded as a Swedish dialect, but by several criteria closer related to West Scandinavian dialects, Elfdalian is a separate language by the standard of mutual intelligibility. Although there is no mutual intelligibility, due to schools and public administration in Älvdalen being conducted in Swedish, native speakers are bilingual and speak Swedish at a native level. Residents in the area who speak only Swedish as their sole native language, neither speaking nor understanding Elfdalian, are also common. Älvdalen can be said to have had its own alphabet during the 17th and 18th century. Today there are about 2,000–3,000 native speakers of Elfdalian.

===Burial sites===

There are numerous burial sites associated with Vikings throughout Europe and their sphere of influence—in Scandinavia, the British Isles, Ireland, Greenland, Iceland, Faeroe Islands, Germany, Latvia, Estonia, Finland, Russia, etc. The burial practices of the Vikings were quite varied, from dug graves in the ground, to tumuli, sometimes including so-called ship burials.

According to written sources, most of the funerals took place at sea. Funerals involved either burial or cremation, depending on local customs. In the area that is now Sweden, cremations were predominant; in Denmark burial was more common; and in Norway both were common. Viking barrows are one of the primary sources of evidence for circumstances in the Viking Age. The items buried with the dead give some indication as to what was considered important to possess in the afterlife. It is unknown what mortuary services were given to dead children by the Vikings. Some of the most important burial sites for understanding the Vikings include:
* Norway: Oseberg; Gokstad; Borrehaugene.
* Sweden: Gettlinge gravfält; the cemeteries of Birka, a World Heritage Site; Valsgärde; Gamla Uppsala; Hulterstad gravfält, near Alby; Hulterstad, Öland, Gotland.
* Denmark: Jelling, a World Heritage Site; Lindholm Høje; Ladby ship; Mammen chamber tomb and hoard.
* Estonia: Salme ships – The largest and earliest Viking ship burial ground ever uncovered.
* Scotland: Port an Eilean Mhòir ship burial; Scar boat burial, Orkney.
* Faroe Islands: Hov.
* Iceland: Mosfellsbær in Capital Region; the boat burial in Vatnsdalur, Austur-Húnavatnssýsla.
* Greenland: Brattahlíð.
* Germany: Hedeby.
* Latvia: Grobiņa.
* Ukraine: the Black Grave.
* Russia: Gnezdovo, Staraya Ladoga.

===Ships===


There have been several archaeological finds of Viking ships of all sizes, providing knowledge of the craftsmanship that went into building them. There were many types of Viking ships, built for various uses; the best-known type is probably the longship. Longships were intended for warfare and exploration, designed for speed and agility, and were equipped with oars to complement the sail, making navigation possible independently of the wind. The longship had a long, narrow hull and shallow draught to facilitate landings and troop deployments in shallow water. Longships were used extensively by the Leidang, the Scandinavian defence fleets. The longship allowed the Norse to &quot;go Viking&quot;, which might explain why this type of ship has become almost synonymous with the concept of Vikings.

The Vikings built many unique types of watercraft, often used for more peaceful tasks. The &quot;knarr&quot; was a dedicated merchant vessel designed to carry cargo in bulk. It had a broader hull, a deeper draught, and a small number of oars (used primarily to manoeuvre in harbours and similar situations). One Viking innovation was the &#x27;beitass&#x27;, a spar mounted to the sail that allowed their ships to sail effectively against the wind. It was common for seafaring Viking ships to tow or carry a smaller boat to transfer crew and cargo from the ship to shore.

Ships were an integral part of Viking culture. They facilitated everyday transportation across seas and waterways, exploration of new lands, raids, conquests, and trade with neighbouring cultures. They also held a major religious importance. People with high status were sometimes buried in a ship along with animal sacrifices, weapons, provisions and other items, as evidenced by the buried vessels at Gokstad and Oseberg in Norway and the excavated ship burial at Ladby in Denmark. Ship burials were also practised by Vikings overseas, as evidenced by the excavations of the Salme ships on the Estonian island of Saaremaa.

Well-preserved remains of five Viking ships were excavated from Roskilde Fjord in the late 1960s, representing both the longship and the &quot;knarr&quot;. The ships were scuttled there in the 11th century to block a navigation channel and thus protect Roskilde, then the Danish capital, from a seaborne assault. The remains of these ships are on display at the Viking Ship Museum in Roskilde.

In 2019, archaeologists uncovered two Viking boat graves in Gamla Uppsala. They also discovered that one of the boats still holds the remains of a man, a dog, and a horse, along with other items. This has shed light on the death rituals of Viking communities in the region.

===Social structure===

Viking society was divided into the three socio-economic classes: &quot;thralls&quot;, &quot;karls&quot; and &quot;jarls&quot;. This is described vividly in the Eddic poem of &quot;Rígsþula&quot;, which also explains that it was the god Ríg—father of mankind also known as Heimdallr—who created the three classes. Archaeology has confirmed this social structure.

*The lowest ranking class were &quot;thralls&quot;, Old Norse for slaves, who comprised as much as a quarter of the population. Slavery was vital to Viking society – for everyday chores and large-scale construction, and also for trading and for the economy. &quot;Thralls&quot; were servants and workers on the farms and in larger households of the &quot;karls&quot; and &quot;jarls&quot;, and they were used for constructing fortifications, ramps, canals, mounds, roads and similar projects built by hard labour. According to the &quot;Rígsþula&quot;, &quot;thralls&quot; were despised and looked down upon. New &quot;thralls&quot; were supplied by either the sons and daughters of &quot;thralls&quot;, or were captured abroad by the Vikings on their raids in Europe. The &quot;thralls&quot; were brought back to Scandinavia by boat, used on location or in newer settlements to build needed structures, or sold, often to the Arabs in exchange for silver dirhams or silk.

*Free peasants (&quot;karlar&quot;). They owned farms, land and cattle, and engaged in chores like ploughing the fields, milking the cows, and building houses and wagons, but used thralls to make ends meet. Other names for &quot;karls&quot; were &quot;bonde&quot; or simply free men. Similar classes were &quot;churl&quot;s and &quot;huskarls&quot;.

*Aristocracy (&quot;jarlar&quot;). They were wealthy and owned large estates with huge longhouses, horses and many thralls. The &quot;thralls&quot; did most of the daily chores, while the &quot;jarls&quot; carried out administration, politics, hunting, and sports – they also visited other &quot;jarls&quot; or went abroad on expeditions. When a &quot;jarl&quot; died and was buried, his household thralls were sometimes sacrificially killed and buried next to him, as many excavations have revealed.

In daily life, there were many intermediate positions in the overall social structure and it appears that there was some social mobility between them. These details are unclear, but titles and positions like &quot;hauldr&quot;, &quot;thegn&quot;, and &quot;landmand&quot;, show mobility between the &quot;karls&quot; and the &quot;jarls&quot;.

Other social structures included the communities of &quot;félag&quot; in both the civil and the military spheres, to which its members (called &quot;félagi&quot;) were obliged. A félag could be centred around certain trades, a common ownership of a sea vessel or a military obligation under a specific leader. Members of the latter were referred to as &quot;drenge&quot;, one of the words for warrior. There were also official communities within towns and villages, the overall defence, religion, the legal system and the &quot;Things&quot;.

====Status of women====

Like elsewhere in medieval Europe, most women in Viking society were subordinate to their husbands and fathers and had little political power. However, written sources portray free Viking women as having independence and rights. Viking women generally appear to have had more freedom than women elsewhere, as illustrated in the Icelandic Grágás and the Norwegian Frostating laws and Gulating laws.

Most free Viking women were housewives, and a woman&#x27;s standing in society was linked to that of her husband. Marriage gave a woman a degree of economic security and social standing encapsulated in the title &quot;húsfreyja&quot; (lady of the house). Norse laws assert the housewife&#x27;s authority over the &#x27;indoor household&#x27;. She had the important roles of managing the farm&#x27;s resources, conducting business, as well as child-rearing, although some of this would be shared with her husband.

After the age of 20, an unmarried woman, referred to as &quot;maer&quot; and &quot;mey&quot;, reached legal majority and had the right to decide her place of residence and was regarded as her own person before the law. An exception to her independence was the right to choose a husband, as marriages were normally arranged by the family. The groom would pay a bride-price (&quot;mundr&quot;) to the bride&#x27;s family, and the bride brought assets into the marriage, as a dowry. A married woman could divorce her husband and remarry.

Concubinage was also part of Viking society, whereby a woman could live with a man and have children with him without marrying; such a woman was called a &quot;frilla&quot;. Usually she would be the mistress of a wealthy and powerful man who also had a wife. The wife had authority over the mistresses if they lived in her household. Through her relationship to a man of higher social standing, a concubine and her family could advance socially; although her position was less secure than that of a wife. There was little distinction made between children born inside or outside marriage: both had the right to inherit property from their parents, and there were no &quot;legitimate&quot; or &quot;illegitimate&quot; children. However, children born in wedlock had more inheritance rights than those born out of wedlock.

A woman had the right to inherit part of her husband&#x27;s property upon his death, and widows enjoyed the same independent status as unmarried women. The paternal aunt, paternal niece and paternal granddaughter, referred to as &quot;odalkvinna&quot;, all had the right to inherit property from a deceased man. A woman with no husband, sons or male relatives could inherit not only property but also the position as head of the family when her father or brother died. Such a woman was referred to as &quot;Baugrygr&quot;, and she exercised all the rights afforded to the head of a family clan, until she married, by which her rights were transferred to her new husband.

Women had religious authority and were active as priestesses (&quot;gydja&quot;) and oracles (&quot;sejdkvinna&quot;). They were active within art as poets (&quot;skalder&quot;) and rune masters, and as merchants and medicine women. There may also have been female entrepreneurs, who worked in textile production. Women may also have been active within military offices: the tales about shieldmaidens are unconfirmed, but some archaeological finds such as the Birka female Viking warrior may indicate that at least some women in military authority existed.

These liberties of the Viking women gradually disappeared after the introduction of Christianity, and from the late 13th century, they are no longer mentioned.

Examination of Viking Age burials suggests that women lived longer, and nearly all well past the age of 35, as compared to earlier times. Female graves from before the Viking Age in Scandinavia hold a proportionally large number of remains from women aged 20 to 35, presumably due to complications of childbirth.

Examination of skeletal remains also allows the relative health and nutritional status of boys and girls in the past to be reconstructed, using anthropometric techniques. Burials from Scandinavia and other European countries suggest that, in comparison with other societies at the time, female equality was remarkably high in rural Scandinavia. Females in the rural periphery of Nordic countries during the Viking period and the later Middle Ages had relatively high status, resulting in substantial nutritional and health resources being allocated to girls, enabling them to grow stronger and healthier.

====Appearance====
Scandinavian Vikings were similar in appearance to modern Scandinavians: &quot;their skin was fair and the hair color varied between blond, dark and reddish&quot;. Genetic studies suggest that people were mostly blond in what is now eastern Sweden, while red hair was mostly found in western Scandinavia. Most Viking men had shoulder-length hair and beards, and slaves (thralls) were usually the only men with short hair. The length varied according to personal preference and occupation. Men involved in warfare, for example, may have had slightly shorter hair and beards for practical reasons. Men in some regions bleached their hair a golden saffron colour. Females also had long hair, with girls often wearing it loose or braided, and married women often wearing it in a bun. The average height is estimated to have been for men and for women.

The three classes were easily recognisable by their appearance. Men and women of the Jarls were well groomed with neat hairstyles and expressed their wealth and status by wearing expensive clothes (often silk) and well-crafted jewellery like brooches, belt buckles, necklaces and arm rings. Almost all of the jewellery was crafted in specific designs unique to the Norse (see Viking art). Finger rings were seldom used and earrings were not used at all, as they were seen as a Slavic phenomenon. Most &quot;karls&quot; expressed similar tastes and hygiene, but in a more relaxed and inexpensive way.

Archaeological finds from Scandinavia and Viking settlements in the British Isles support the idea of the well-groomed and hygienic Viking. Burial with grave goods was a common practice in the Scandinavian world, through the Viking Age and well past the Christianisation of the Norse peoples. Within these burial sites and homesteads, combs, often made from antler, are a common find. The manufacturing of such antler combs was common, as at the Viking settlement at Dublin hundreds of examples of combs from the tenth-century have survived, suggesting that grooming was a common practice. The manufacture of such combs was also widespread throughout the Viking world, as examples of similar combs have been found at Viking settlements in Ireland, England, and Scotland. The combs share a common visual appearance as well, with the extant examples often decorated with linear, interlacing, and geometric motifs, or other forms of ornamentation depending on the comb&#x27;s period and type, but stylistically similar to Viking Age art. All levels of Viking age society appear to have groomed their hair, as hair combs have been found in common graves as well as in aristocratic ones.

====Farming and cuisine====
The sagas tell about the diet and cuisine of the Vikings, but first-hand evidence, like cesspits, kitchen middens and garbage dumps have proved to be of great value and importance. Undigested remains of plants from cesspits at Coppergate in York have provided much information in this respect. Overall, archaeo-botanical investigations have been undertaken increasingly in recent decades, as a collaboration between archaeologists and palaeoethno-botanists. This new approach sheds light on the agricultural and horticultural practices of the Vikings and their cuisine.
The combined information from various sources suggests a diverse cuisine and ingredients. Meat products of all kinds, such as cured, smoked and whey-preserved meat, sausages, and boiled or fried fresh meat cuts, were prepared and consumed. There were plenty of seafood, bread, porridges, dairy products, vegetables, fruits, berries and nuts. Alcoholic drinks like beer, mead, bjórr (a strong fruit wine) and, for the rich, imported wine, were served.

Certain livestock were typical and unique to the Vikings, including the Icelandic horse, Icelandic cattle, a plethora of sheep breeds, the Danish hen and the Danish goose. The Vikings in York mostly ate beef, mutton, and pork with small amounts of horse meat. Most of the beef and horse leg bones were found split lengthways, to extract the marrow. The mutton and swine were cut into leg and shoulder joints and chops. The frequent remains of pig skull and foot bones found on house floors indicate that brawn and trotters were also popular. Hens were kept for both their meat and eggs, and the bones of game birds such as black grouse, golden plover, wild ducks, and geese have also been found.

Seafood was important, in some places even more so than meat. Whales and walrus were hunted for food in Norway and the northwestern parts of the North Atlantic region, and seals were hunted nearly everywhere. Oysters, mussels and shrimp were eaten in large quantities and cod and salmon were popular fish. In the southern regions, herring was also important.

Milk and buttermilk were popular, both as cooking ingredients and drinks, but were not always available, even at farms. Milk came from cows, goats and sheep, with priorities varying from location to location, and fermented milk products like skyr or surmjölk were produced as well as butter and cheese.

Food was often salted and enhanced with spices, some of which were imported like black pepper, while others were cultivated in herb gardens or harvested in the wild. Home grown spices included caraway, mustard and horseradish as evidenced from the Oseberg ship burial or dill, coriander, and wild celery, as found in cesspits at Coppergate in York. Thyme, juniper berry, sweet gale, yarrow, rue and peppercress were also used and cultivated in herb gardens.
Vikings collected and ate fruits, berries and nuts. Apple (wild crab apples), plums and cherries were part of the diet, as were rose hips and raspberry, wild strawberry, blackberry, elderberry, rowan, hawthorn and various wild berries, specific to the locations. Hazelnuts were an important part of the diet in general and large amounts of walnut shells have been found in cities like Hedeby. The shells were used for dyeing, and it is assumed that the nuts were consumed.

The invention and introduction of the mouldboard plough revolutionised agriculture in Scandinavia in the early Viking Age and made it possible to farm even poor soils. In Ribe, grains of rye, barley, oat and wheat dated to the 8th century have been found and examined, and are believed to have been cultivated locally. Grains and flour were used for making porridges, some cooked with milk, some cooked with fruit and sweetened with honey, and also various forms of bread. Remains of bread from primarily Birka in Sweden were made of barley and wheat. It is unclear if the Norse leavened their breads, but their ovens and baking utensils suggest that they did. Flax was a very important crop for the Vikings: it was used for oil extraction, food consumption, and most importantly, the production of linen. More than 40% of all known textile recoveries from the Viking Age can be traced as linen. This suggests a much higher actual percentage, as linen is poorly preserved compared to wool, for example.

The quality of food for common people was not always particularly high. The research at Coppergate shows that the Vikings in York made bread from wholemeal flour—probably both wheat and rye—but with the seeds of cornfield weeds included. Corncockle (Agrostemma), would have made the bread dark-coloured, but the seeds are poisonous, and people who ate the bread might have become ill. Seeds of carrots, parsnip, and brassicas were also discovered, but they were poor specimens and tend to come from white carrots and bitter tasting cabbages. The rotary querns often used in the Viking Age left tiny stone fragments (often from basalt rock) in the flour, which when eaten wore down the teeth. The effects of this can be seen on skeletal remains from that period.

====Sports====
Sports were widely practised and encouraged by the Vikings. Sports that involved weapons training and developing combat skills were popular. These included spear and stone throwing, building and testing physical strength through wrestling (see glima), fist fighting, and stone lifting. In areas with mountains, mountain climbing was practised as a sport. Agility and balance were built and tested by running and jumping for sport, and there is mention of a sport that involved jumping from oar to oar on the outside of a ship&#x27;s railing as it was being rowed. Swimming was a popular sport – Snorri Sturluson describes three types: diving, long-distance swimming, and a contest in which two swimmers try to dunk one another. Children often participated in some of the sport disciplines, and women have also been mentioned as swimmers, although it is unclear if they took part in competitions. King Olaf Tryggvason was acclaimed for his skill in both mountain climbing and oar-jumping, and reputedly excelled in the art of knife juggling as well. Skiing and ice skating were the principal winter sports, and also provided transport on snow and ice for adults.

Horse fighting was practised for sport, although the rules are unclear. It appears to have involved two stallions pitted against each other, within smell and sight of fenced-off mares. Whatever the rules were, the fights often resulted in the death of one of the stallions.

Icelandic sources often mention &quot;knattleik&quot;, a ball game similar to hockey, played with a bat and a small hard ball, usually on a smooth surface of ice. Popular with both adults and children, it was a rugged game that often led to injuries. Knattleik appears to have been played only in Iceland, where it attracted many spectators, as did horse fighting.

Hunting was practiced as a sport only in Denmark, where it was not an essential food source. Deer and hares were hunted for meat, along with partridges and sea birds, while foxes were hunted to stop their killing of farm animals and for their furs. Spears, bows, and later crossbows, were the weapons used; stalking was the most common method, although game was also chased with dogs. Numerous kinds of snares and traps were used as well.

====Games and entertainment====

Archaeological finds and written sources indicate that the Vikings participated in social gatherings and festivities. Board games and dice games were a popular pastime. Game boards were made of ornately carved wood, with gaming pieces fashioned mostly from wood, bone, or stone. Pieces were also made of glass, amber, and antler, along with materials such as walrus tusk and ivory from foreign sources. The Vikings played several types of &quot;tafl&quot; games; &quot;hnefatafl&quot;, &quot;nitavl&quot; (nine men&#x27;s morris) and the less common &quot;kvatrutafl&quot;.

&quot;Hnefatafl&quot; was probably the oldest type of board game played in medieval Scandinavia. The archaeological record indicates that &quot;hnefatafl&quot; was popular by the early medieval period, with the Vikings introducing it to England, Scotland, Wales, and Ireland. The Ockelbo Runestone shows two men possibly playing &quot;hnefatafl&quot;, and one saga suggests that dice games involved gambling.

Beer and mead were served on festive occasions, where music was played, poetry was recited, and stories were told. Music was considered an art form and musical skill was viewed as suitable for a cultivated man. The Vikings are known to have played instruments including harps, lutes, lyres and fiddles.

===Cultural assimilation===
Elements of a Scandinavian identity and practices were maintained in settler societies, but they could be quite distinct as the groups assimilated into neighbouring societies. Assimilation to the Frankish culture in Normandy for example was rapid. Links to a Viking identity remained longer in the remote islands of Iceland and the Faroes.

==Weapons and warfare==

Knowledge about the arms and armour of the Viking age is based on archaeological finds, pictorial representation, and to some extent on the accounts in the Norse sagas and Norse laws recorded in the 13th century. According to custom, all free Norse men were required to own weapons and were permitted to carry them at all times. These arms indicated a Viking&#x27;s social status: a wealthy Viking had a complete ensemble of a helmet, shield, mail shirt, and sword. However, swords were rarely used in battle; they were probably not sturdy enough for combat and most likely only used as symbolic or decorative items.

A typical &quot;bóndi&quot; (freeman) was more likely to fight with a spear and shield, and most also carried a seax as a utility knife and side-arm. Bows were used in the opening stages of land battles and at sea, but they tended to be considered less &quot;honourable&quot; than melee weapons. Vikings were relatively unusual for the time in their use of axes as a main battle weapon. The Húscarls, the elite guard of King Cnut (and later of King Harold II) were armed with two-handed axes that could split shields or metal helmets with ease.

The warfare and violence of the Vikings were often motivated and fuelled by their beliefs in Norse religion, focusing on Thor and Odin, the gods of war and death.

Violence was common in Viking Age Norway. An examination of Norwegian human remains from the Viking Age found that 72% of the examined males and 42% of the examined females had suffered weapon-related injuries. Violence was less common in Viking Age Denmark, where society was more centralized and complex than the clan-based Norwegian society.

The Viking warrior is often associated with violent fits of rage and frenzied fighting in modern popular culture, as reflected in meanings attached to the words &quot;berserkergang&quot; and &quot;berserker&quot; that would not have been the meanings understood by medieval Norse society. Such a fighting style may have been deployed intentionally by shock troops, and it has been proposed that the berserk-state may have been induced by consuming large amounts of alcohol, or through ingestion of materials with psychoactive properties, such as the solanaceous plant Hyoscyamus niger, as speculated by Karsten Fatur or by consumption of the hallucinogenic mushroom &quot;Amanita muscaria&quot;, as first hypothesised by the Swedish theologian Samuel Ødman in 1784 and later by the botanist F.C. Schübeler in 1885. The Norwegian battlefield archaeologist Are Skarstein Kolberg asserts that &quot;...Ödman&#x27;s hypothesis is not supported by the saga literature or by the archaeological record&quot;, and according to Roderick Dale, there is no evidence for it from the Viking Age or from Old Norse literature.

==Trade==

The Vikings established and engaged in extensive trading networks throughout the known world and had a profound influence on the economic development of Europe and Scandinavia.

Other than in such trading centres as Ribe Hedeby in Denmark, Scandinavia was unfamiliar with the use of coinage. Therefore, its economy was based on bullion; that is, the purity and weight of precious metals used in exchange. Silver was the precious metal most commonly used, although gold was also used. Traders carried small portable scales, enabling them to measure weight precisely, which allowed an accurate medium of exchange, even lacking a regular coinage.

===Goods===
Organised trade covered everything from ordinary items in bulk to exotic luxury products. The Viking ship designs, like that of the &quot;knarr&quot;, were an important factor in their success as merchants. Imported goods from other cultures included:
* Spices were obtained from Chinese and Persian traders, who met with the Viking traders in Russia. Vikings used homegrown spices and herbs like caraway, thyme, horseradish and mustard, but imported cinnamon.
* Glass was much prized by the Norse. The imported glass was often made into beads for decoration and these have been found in the thousands. Åhus in Scania and the old market town of Ribe were major centres of glass bead production.
* Silk was a very important commodity obtained from Byzantium (modern day Istanbul) and China. It was valued by many European cultures of the time, and the Vikings used it to indicate status such as wealth and nobility. Many of the archaeological finds in Scandinavia include silk.
* Wine was imported from France and Germany as a drink of the wealthy, augmenting the regular mead and beer.
To counter these valuable imports, the Vikings exported a large variety of goods. These goods included:

* Amber—the fossilised resin of the pine tree—was frequently found on the North Sea and Baltic coastline. It was worked into beads and ornamental objects, before being traded. (See also the Amber Road).
* Fur was also exported as it provided warmth. This included the furs of pine martens, foxes, bears, otters and beavers.
* Cloth and wool. The Vikings were skilled spinners and weavers and exported woollen cloth of a high quality.
* Down was collected and exported. The Norwegian west coast supplied eiderdowns and sometimes feathers were bought from the Samis. Down was used for bedding and quilted clothing. Fowling on the steep slopes and cliffs was dangerous work and was often lethal.
* Slaves. The Muslim writer Ahmad ibn Rustah described how the Viking Rus&#x27; had &quot;no cultivated fields and lived by pillaging alone&quot;. They were ruthless in their enslaving of many people. Most of the slaves were taken to Scandinavia, but others were sold in the markets of Atil that fed the demand in many cities of Asia and North Africa. The surge in the slave trade of the 9th century is reflected in the amount of coins minted in Central Asia, that have been unearthed in Scandinavia.

Other exports included weapons, walrus ivory, wax, salt and cod. As one of the more exotic exports, hunting birds were sometimes provided from Norway to the European aristocracy, from the 10th century.

Many of these goods were also traded within the Viking world itself, as well as goods such as soapstone and whetstone. Soapstone was traded with the Norse on Iceland and in Jutland, who used it for pottery. Whetstones were traded and used for sharpening weapons, tools and knives. There are indications from Ribe and surrounding areas, that the extensive medieval trade with oxen and cattle from Jutland (see Ox Road), reach as far back as c. 720 AD. This trade satisfied the Vikings&#x27; need for leather and meat to some extent, and perhaps hides for parchment production on the European mainland. Wool was also very important as a domestic product for the Vikings, to produce warm clothing for the cold Scandinavian and Nordic climate, and for sails. Sails for Viking ships required large amounts of wool, as evidenced by experimental archaeology. There are archaeological signs of organised textile productions in Scandinavia, reaching as far back as the early Iron Ages. Artisans and craftsmen in the larger towns were supplied with antlers from organised hunting with large-scale reindeer traps in the far north. They were used as raw material for making everyday utensils like combs.

==Legacy==

===English language===
The Vikings heavily influenced Old English to contribute to Modern English. Nouns lost their grammatical gender and grammatical conjugation was reduced to a simple &quot;-s&quot; added to the third person verb. Preposition stranding also entered English, which is permitted in Old Norse.

===Medieval perceptions===

In England the Viking Age began dramatically on 8 June 793 when Norsemen destroyed the abbey on the island of Lindisfarne. The devastation of Northumbria&#x27;s Holy Island shocked and alerted the royal courts of Europe to the Viking presence. &quot;Never before has such an atrocity been seen&quot;, declared the Northumbrian scholar Alcuin of York. Medieval Christians in Europe were totally unprepared for the Viking incursions and could find no explanation for their arrival and the accompanying suffering they experienced at their hands save the &quot;Wrath of God&quot;. More than any other single event, the attack on Lindisfarne demonised perception of the Vikings for the next twelve centuries. Not until the 1890s did scholars outside Scandinavia begin to seriously reassess the achievements of the Vikings, recognising their artistry, technological skills, and seamanship.

Norse Mythology, sagas, and literature tell of Scandinavian culture and religion through tales of heroic and mythological heroes. Early transmission of this information was primarily oral, and later texts relied on the writings and transcriptions of Christian scholars, including the Icelanders Snorri Sturluson and Sæmundur fróði. Many of these sagas were written in Iceland, and most of them, even if they had no Icelandic provenance, were preserved there after the Middle Ages due to the continued interest of Icelanders in Norse literature and legal codes.

The 200-year Viking influence on European history is filled with tales of plunder and colonisation, and the majority of these chronicles came from western European witnesses and their descendants. Less common, although equally relevant, are references to Vikings in chronicles that originated in the east, including the Nestor chronicles, Novgorod chronicles, Ibn Fadlan chronicles, Ibn Rusta chronicles, and brief mentions by Photius, patriarch of Constantinople, regarding the first Viking attack on the Byzantine Empire. Other chroniclers of Viking history include Adam of Bremen, who wrote, in the fourth volume of his &quot;Gesta Hammaburgensis Ecclesiae Pontificum&quot;, &quot;[t]here is much gold here (in Zealand), accumulated by piracy. These pirates, which are called &quot;wichingi&quot; by their own people, and &quot;Ascomanni&quot; by our own people, pay tribute to the Danish king.&quot; In 991, the Battle of Maldon between Viking raiders and the inhabitants of Maldon in Essex was commemorated with a poem of the same name.

===Post-medieval perceptions===

Early modern publications, dealing with what is now called Viking culture, appeared in the 16th century, e.g. &quot;Historia de gentibus septentrionalibus&quot; (&quot;History of the northern people&quot;) of Olaus Magnus (1555), and the first edition of the 13th-century &quot;Gesta Danorum&quot; (&quot;Deeds of the Danes&quot;), by Saxo Grammaticus, in 1514. The pace of publication increased during the 17th century with Latin translations of the Edda (notably Peder Resen&#x27;s &quot;Edda Islandorum&quot; of 1665).

In Scandinavia, the 17th-century Danish scholars Thomas Bartholin and Ole Worm and the Swede Olaus Rudbeck used runic inscriptions and Icelandic sagas as historical sources. An important early British contributor to the study of the Vikings was George Hickes, who published his &quot;Linguarum vett. septentrionalium thesaurus&quot; (&quot;Dictionary of the Old Northern Languages&quot;) in 1703–05. During the 18th century, British interest and enthusiasm for Iceland and early Scandinavian culture grew dramatically, expressed in English translations of Old Norse texts and in original poems that extolled the supposed Viking virtues.

The word &quot;viking&quot; was first popularised at the beginning of the 19th century by Erik Gustaf Geijer in his poem, &quot;The Viking&quot;. Geijer&#x27;s poem did much to propagate the new romanticised ideal of the Viking, which had little basis in historical fact. The renewed interest of Romanticism in the Old North had contemporary political implications. The Geatish Society, of which Geijer was a member, popularised this myth to a great extent. Another Swedish author who had great influence on the perception of the Vikings was Esaias Tegnér, a member of the Geatish Society, who wrote a modern version of &quot;Friðþjófs saga hins frœkna&quot;, which became widely popular in the Nordic countries, the United Kingdom, and Germany.
Fascination with the Vikings reached a peak during the so-called Viking revival in the late 18th and 19th centuries as a form of Romantic nationalism. In Britain this was called Septentrionalism, in Germany &quot;Wagnerian&quot; pathos, and in the Scandinavian countries Scandinavism. Pioneering 19th-century scholarly editions of the Viking Age began to reach a small readership in Britain. Archaeologists began to dig up Britain&#x27;s Viking past, and linguistic enthusiasts started to identify the Viking-Age origins of rural idioms and proverbs. The new dictionaries of the Old Norse language enabled the Victorians to grapple with the primary Icelandic sagas.

Until recently, the history of the Viking Age was largely based on Icelandic sagas, the history of the Danes written by Saxo Grammaticus, the &quot;Primary Chronicle&quot;, and &quot;Cogad Gáedel re Gallaib&quot;. Few scholars still accept these texts as reliable sources, as historians now rely more on archaeology and numismatics, disciplines that have made valuable contributions toward understanding the period.

====In 20th-century politics====
The romanticised idea of the Vikings constructed in scholarly and popular circles in northwestern Europe in the 19th and early 20th centuries was a potent one, and the figure of the Viking became a familiar and malleable symbol in different contexts in the politics and political ideologies of 20th-century Europe. In Normandy, which had been settled by Vikings, the Viking ship became an uncontroversial regional symbol. In Germany, awareness of Viking history in the 19th century had been stimulated by the border dispute with Denmark over Schleswig-Holstein and the use of Scandinavian mythology by Richard Wagner. The idealised view of the Vikings appealed to Germanic supremacists who transformed the figure of the Viking in accordance with the ideology of a Germanic master race. Building on the linguistic and cultural connections between Norse-speaking Scandinavians and other Germanic groups in the distant past, Scandinavian Vikings were portrayed in Nazi Germany as a pure Germanic type. The cultural phenomenon of Viking expansion was re-interpreted for use as propaganda to support the extreme militant nationalism of the Third Reich, and ideologically informed interpretations of Viking paganism and the Scandinavian use of runes were employed in the construction of Nazi mysticism. Other political organisations of the same ilk, such as the former Norwegian fascist party Nasjonal Samling, similarly appropriated elements of the modern Viking cultural myth in their symbolism and propaganda.

Soviet and earlier Slavophile historians emphasised a Slavic rooted foundation in contrast to the Normanist theory of the Vikings conquering the Slavs and founding the Kievan Rus&#x27;. They accused Normanist theory proponents of distorting history by depicting the Slavs as undeveloped primitives. In contrast, Soviet historians stated that the Slavs laid the foundations of their statehood long before the Norman/Viking raids, while the Norman/Viking invasions only served to hinder the historical development of the Slavs. They argued that Rus&#x27; composition was Slavic and that Rurik and Oleg&#x27;s success was rooted in their support from within the local Slavic aristocracy.. After the dissolution of the USSR, Novgorod acknowledged its Viking history by incorporating a Viking ship into its logo.

=== In modern popular culture ===


Led by the operas of German composer Richard Wagner, such as &quot;Der Ring des Nibelungen&quot;, Vikings and the Romanticist Viking Revival have inspired many creative works. These have included novels directly based on historical events, such as Frans Gunnar Bengtsson&#x27;s &quot;The Long Ships&quot; (which was also released as a 1963 film), and historical fantasies such as the film &quot;The Vikings&quot;, Michael Crichton&#x27;s &quot;Eaters of the Dead&quot; (movie version called &quot;The 13th Warrior&quot;), and the comedy film &quot;Erik the Viking&quot;. The vampire Eric Northman, in the HBO TV series &quot;True Blood&quot;, was a Viking prince before being turned into a vampire. Vikings appear in several books by the Danish American writer Poul Anderson, while British explorer, historian, and writer Tim Severin authored a trilogy of novels in 2005 about a young Viking adventurer Thorgils Leifsson, who travels around the world.

In 1962, American comic book writer Stan Lee and his brother Larry Lieber, together with Jack Kirby, created the Marvel Comics superhero Thor, which they based on the Norse god of the same name. The character is featured in the 2011 Marvel Studios film &quot;Thor&quot; and its sequels. The character also appears in the 2012 film &quot;The Avengers&quot; and its associated animated series.

The appearance of Vikings within popular media and television has seen a resurgence in recent decades, especially with the History Channel&#x27;s series &quot;Vikings&quot; (2013), directed by Michael Hirst. The show has a loose grounding in historical facts and sources, but bases itself more so on literary sources, such as fornaldarsaga Ragnars saga loðbrókar, itself more legend than fact, and Old Norse Eddic and Skaldic poetry. The events of the show frequently make references to the &quot;Völuspá&quot;, an Eddic poem describing the creation of the world, often directly referencing specific lines of the poem in the dialogue. The show portrays some of the social realities of the medieval Scandinavian world, such as slavery and the greater role of women within Viking society. The show also addresses the topics of gender equity in Viking society with the inclusion of shield maidens through the character Lagertha, also based on a legendary figure. Recent archaeological interpretations and osteological analyses of previous excavations of Viking burials have given support to the idea of the Viking woman warrior, namely the excavation and DNA study of the Birka female Viking warrior, within recent years. However, the conclusions remain contentious.

Vikings have served as an inspiration for numerous video games, such as &quot;The Lost Vikings&quot; (1993), &quot;Age of Mythology&quot; (2002), and &quot;For Honor&quot; (2017). All three Vikings from &quot;The Lost Vikings&quot; series—Erik the Swift, Baleog the Fierce, and Olaf the Stout—appeared as a playable hero in the crossover title &quot;Heroes of the Storm&quot; (2015). &quot;The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim&quot; (2011) is an action role-playing video game heavily inspired by Viking culture. Vikings are the lead focus of the 2020 video game &quot;Assassin&#x27;s Creed Valhalla&quot;, which is set in 873 AD, and recounts an alternative history of the Viking invasion of Britain.

Modern reconstructions of Viking mythology have shown a persistent influence in late 20th- and early 21st-century popular culture in some countries, inspiring comics, movies, television series, role-playing games, computer games, and music, including Viking metal, a subgenre of heavy metal music.

Since the 1960s, there has been rising enthusiasm for historical reenactment. While the earliest groups had little claim for historical accuracy, the seriousness and accuracy of reenactors has increased. The largest such groups include The Vikings and Regia Anglorum, though many smaller groups exist in Europe, North America, New Zealand, and Australia. Many reenactor groups participate in live-steel combat, and a few have Viking-style ships or boats.

The Minnesota Vikings of the National Football League are so-named owing to the large Scandinavian population in the US state of Minnesota.

During the banking boom of the first decade of the twenty-first century, Icelandic financiers came to be styled as &quot;útrásarvíkingar&quot; (roughly &#x27;raiding Vikings&#x27;).

===Experimental archaeology===
Experimental archaeology of the Viking Age is a flourishing branch and several places have been dedicated to this technique, such as Jorvik Viking Centre in the United Kingdom, Sagnlandet Lejre and in Denmark, Foteviken Museum in Sweden or Lofotr Viking Museum in Norway. Viking-age reenactors have undertaken experimental activities such as iron smelting and forging using Norse techniques at Norstead in Newfoundland for example.

On 1 July 2007, the reconstructed Viking ship &quot;Skuldelev 2&quot;, renamed &quot;Sea Stallion&quot;, began a journey from Roskilde to Dublin. The remains of that ship and four others were discovered during a 1962 excavation in the Roskilde Fjord. Tree-ring analysis has shown the ship was built of oak in the vicinity of Dublin in about 1042. Seventy multinational crew members sailed the ship back to its home, and &quot;Sea Stallion&quot; arrived outside Dublin&#x27;s Custom House on 14 August 2007. The purpose of the voyage was to test and document the seaworthiness, speed, and manoeuvrability of the ship on the rough open sea and in coastal waters with treacherous currents. The crew tested how the long, narrow, flexible hull withstood the tough ocean waves. The expedition also provided valuable new information on Viking longships and society. The ship was built using Viking tools, materials, and much of the same methods as the original ship.

Other vessels, often replicas of the Gokstad ship (full- or half-scale) or Skuldelev have been built and tested as well. The &quot;Snorri&quot; (a Skuldelev I Knarr), was sailed from Greenland to Newfoundland in 1998.

===Common misconceptions===
====Horned helmets====
Apart from two or three representations of (ritual) helmets—with protrusions that may be either stylised ravens, snakes, or horns—no depiction of the helmets of Viking warriors, and no preserved helmet, has horns. The formal, close-quarters style of Viking combat (either in shield walls or aboard &quot;ship islands&quot;) would have made horned helmets cumbersome and hazardous to the warrior&#x27;s own side.

Historians therefore believe that Viking warriors did not wear horned helmets; whether such helmets were used in Scandinavian culture for other, ritual purposes, remains unproven. The general misconception that Viking warriors wore horned helmets was partly promulgated by the 19th-century enthusiasts of &quot;Götiska Förbundet&quot;, founded in 1811 in Stockholm. They promoted the use of Norse mythology as the subject of high art and other ethnological and moral aims.

The Vikings were often depicted with winged helmets and in other clothing taken from Classical antiquity, especially in depictions of Norse gods. This was done to legitimise the Vikings and their mythology by associating it with the Classical world, which had long been idealised in European culture.

The latter-day &quot;mythos&quot; created by national romantic ideas blended the Viking Age with aspects of the Nordic Bronze Age some 2,000 years earlier. Horned helmets from the Bronze Age were shown in petroglyphs and appeared in archaeological finds (see Bohuslän and Vikso helmets). They were probably used for ceremonial purposes.
Cartoons like &quot;Hägar the Horrible&quot; and &quot;Vicky the Viking&quot;, and sports kits such as those of the Minnesota Vikings and Canberra Raiders have perpetuated the myth of the horned helmet.

Viking helmets were conical, made from hard leather with wood and metallic reinforcements for regular troops. The iron helmet with mask and mail was for the chieftains, based on the previous Vendel-age helmets from central Sweden. The only original Viking helmet discovered is the Gjermundbu helmet, found in Norway. This helmet is made of iron and has been dated to the 10th century.

====Barbarity====

The image of wild-haired, dirty savages sometimes associated with the Vikings in popular culture is a distorted picture of reality. Viking tendencies were often misreported, and the work of Adam of Bremen, among others, told largely disputable tales of Viking savagery and uncleanliness.

====Use of skulls as drinking vessels====
There is no evidence that Vikings drank out of the skulls of vanquished enemies. This was a misconception based on a passage in the skaldic poem Krákumál speaking of heroes drinking from &quot;ór bjúgviðum hausa&quot; (branches of skulls). This was a reference to drinking horns, but was mistranslated in the 17th century as referring to the skulls of the slain.

==Genetic legacy==
Margaryan et al. 2020 analysed 442 Viking world individuals from various archaeological sites in Europe. They were found to be closely related to modern Scandinavians. The Y-DNA composition of the individuals in the study was also similar to that of modern Scandinavians. The most common Y-DNA haplogroup was I1 (95 samples), followed by R1b (84 samples) and R1a, especially (but not exclusively) of the Scandinavian R1a-Z284 subclade (61 samples). The study showed what many historians have hypothesised: that it was common for Norseman settlers to marry foreign women. Some individuals from the study, such as those found in Foggia, displayed typical Scandinavian Y-DNA haplogroups but also southern European autosomal ancestry, suggesting that they were the descendants of Viking settler males and local women. The five individual samples from Foggia were likely Normans. The same pattern of a combination of Scandinavian Y-DNA and local autosomal ancestry is seen in other samples from the study, for example Varangians buried near lake Ladoga and Vikings in England, suggesting that Viking men had married into local families in those places too.

The study found evidence of a Swedish influx into Estonia and Finland; and Norwegian influx into Ireland, Iceland and Greenland during the Viking Age. However, the authors commented &quot;Viking Age Danish-like ancestry in the British Isles cannot be distinguished from that of the Angles and Saxons, who migrated in the fifth to sixth centuries AD from Jutland and northern Germany&quot;.

Margaryan et al. 2020 examined the skeletal remains of 42 individuals from the Salme ship burials in Estonia. The skeletal remains belonged to warriors killed in battle who were later buried together with numerous valuable weapons and armour. DNA testing and isotope analysis revealed that the men came from central Sweden.

Female descent studies show evidence of Norse descent in areas closest to Scandinavia, such as the Shetland and Orkney islands. Inhabitants of lands farther away show most Norse descent in the male Y-chromosome lines.

A specialised genetic and surname study in Liverpool showed marked Norse heritage: up to 50% of males of families that lived there before the years of industrialisation and population expansion. High percentages of Norse inheritance—tracked through the R-M420 haplotype—were also found among males in the Wirral and West Lancashire. This was similar to the percentage of Norse inheritance found among males in the Orkney Islands.

Recent research suggests that the Celtic warrior Somerled, who drove the Vikings out of western Scotland and was the progenitor of Clan Donald, may have been of Viking descent, a member of haplogroup R-M420.

Margaryan et al. 2020 examined an elite warrior burial from Bodzia (Poland) dated to 1010–1020 AD. The cemetery in Bodzia is exceptional in terms of Scandinavian and Kievian Rus links. The Bodzia man (sample VK157, or burial E864/I) was not a simple warrior from the princely retinue, but he belonged to the princely family himself. His burial is the richest one in the whole cemetery. Moreover, strontium analysis of his teeth enamel shows he was not local.  It is assumed that he came to Poland with the Prince of Kiev, Sviatopolk the Accursed, and met a violent death in combat. This corresponds to the events of 1018 AD when Sviatopolk himself disappeared after having retreated from Kiev to Poland. It cannot be excluded that the Bodzia man was Sviatopolk himself, as the genealogy of the Rurikids at this period is extremely sketchy and the dates of birth of many princes of this dynasty may be quite approximative. The Bodzia man carried haplogroup I1-S2077 and had both Scandinavian ancestry and Russian admixture.

==See also==

* Faroese people
* Geats
* Gotlander
* Gutasaga
* Oeselians
* Proto-Norse language
* Scandinavian prehistory
* Swedes (Germanic tribe)
* Ushkuiniks, Novgorod&#x27;s privateers
* Viking activity in the British Isles
* Viking raid warfare and tactics
* Wokou
==Notes==

==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==
* Blanck, Dag. &quot;The Transnational Viking: The Role of the Viking in Sweden, the United States, and Swedish America.&quot; &quot;Journal of Transnational American Studies&quot; 7.1 (2016). online 
* 
* 
* 
* . online 
* 
* 
==External links==


* Vikings – View videos at The History Channel
* Copenhagen-Portal – The Danish Vikings
* BBC: History of Vikings
* Borg Viking museum, Norway
* Ibn Fadlan and the Rusiyyah, by James E. Montgomery, with full translation of Ibn Fadlan
* Reassessing what we collect website – Viking and Danish London History of Viking and Danish London with objects and images
* Wawm, Andrew, The Viking Revival – BBC Online, Ancient History in Depth (updated 17 February 2011)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="0" end="7" title="Vikings" label="Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="46" end="57" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="71" end="78" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="80" end="86" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="92" end="98" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="247" end="260" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="262" end="274" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="280" end="291" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="293" end="302" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q192823" start="308" end="315" title="Vinland" label="Vinland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="329" end="341" title="Newfoundland" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="345" end="351" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="353" end="366" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q213649" start="491" end="501" title="Viking Age" label="Viking Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q202763" start="657" end="671" title="Early Middle Ages" label="early medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q27479" start="683" end="691" title="Northern Europe" label="northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="696" end="710" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="762" end="769" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="810" end="816" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="848" end="854" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108445" start="858" end="874" title="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;" label="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q897611" start="931" end="939" title="longship" label="longship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053398" start="1003" end="1016" title="Viking activity in the British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="1022" end="1035" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725768" start="1037" end="1044" title="Settlement of Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1046" end="1055" title="History of Greenland#Norse settlement" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918835" start="1057" end="1065" title="History of Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="1075" end="1087" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q378346" start="1110" end="1117" title="Trade route from the Varangians to the Greeks" label="Dnieper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661187" start="1122" end="1139" title="Volga trade route" label="Volga trade route"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="1148" end="1162" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q48343" start="1193" end="1203" title="Varangians" label="Varangians"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="1209" end="1216" title="Normans" label="Normans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293452" start="1218" end="1229" title="Norse-Gaels" label="Norse-Gaels"/>
<link wikidata="Q914114" start="1231" end="1234" title="Rus&amp;#x27; people" label="Rus"/>
<link wikidata="Q223179" start="1236" end="1243" title="Faroe Islanders" label="Faroese"/>
<link wikidata="Q191356" start="1249" end="1259" title="Icelanders" label="Icelanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="1395" end="1404" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="1450" end="1464" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383436" start="1490" end="1494" title="Caspian expeditions of the Rus&amp;#x27;" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="1499" end="1505" title="Arab world" label="Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q582948" start="1569" end="1593" title="Norse colonization of North America" label="settling in Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="1983" end="1992" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q82996" start="2018" end="2023" title="runes" label="runes"/>
<link wikidata="Q121617" start="2067" end="2085" title="Old Norse religion" label="Old Norse religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2965826" start="2097" end="2114" title="Christianization of Scandinavia" label="became Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175245" start="2142" end="2146" title="Medieval Scandinavian law" label="laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q222466" start="2148" end="2151" title="Viking art" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211290" start="2342" end="2350" title="Norsemen" label="Norsemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="2369" end="2380" title="archaeology" label="archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q829689" start="2442" end="2454" title="noble savage" label="noble savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q10726982" start="2561" end="2575" title="Viking revival" label="Viking revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3723591" start="3024" end="3037" title="horned helmet" label="horned helmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q35133" start="3340" end="3351" title="Old Frisian" label="Old Frisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="3511" end="3520" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017003" start="3622" end="3632" title="Viking runestones" label="runestones"/>
<link wikidata="Q28401808" start="4361" end="4383" title="Épinal-Erfurt glossary" label="Épinal-Erfurt glossary"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="4534" end="4545" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="4571" end="4582" title="Anglo-Saxon" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368506" start="4594" end="4601" title="Widsith" label="Widsith"/>
<link wikidata="Q428905" start="4768" end="4773" title="Asser" label="Asser"/>
<link wikidata="Q509678" start="4888" end="4900" title="Janet Nelson" label="Janet Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q27914789" start="5068" end="5085" title="Eric Christiansen" label="Eric Christiansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q36395" start="5202" end="5216" title="Middle English" label="Middle English"/>
<link wikidata="Q829689" start="5421" end="5433" title="noble savage" label="noble savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="5591" end="5598" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="5607" end="5620" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="6266" end="6292" title="Norman conquest of England" label="Norman conquest of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q47545" start="6319" end="6332" title="Norwegian Sea" label="Norwegian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="6337" end="6347" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="6382" end="6389" title="Normans" label="Normans"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="6443" end="6449" title="feudal" label="feudal"/>
<link wikidata="Q842091" start="6503" end="6520" title="Duchy of Normandy" label="Duchy of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q159597" start="6653" end="6669" title="Harold Godwinson" label="Harold Godwinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q181896" start="6788" end="6803" title="Sweyn Forkbeard" label="Sweyn Forkbeard"/>
<link wikidata="Q134128" start="6863" end="6877" title="Cnut the Great" label="Cnut the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="6990" end="6997" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="6999" end="7005" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="7048" end="7062" title="Germanic peoples" label="North Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q339271" start="7085" end="7092" title="Danelaw" label="Danelaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q107299" start="7182" end="7193" title="Northumbria" label="Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q105092" start="7204" end="7210" title="Mercia" label="Mercia"/>
<link wikidata="Q837998" start="7216" end="7227" title="Kingdom of East Anglia" label="East Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="7367" end="7375" title="Shetland" label="Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="7377" end="7383" title="Orkney" label="Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="7413" end="7422" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q189113" start="7428" end="7451" title="L&amp;#x27;Anse aux Meadows" label="L&amp;#x27;Anse aux Meadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="7481" end="7493" title="Newfoundland" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q498819" start="7571" end="7591" title="Medieval Warm Period" label="Medieval Warm Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133621" start="7660" end="7674" title="Climate variability and change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990" start="7702" end="7707" title="Rurik" label="Rurik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235" start="7741" end="7749" title="Novgorod" label="Novgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131983" start="7776" end="7780" title="Oleg the Wise" label="Oleg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="7790" end="7794" title="Kiev" label="Kiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q914114" start="7833" end="7836" title="Rus&amp;#x27; people" label="Rus"/>
<link wikidata="Q210398" start="7842" end="7855" title="Rurik dynasty" label="Rurik dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q23725" start="7960" end="7969" title="Byzantium" label="Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="8029" end="8045" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q48343" start="8195" end="8204" title="Varangian" label="Varangian"/>
<link wikidata="Q165192" start="8367" end="8374" title="Swedish people" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q726721" start="8482" end="8495" title="Västgötalagen" label="Västgötalagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q213551" start="8508" end="8521" title="Västergötland" label="Västergötland"/>
<link wikidata="Q304105" start="8792" end="8800" title="Þingalið" label="Þingalið"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="8858" end="8865" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="8885" end="8899" title="Abbasid Caliphate" label="Islamic Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q626" start="8931" end="8936" title="Volga" label="Volga"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="9005" end="9011" title="slaves" label="slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q208177" start="9063" end="9068" title="Birka" label="Birka"/>
<link wikidata="Q165414" start="9070" end="9076" title="Hedeby" label="Hedeby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737156" start="9078" end="9085" title="Kaupang" label="Kaupang"/>
<link wikidata="Q889970" start="9087" end="9093" title="Jorvik" label="Jorvik"/>
<link wikidata="Q216794" start="9095" end="9109" title="Staraya Ladoga" label="Staraya Ladoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235" start="9111" end="9119" title="Novgorod" label="Novgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q254346" start="9355" end="9368" title="History of the Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725768" start="9370" end="9377" title="Settlement of Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16488964" start="9379" end="9394" title="Norse Greenland" label="Norse Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q582948" start="9396" end="9408" title="Norse colonization of the Americas" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="9410" end="9425" title="Netherlands" label="the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="9436" end="9444" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429971" start="9453" end="9461" title="Scandinavian Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="9472" end="9477" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="9492" end="9503" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q60747281" start="9505" end="9512" title="Viking Age in Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="9514" end="9520" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="9522" end="9531" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="9533" end="9540" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q59532" start="10161" end="10177" title="Christianisation" label="Christianisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q318912" start="11159" end="11163" title="Eric the Victorious" label="Eric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887133" start="11180" end="11187" title="Gunhild of Wenden" label="Gunhild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="11196" end="11202" title="Polish people" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q201615" start="11203" end="11217" title="House of Piast" label="House of Piast"/>
<link wikidata="Q313436" start="11238" end="11242" title="Olof Skötkonung" label="Olof"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986329" start="11262" end="11266" title="Edla" label="Edla"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11310" end="11316" title=":sv:Frilla" label="frilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q382156" start="11367" end="11380" title="Emund the Old" label="Emund the Old"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355204" start="11402" end="11408" title="Astrid Olofsdotter of Sweden" label="Astrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q134128" start="11427" end="11441" title="Cnut the Great" label="Cnut the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q53435" start="11509" end="11528" title="Mieszko I of Poland" label="Mieszko I of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q109244" start="11817" end="11831" title="Adam of Bremen" label="Adam of Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q42838" start="12425" end="12437" title="Leif Ericson" label="Leif Erikson"/>
<link wikidata="Q172345" start="12447" end="12459" title="Erik the Red" label="Erik the Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q189113" start="12533" end="12556" title="L&amp;#x27;Anse aux Meadows" label="L&amp;#x27;Anse aux Meadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q498819" start="12615" end="12635" title="Medieval Warm Period" label="Medieval Warm Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q101985" start="12771" end="12777" title="Saxons" label="Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057629" start="12791" end="12801" title="Old Saxony" label="Old Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q877429" start="13003" end="13008" title="Danes (Germanic tribe)" label="Danes"/>
<link wikidata="Q689454" start="13055" end="13064" title="Danevirke" label="Danevirke"/>
<link wikidata="Q165414" start="13079" end="13085" title="Hedeby" label="Hedeby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="13148" end="13159" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q499909" start="13180" end="13190" title="Saxon Wars" label="Saxon Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q31929" start="13299" end="13317" title="Carolingian Empire" label="Carolingian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="13331" end="13337" title="Franks" label="Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q156108" start="13534" end="13543" title="Obotrites" label="Obotrites"/>
<link wikidata="Q31929" start="13615" end="13630" title="Frankish empire" label="Frankish empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q461614" start="13651" end="13663" title="King Gudfred" label="King Gudfred"/>
<link wikidata="Q569174" start="13695" end="13700" title="Reric" label="Reric"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="13957" end="13960" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="14008" end="14031" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q186285" start="14036" end="14060" title="University of Copenhagen" label="University of Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4276" start="14476" end="14497" title="Dudo of Saint-Quentin" label="Dudo of Saint-Quentin"/>
<link wikidata="Q243688" start="14668" end="14678" title="Polygyny" label="polygynous"/>
<link wikidata="Q206913" start="15160" end="15181" title="male-male competition" label="male-male competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q564325" start="15326" end="15342" title="Annals of Ulster" label="Annals of Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q113803" start="15706" end="15718" title="Rudolf Simek" label="Rudolf Simek"/>
<link wikidata="Q405155" start="16835" end="16846" title="trade route" label="trade route"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="16964" end="16984" title="Western Roman Empire" label="Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610620" start="17014" end="17032" title="Spread of Islam" label="expansion of Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q154845" start="17242" end="17247" title="Jutes" label="Jutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q25389" start="17304" end="17311" title="Jutland" label="Jutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q131192" start="17323" end="17340" title="Age of Migrations" label="Age of Migrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q877429" start="17353" end="17358" title="Danes (Germanic tribe)" label="Danes"/>
<link wikidata="Q101985" start="17378" end="17384" title="Saxons" label="Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q104238" start="17393" end="17399" title="Angles (tribe)" label="Angles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702716" start="18289" end="18297" title="Jomsborg" label="Jomsborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="18366" end="18376" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q158281" start="18387" end="18395" title="Wends" label="Wendland"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520" start="18404" end="18413" title="Pomerania" label="Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q41345" start="18486" end="18497" title="Jomsvikings" label="Jomsvikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q552" start="18659" end="18663" title="Oder" label="Oder"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="18993" end="19008" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2965826" start="19607" end="19634" title="Christianization of Scandinavia" label="Christianity had taken root"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167" start="20083" end="20087" title="Lund" label="Lund"/>
<link wikidata="Q641707" start="20215" end="20226" title="Christendom" label="Christendom"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="20564" end="20579" title="chattel slavery" label="chattel slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q313005" start="21078" end="21096" title="Sigurd I of Norway" label="Sigurd I of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q55502" start="21194" end="21214" title="Kingdom of Jerusalem" label="Kingdom of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q51662" start="21277" end="21292" title="Baltic Crusades" label="Baltic Crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q815241" start="21574" end="21583" title="runestone" label="runestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="22269" end="22274" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q82996" start="22484" end="22489" title="runes" label="runes"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907236" start="23006" end="23023" title="Christian culture" label="Christian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q180494" start="23328" end="23343" title="Saga" label="Icelandic sagas"/>
<link wikidata="Q947305" start="23551" end="23556" title="skald" label="skald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237928" start="23580" end="23591" title="Poet laureate" label="court poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297992" start="24120" end="24127" title="Egilsay" label="Egilsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020958" start="24186" end="24194" title="Ormskirk" label="Ormskirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616766" start="24269" end="24274" title="Meols" label="Meols"/>
<link wikidata="Q147557" start="24319" end="24327" title="Snaefell" label="Snaefell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296173" start="24341" end="24350" title="Ravenscar, North Yorkshire" label="Ravenscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q192823" start="24366" end="24373" title="Vinland" label="Vinland"/>
<link wikidata="Q130601844" start="24399" end="24407" title="Winberry" label="Winberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q728224" start="24410" end="24419" title="Kaupanger" label="Kaupanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q10704" start="24438" end="24446" title="Tórshavn" label="Tórshavn"/>
<link wikidata="Q25331" start="24498" end="24504" title="Odense" label="Odense"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="24528" end="24532" title="Odin" label="Odin"/>
<link wikidata="Q827704" start="24641" end="24648" title="Tynwald" label="Tynwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058774" start="24871" end="24885" title="Northern Isles" label="Northern Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q36708" start="25003" end="25016" title="Norn language" label="Norn language"/>
<link wikidata="Q42462" start="25186" end="25190" title="York" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q23051" start="25204" end="25211" title="Swansea" label="Swansea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370957" start="25213" end="25219" title="Sven" label="Sveinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q250565" start="25277" end="25288" title="Tocqueville (disambiguation)" label="Tocqueville"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="25647" end="25654" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9043" start="25656" end="25665" title="Norwegian language" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9035" start="25667" end="25673" title="Danish language" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q25258" start="25675" end="25682" title="Faroese language" label="Faroese"/>
<link wikidata="Q294" start="25687" end="25696" title="Icelandic language" label="Icelandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23526" start="25749" end="25765" title="Slavic languages" label="Slavic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4163154" start="26058" end="26064" title="Dnieper Rapids" label="rapids"/>
<link wikidata="Q40855" start="26072" end="26079" title="Dnieper River" label="Dnieper"/>
<link wikidata="Q203509" start="26848" end="26855" title="Uppland" label="Uppland"/>
<link wikidata="Q626062" start="26939" end="26951" title="Södermanland" label="Södermanland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27151" end="27166" title="Kjula Runestone#Sö 106" label="Kjula runestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q21554854" start="27225" end="27242" title="Turinge Runestone" label="Turinge Runestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3903610" start="27390" end="27399" title="Färentuna Runestones" label="Färentuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3903556" start="27401" end="27410" title="Hillersjö stone" label="Hillersjö"/>
<link wikidata="Q3903599" start="27412" end="27430" title="Snottsta and Vreta stones" label="Snottsta and Vreta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955660" start="27497" end="27512" title="Gerlög and Inga" label="Gerlög and Inga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3903605" start="27595" end="27613" title="England runestones" label="England runestones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422427" start="27911" end="27928" title="Greece Runestones" label="Greece Runestones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770639" start="27940" end="27957" title="Ingvar Runestones" label="Ingvar Runestones"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="28045" end="28054" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306379" start="28064" end="28079" title="Younger Futhark" label="Younger Futhark"/>
<link wikidata="Q723999" start="28087" end="28101" title="Jelling stones" label="Jelling stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q314490" start="28177" end="28189" title="Gorm the Old" label="Gorm the Old"/>
<link wikidata="Q242395" start="28247" end="28258" title="Thyra" label="Queen Thyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q201041" start="28300" end="28316" title="Harald Bluetooth" label="Harald Bluetooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q22889" start="28707" end="28711" title="Bath, Somerset" label="Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q23725" start="28753" end="28762" title="Byzantium" label="Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q182647" start="28787" end="28795" title="Khwaresm" label="Khwaresm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="28797" end="28806" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423496" start="28834" end="28842" title="Serkland" label="Serkland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055922" start="28991" end="29006" title="Manx runestones" label="Manx runestones"/>
<link wikidata="Q590286" start="29083" end="29106" title="Kingittorsuaq Runestone" label="Kingittorsuaq Runestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q82996" start="29239" end="29253" title="Runic alphabet" label="Runic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q254950" start="29300" end="29309" title="Elfdalian" label="Elfdalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453291" start="29342" end="29350" title="Älvdalen" label="Älvdalen"/>
<link wikidata="Q205218" start="29378" end="29385" title="Dalarna" label="Dalarna"/>
<link wikidata="Q254950" start="29414" end="29423" title="Elfdalian" label="Elfdalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453291" start="29448" end="29456" title="Älvdalen" label="Älvdalen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453291" start="29595" end="29603" title="Älvdalen" label="Älvdalen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453291" start="29690" end="29698" title="Älvdalen" label="Älvdalen"/>
<link wikidata="Q254950" start="29761" end="29770" title="Elfdalian" label="Elfdalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352035" start="29817" end="29834" title="Dalecarlian runes" label="Dalecarlian runes"/>
<link wikidata="Q205218" start="29879" end="29886" title="Dalarna" label="Dalarna"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="29917" end="29924" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q829257" start="30056" end="30078" title="mutual intelligibility" label="mutual intelligibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453291" start="30412" end="30420" title="Älvdalen" label="Älvdalen"/>
<link wikidata="Q254950" start="30549" end="30558" title="Elfdalian" label="Elfdalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34023" start="30902" end="30908" title="tumuli" label="tumuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145397" start="30940" end="30951" title="ship burial" label="ship burial"/>
<link wikidata="Q832395" start="31609" end="31616" title="Oseberg Ship" label="Oseberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q11972326" start="31618" end="31625" title="Gokstad Mound" label="Gokstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624400" start="31627" end="31639" title="Borre mound cemetery" label="Borrehaugene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664166" start="31651" end="31660" title="Gettlinge" label="Gettlinge"/>
<link wikidata="Q208177" start="31689" end="31694" title="Birka" label="Birka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096449" start="31719" end="31728" title="Valsgärde" label="Valsgärde"/>
<link wikidata="Q433032" start="31730" end="31743" title="Gamla Uppsala" label="Gamla Uppsala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331880" start="31771" end="31775" title="Alby, Öland" label="Alby"/>
<link wikidata="Q239276" start="31789" end="31794" title="Öland" label="Öland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027830" start="31796" end="31803" title="Gotland" label="Gotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q835708" start="31816" end="31823" title="Jelling" label="Jelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="31827" end="31846" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q796045" start="31848" end="31861" title="Lindholm Høje" label="Lindholm Høje"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799877" start="31863" end="31873" title="Ladby ship" label="Ladby ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2178247" start="31875" end="31881" title="Mammen" label="Mammen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569907" start="31917" end="31928" title="Salme ships" label="Salme ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235151" start="32010" end="32042" title="Port an Eilean Mhòir ship burial" label="Port an Eilean Mhòir ship burial"/>
<link wikidata="Q893171" start="32044" end="32060" title="Scar boat burial" label="Scar boat burial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025136" start="32087" end="32090" title="Hov, Faroe Islands" label="Hov"/>
<link wikidata="Q829859" start="32103" end="32114" title="Mosfellsbær" label="Mosfellsbær"/>
<link wikidata="Q203304" start="32118" end="32132" title="Capital Region (Iceland)" label="Capital Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511371" start="32153" end="32163" title="Vatnsdalur" label="Vatnsdalur"/>
<link wikidata="Q107024302" start="32165" end="32186" title="Austur-Húnavatnssýsla" label="Austur-Húnavatnssýsla"/>
<link wikidata="Q798672" start="32201" end="32211" title="Brattahlíð" label="Brattahlíð"/>
<link wikidata="Q165414" start="32224" end="32230" title="Hedeby" label="Hedeby"/>
<link wikidata="Q757049" start="32242" end="32249" title="Grobiņa" label="Grobiņa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254138" start="32266" end="32277" title="Black Grave" label="Black Grave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626066" start="32289" end="32297" title="Gnezdovo" label="Gnezdovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q216794" start="32299" end="32313" title="Staraya Ladoga" label="Staraya Ladoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q897611" start="32575" end="32583" title="longship" label="longship"/>
<link wikidata="Q15376278" start="32935" end="32942" title="Leidang" label="Leidang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163179" start="33232" end="33237" title="knarr" label="knarr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3637533" start="33479" end="33486" title="beitass" label="beitass"/>
<link wikidata="Q11972326" start="34111" end="34118" title="Gokstad" label="Gokstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q832395" start="34123" end="34130" title="Oseberg" label="Oseberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799877" start="34174" end="34179" title="Ladby ship" label="Ladby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569907" start="34285" end="34296" title="Salme ships" label="Salme ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q951302" start="34323" end="34331" title="Saaremaa" label="Saaremaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432961" start="34398" end="34412" title="Roskilde Fjord" label="Roskilde Fjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q26563" start="34587" end="34595" title="Roskilde" label="Roskilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458032" start="34696" end="34726" title="Viking Ship Museum in Roskilde" label="Viking Ship Museum in Roskilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342610" start="35100" end="35106" title="thrall" label="thrall"/>
<link wikidata="Q40403" start="35143" end="35147" title="jarl" label="jarl"/>
<link wikidata="Q205874" start="35189" end="35199" title="Eddic poem" label="Eddic poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q9672887" start="35209" end="35217" title="Rígsþula" label="Rígsþula"/>
<link wikidata="Q9672887" start="35265" end="35268" title="Ríg (Norse god)" label="Ríg"/>
<link wikidata="Q131196" start="35301" end="35310" title="Heimdallr" label="Heimdallr"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="35444" end="35453" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q572664" start="36347" end="36354" title="dirhams" label="dirhams"/>
<link wikidata="Q37681" start="36358" end="36362" title="silk" label="silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739270" start="36676" end="36681" title="churl" label="churl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362652" start="36699" end="36707" title="Housecarl" label="huskarls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478141" start="36717" end="36728" title="Aristocracy (class)" label="Aristocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q119094" start="37137" end="37157" title="Human sacrifice in Germanic paganism" label="sacrificially killed"/>
<link wikidata="Q387834" start="38091" end="38097" title="Thing (assembly)" label="Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551261" start="38469" end="38475" title="Grágás" label="Grágás"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770089" start="38494" end="38504" title="Frostating" label="Frostating"/>
<link wikidata="Q11973182" start="38514" end="38522" title="Gulating" label="Gulating"/>
<link wikidata="Q765157" start="39404" end="39415" title="bride-price" label="bride-price"/>
<link wikidata="Q45803" start="39517" end="39522" title="dowry" label="dowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q188790" start="39580" end="39591" title="Concubinage" label="Concubinage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334906" start="40909" end="40917" title="Baugrygr" label="Baugrygr"/>
<link wikidata="Q211503" start="40991" end="40995" title="clan" label="clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q947305" start="41237" end="41242" title="skald" label="skald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749303" start="41256" end="41267" title="rune master" label="rune master"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="41368" end="41375" title="textile" label="textile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473687" start="41461" end="41473" title="shieldmaiden" label="shieldmaiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q40179239" start="41534" end="41561" title="Birka female Viking warrior" label="Birka female Viking warrior"/>
<link wikidata="Q6656244" start="42251" end="42265" title="Anthropometry" label="anthropometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="42542" end="42553" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908400" start="42790" end="42803" title="North Germanic peoples" label="Scandinavians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725283" start="43370" end="43384" title="Saffron (color)" label="golden saffron"/>
<link wikidata="Q499916" start="43823" end="43829" title="brooch" label="brooch"/>
<link wikidata="Q222466" start="43957" end="43967" title="Viking art" label="Viking art"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="44058" end="44064" title="Slavic people" label="Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q180494" start="45398" end="45402" title="saga" label="saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q204435" start="45482" end="45489" title="cesspit" label="cesspit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152199" start="45492" end="45507" title="Midden" label="kitchen middens"/>
<link wikidata="Q98414094" start="45621" end="45631" title="Coppergate" label="Coppergate"/>
<link wikidata="Q48803" start="45906" end="45919" title="horticulture" label="horticultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503716" start="46090" end="46095" title="Curing (food preservation)" label="cured"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682434" start="46097" end="46103" title="smoked meat" label="smoked"/>
<link wikidata="Q185009" start="46108" end="46112" title="whey" label="whey"/>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="46328" end="46332" title="beer" label="beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q184442" start="46334" end="46338" title="mead" label="mead"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46340" end="46345" title="bjórr" label="bjórr"/>
<link wikidata="Q282" start="46396" end="46400" title="wine" label="wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q262924" start="46488" end="46503" title="Icelandic horse" label="Icelandic horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1803779" start="46505" end="46521" title="Icelandic cattle" label="Icelandic cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400292" start="46555" end="46565" title="Danish hen" label="Danish hen"/>
<link wikidata="Q10466704" start="46574" end="46586" title="Danish landrace goose" label="Danish goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q123122627" start="46625" end="46631" title="Lamb and mutton" label="mutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4675762" start="46920" end="46925" title="brawn" label="brawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q17118905" start="46930" end="46938" title="Pig&amp;#x27;s trotters" label="trotters"/>
<link wikidata="Q155878" start="47039" end="47051" title="black grouse" label="black grouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359014" start="47053" end="47066" title="golden plover" label="golden plover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865281" start="47175" end="47180" title="Whale" label="Whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q40994" start="47186" end="47192" title="walrus" label="walrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="47258" end="47272" title="North Atlantic" label="North Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q30263" start="47285" end="47290" title="Pinniped" label="seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q107411" start="47322" end="47328" title="Oyster" label="Oyster"/>
<link wikidata="Q13042834" start="47331" end="47337" title="mussel" label="mussel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517781" start="47343" end="47349" title="shrimp" label="shrimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q13194939" start="47385" end="47388" title="cod" label="cod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796766" start="47393" end="47399" title="salmon" label="salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127419" start="47444" end="47451" title="herring" label="herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q106612" start="47482" end="47492" title="buttermilk" label="buttermilk"/>
<link wikidata="Q742127" start="47715" end="47719" title="skyr" label="skyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q14732227" start="47723" end="47731" title="Filmjölk" label="surmjölk"/>
<link wikidata="Q43084" start="47858" end="47870" title="black pepper" label="black pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q26811" start="47970" end="47977" title="caraway" label="caraway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937700" start="47979" end="47986" title="Mustard seed" label="mustard"/>
<link wikidata="Q26545" start="47991" end="48002" title="horseradish" label="horseradish"/>
<link wikidata="Q26686" start="48048" end="48052" title="dill" label="dill"/>
<link wikidata="Q41611" start="48054" end="48063" title="coriander" label="coriander"/>
<link wikidata="Q207745" start="48069" end="48080" title="Angelica archangelica" label="wild celery"/>
<link wikidata="Q204435" start="48094" end="48101" title="cesspit" label="cesspit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215980" start="48126" end="48131" title="Thyme" label="Thyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251025" start="48133" end="48146" title="juniper berry" label="juniper berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q161681" start="48148" end="48158" title="sweet gale" label="sweet gale"/>
<link wikidata="Q25408" start="48160" end="48166" title="yarrow" label="yarrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q25062" start="48168" end="48171" title="rue" label="rue"/>
<link wikidata="Q146217" start="48176" end="48187" title="peppercress" label="peppercress"/>
<link wikidata="Q104819" start="48299" end="48309" title="crab apple" label="crab apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q46740" start="48363" end="48372" title="rose hips" label="rose hips"/>
<link wikidata="Q13179" start="48377" end="48386" title="raspberry" label="raspberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q745" start="48388" end="48403" title="Fragaria" label="wild strawberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q19842373" start="48405" end="48415" title="blackberry" label="blackberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q131448" start="48417" end="48427" title="elderberry" label="elderberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12646464" start="48429" end="48434" title="rowan" label="rowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q161511" start="48436" end="48444" title="common hawthorn" label="hawthorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q578307" start="48498" end="48506" title="Hazelnut" label="Hazelnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q46871" start="48575" end="48581" title="Juglans regia" label="walnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q11464" start="48747" end="48764" title="mouldboard plough" label="mouldboard plough"/>
<link wikidata="Q322361" start="48880" end="48884" title="Ribe" label="Ribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q12099" start="48896" end="48899" title="rye" label="rye"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="48901" end="48907" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q12104" start="48909" end="48912" title="oat" label="oat"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="48917" end="48922" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q45108" start="49370" end="49374" title="Flax" label="Flax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426327" start="49508" end="49513" title="linen" label="linen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12099" start="49899" end="49902" title="rye" label="rye"/>
<link wikidata="Q148897" start="49963" end="49973" title="Agrostemma" label="Agrostemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q188614" start="50116" end="50123" title="parsnip" label="parsnip"/>
<link wikidata="Q58677" start="50129" end="50138" title="brassicas" label="brassicas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543947" start="50259" end="50271" title="rotary quern" label="rotary quern"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="50340" end="50346" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q42486" start="50720" end="50729" title="wrestling" label="wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q651295" start="50735" end="50740" title="glima" label="glima"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="50743" end="50756" title="Boxing" label="fist fighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q36908" start="50802" end="50819" title="Mountaineering" label="mountain climbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q31920" start="51055" end="51063" title="Swimming (sport)" label="Swimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q102323" start="51086" end="51102" title="Snorri Sturluson" label="Snorri Sturluson"/>
<link wikidata="Q213801" start="51392" end="51407" title="Olaf Tryggvason" label="Olaf Tryggvason"/>
<link wikidata="Q6422145" start="51516" end="51530" title="knife juggling" label="knife juggling"/>
<link wikidata="Q130949" start="51540" end="51546" title="Skiing" label="Skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q779272" start="51551" end="51562" title="ice skating" label="ice skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q728340" start="51967" end="51976" title="knattleikr" label="knattleik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622659" start="52007" end="52013" title="hockey" label="hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q46076" start="52397" end="52401" title="hare" label="hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q25381" start="53079" end="53084" title="amber" label="amber"/>
<link wikidata="Q40994" start="53127" end="53133" title="walrus" label="walrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q750693" start="53237" end="53246" title="hnefatafl" label="hnefatafl"/>
<link wikidata="Q209669" start="53274" end="53296" title="nine men&amp;#x27;s morris" label="nine men&amp;#x27;s morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q750693" start="53324" end="53334" title="Tafl games" label="kvatrutafl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326853" start="53623" end="53640" title="Ockelbo Runestone" label="Ockelbo Runestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q947305" start="53825" end="53831" title="skaldic poetry" label="poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q180733" start="54030" end="54034" title="lute" label="lute"/>
<link wikidata="Q201129" start="54037" end="54041" title="lyre" label="lyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="54281" end="54289" title="Franks" label="Frankish"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="54301" end="54309" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="54417" end="54423" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q180494" start="54607" end="54618" title="Norse sagas" label="Norse sagas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175245" start="54623" end="54632" title="Norse law" label="Norse law"/>
<link wikidata="Q383509" start="54878" end="54884" title="Viking helmet" label="helmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q131559" start="54886" end="54892" title="shield" label="shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q659631" start="54894" end="54898" title="Mail (armour)" label="mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q44475" start="55139" end="55144" title="spear" label="spear"/>
<link wikidata="Q58122" start="55181" end="55185" title="seax" label="seax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362652" start="55460" end="55468" title="Housecarls" label="Húscarls"/>
<link wikidata="Q134128" start="55494" end="55498" title="Cnut" label="Cnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q159597" start="55513" end="55527" title="Harold Godwinson" label="King Harold II"/>
<link wikidata="Q121617" start="55708" end="55722" title="Norse religion" label="Norse religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q42952" start="55736" end="55740" title="Thor" label="Thor"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="55745" end="55749" title="Odin" label="Odin"/>
<link wikidata="Q335303" start="56322" end="56331" title="berserker" label="berserker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936177" start="56476" end="56488" title="shock troops" label="shock troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706669" start="56638" end="56650" title="psychoactive" label="psychoactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q161058" start="56693" end="56709" title="Hyoscyamus niger" label="Hyoscyamus niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q194270" start="56767" end="56781" title="hallucinogenic" label="hallucinogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131227" start="56797" end="56813" title="Amanita muscaria" label="Amanita muscaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q322361" start="57465" end="57469" title="Ribe" label="Ribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q165414" start="57470" end="57476" title="Hedeby" label="Hedeby"/>
<link wikidata="Q557709" start="57577" end="57584" title="bullion" label="bullion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="57654" end="57660" title="Silver" label="Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="57713" end="57717" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q42527" start="58160" end="58165" title="Spice" label="Spice"/>
<link wikidata="Q26811" start="58303" end="58310" title="caraway" label="caraway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215980" start="58312" end="58317" title="thyme" label="thyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q26545" start="58319" end="58330" title="horseradish" label="horseradish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937700" start="58335" end="58342" title="Mustard seed" label="mustard"/>
<link wikidata="Q28165" start="58357" end="58365" title="cinnamon" label="cinnamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11469" start="58369" end="58374" title="Glass" label="Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q127419" start="58509" end="58513" title="Åhus" label="Åhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q37681" start="58603" end="58607" title="Silk" label="Silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q23725" start="58653" end="58662" title="Byzantium" label="Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="58675" end="58683" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q282" start="58885" end="58889" title="Wine" label="Wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q184442" start="58977" end="58981" title="mead" label="mead"/>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="58986" end="58990" title="beer" label="beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q25381" start="59099" end="59104" title="Amber" label="Amber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="59171" end="59180" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="59185" end="59191" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q239574" start="59287" end="59297" title="Amber Road" label="Amber Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q26046" start="59373" end="59384" title="pine marten" label="pine marten"/>
<link wikidata="Q8331" start="59387" end="59390" title="fox" label="fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q11788" start="59394" end="59398" title="bear" label="bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q200184" start="59401" end="59406" title="otter" label="otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q47542" start="59412" end="59418" title="beaver" label="beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q42329" start="59433" end="59437" title="wool" label="wool"/>
<link wikidata="Q953515" start="59533" end="59537" title="Down feather" label="Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q48199" start="59655" end="59660" title="Samis" label="Samis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281130" start="59710" end="59717" title="Fowling" label="Fowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="59792" end="59798" title="Slaves" label="Slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q269296" start="59818" end="59834" title="Ahmad ibn Rustah" label="Ahmad ibn Rustah"/>
<link wikidata="Q913429" start="60076" end="60080" title="Atil" label="Atil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352389" start="60324" end="60336" title="walrus ivory" label="walrus ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q124695" start="60338" end="60341" title="wax" label="wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q11254" start="60343" end="60347" title="salt" label="salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q13194939" start="60352" end="60355" title="cod" label="cod"/>
<link wikidata="Q211011" start="60392" end="60405" title="Falconry" label="hunting birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q707896" start="60589" end="60598" title="soapstone" label="soapstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q507559" start="60603" end="60612" title="Sharpening stone" label="whetstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="60653" end="60660" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25389" start="60668" end="60675" title="Jutland" label="Jutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q493373" start="60904" end="60911" title="Hærvejen" label="Ox Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q226697" start="61049" end="61058" title="parchment" label="parchment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6072299" start="61461" end="61470" title="Nordic Iron Age" label="Iron Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q834007" start="61534" end="61541" title="antlers" label="antlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="61754" end="61765" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649537" start="61783" end="61797" title="Modern English" label="Modern English"/>
<link wikidata="Q162378" start="61816" end="61834" title="grammatical gender" label="grammatical gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q474628" start="61839" end="61862" title="grammatical conjugation" label="grammatical conjugation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151745" start="61934" end="61955" title="Preposition stranding" label="Preposition stranding"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="62000" end="62009" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q160742" start="62127" end="62132" title="abbey" label="abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q213804" start="62150" end="62161" title="Lindisfarne" label="Lindisfarne"/>
<link wikidata="Q107299" start="62182" end="62193" title="Northumbria" label="Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q154332" start="62375" end="62389" title="Alcuin of York" label="Alcuin of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="62925" end="62940" title="Norse Mythology" label="Norse Mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417288" start="62953" end="62963" title="Old Norse literature" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q191356" start="63209" end="63219" title="Icelanders" label="Icelanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q283943" start="63241" end="63255" title="Sæmundur fróði" label="Sæmundur fróði"/>
<link wikidata="Q7787" start="63520" end="63536" title="History of Europe" label="European history"/>
<link wikidata="Q320935" start="63807" end="63813" title="Nestor the Chronicler" label="Nestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297698" start="63826" end="63845" title="Novgorod Chronicle" label="Novgorod chronicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q200947" start="63847" end="63857" title="Ibn Fadlan" label="Ibn Fadlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q269296" start="63870" end="63879" title="Ibn Rusta" label="Ibn Rusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q243187" start="63914" end="63921" title="Photius" label="Photius"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="63993" end="64009" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q109244" start="64055" end="64069" title="Adam of Bremen" label="Adam of Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q25535" start="64201" end="64208" title="Zealand (Denmark)" label="Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442050" start="64403" end="64419" title="Battle of Maldon" label="Battle of Maldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011062" start="64466" end="64472" title="Maldon, Essex" label="Maldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q315804" start="64772" end="64784" title="Olaus Magnus" label="Olaus Magnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q106837" start="64898" end="64914" title="Saxo Grammaticus" label="Saxo Grammaticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q108652" start="65014" end="65018" title="Edda" label="Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q365909" start="65135" end="65151" title="Thomas Bartholin" label="Thomas Bartholin"/>
<link wikidata="Q463570" start="65156" end="65164" title="Ole Worm" label="Ole Worm"/>
<link wikidata="Q350198" start="65179" end="65192" title="Olaus Rudbeck" label="Olaus Rudbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540582" start="65331" end="65344" title="George Hickes (divine)" label="George Hickes"/>
<link wikidata="Q380937" start="65814" end="65832" title="Erik Gustaf Geijer" label="Erik Gustaf Geijer"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="66020" end="66031" title="Romanticism" label="Romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457130" start="66094" end="66109" title="Geatish Society" label="Geatish Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q366765" start="66266" end="66279" title="Esaias Tegnér" label="Esaias Tegnér"/>
<link wikidata="Q397698" start="66350" end="66376" title="Friðþjófs saga hins frœkna" label="Friðþjófs saga hins frœkna"/>
<link wikidata="Q10726982" start="66535" end="66549" title="Viking revival" label="Viking revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q263985" start="66599" end="66619" title="Romantic nationalism" label="Romantic nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="66683" end="66692" title="Wagnerian" label="Wagnerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q580296" start="66741" end="66753" title="Scandinavism" label="Scandinavism"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="67080" end="67090" title="Victorian era" label="Victorians"/>
<link wikidata="Q192551" start="67285" end="67302" title="Primary Chronicle" label="Primary Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280705" start="67320" end="67343" title="Cogad Gáedel re Gallaib" label="Cogad Gáedel re Gallaib"/>
<link wikidata="Q631286" start="67457" end="67468" title="numismatics" label="numismatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="68189" end="68203" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="68548" end="68560" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q14565683" start="68868" end="68882" title="Nazi mysticism" label="Nazi mysticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q167189" start="68974" end="68990" title="Nasjonal Samling" label="Nasjonal Samling"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="69095" end="69101" title="Soviet" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q46699" start="69114" end="69124" title="Slavophilia" label="Slavophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108445" start="69263" end="69279" title="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;" label="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q123411956" start="69638" end="69647" title="Rus&amp;#x27; (name)" label="Rus&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990" start="69680" end="69685" title="Rurik" label="Rurik"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="69810" end="69814" title="USSR" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235" start="69816" end="69824" title="Novgorod" label="Novgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="69977" end="69991" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q190237" start="70007" end="70030" title="Der Ring des Nibelungen" label="Der Ring des Nibelungen"/>
<link wikidata="Q444002" start="70188" end="70210" title="Frans Gunnar Bengtsson" label="Frans Gunnar Bengtsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210846" start="70224" end="70238" title="The Long Ships" label="The Long Ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753829" start="70275" end="70284" title="The Long Ships (1963 film)" label="1963 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146960" start="70335" end="70346" title="The Vikings (1958 film)" label="The Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q172140" start="70354" end="70370" title="Michael Crichton" label="Michael Crichton"/>
<link wikidata="Q776177" start="70384" end="70402" title="Eaters of the Dead" label="Eaters of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q748030" start="70437" end="70453" title="The 13th Warrior" label="The 13th Warrior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354274" start="70488" end="70503" title="Erik the Viking" label="Erik the Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771759" start="70523" end="70536" title="Eric Northman" label="Eric Northman"/>
<link wikidata="Q186219" start="70565" end="70575" title="True Blood" label="True Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015339" start="70678" end="70693" title="Danish American" label="Danish American"/>
<link wikidata="Q220883" start="70701" end="70714" title="Poul Anderson" label="Poul Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q508853" start="70762" end="70773" title="Tim Severin" label="Tim Severin"/>
<link wikidata="Q181900" start="70929" end="70937" title="Stan Lee" label="Stan Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009797" start="70954" end="70966" title="Larry Lieber" label="Larry Lieber"/>
<link wikidata="Q311607" start="70982" end="70992" title="Jack Kirby" label="Jack Kirby"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="71006" end="71019" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q188784" start="71020" end="71029" title="superhero" label="superhero"/>
<link wikidata="Q717588" start="71030" end="71034" title="Thor (Marvel Comics)" label="Thor"/>
<link wikidata="Q367466" start="71126" end="71140" title="Marvel Studios" label="Marvel Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q217020" start="71146" end="71162" title="Thor (film)" label="&amp;quot;Thor&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q182218" start="71230" end="71242" title="The Avengers (2012 film)" label="The Avengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3896442" start="71268" end="71283" title="Marvel&amp;#x27;s Avengers Assemble (TV series)" label="animated series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621107" start="71409" end="71424" title="History Channel" label="History Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579463" start="71445" end="71452" title="Vikings (2013 TV series)" label="Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580228" start="71479" end="71492" title="Michael Hirst (writer)" label="Michael Hirst"/>
<link wikidata="Q3370179" start="71612" end="71648" title="Tale of Ragnar Lodbrok" label="fornaldarsaga Ragnars saga loðbrókar"/>
<link wikidata="Q940563" start="71783" end="71790" title="Völuspá" label="Völuspá"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495913" start="72202" end="72210" title="Lagertha" label="Lagertha"/>
<link wikidata="Q40179239" start="72455" end="72482" title="Birka female Viking warrior" label="Birka female Viking warrior"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="72602" end="72612" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052386" start="72629" end="72645" title="The Lost Vikings" label="The Lost Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q271062" start="72666" end="72682" title="Age of Mythology" label="Age of Mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q20671114" start="72707" end="72716" title="For Honor" label="For Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062345" start="72858" end="72871" title="Player character" label="playable hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q15139655" start="72901" end="72920" title="Heroes of the Storm" label="Heroes of the Storm"/>
<link wikidata="" start="72941" end="72968" title="The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim" label="The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422746" start="72988" end="73007" title="Action role-playing game" label="action role-playing"/>
<link wikidata="Q92464687" start="73111" end="73141" title="Assassin&amp;#x27;s Creed Valhalla" label="Assassin&amp;#x27;s Creed Valhalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="73271" end="73287" title="Viking mythology" label="Viking mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q213149" start="73496" end="73508" title="Viking metal" label="Viking metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="73524" end="73541" title="heavy metal music" label="heavy metal music"/>
<link wikidata="Q657069" start="73598" end="73620" title="historical reenactment" label="historical reenactment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7772619" start="73780" end="73791" title="The Vikings (reenactment group)" label="The Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308349" start="73796" end="73810" title="Regia Anglorum" label="Regia Anglorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q221150" start="74004" end="74021" title="Minnesota Vikings" label="Minnesota Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="74029" end="74053" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="74129" end="74138" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q56274179" start="74262" end="74277" title="útrásarvíkingar" label="útrásarvíkingar"/>
<link wikidata="Q636066" start="74355" end="74379" title="Experimental archaeology" label="Experimental archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1704043" start="74488" end="74508" title="Jorvik Viking Centre" label="Jorvik Viking Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478334" start="74532" end="74548" title="Sagnlandet Lejre" label="Sagnlandet Lejre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426033" start="74565" end="74581" title="Foteviken Museum" label="Foteviken Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q893523" start="74595" end="74615" title="Lofotr Viking Museum" label="Lofotr Viking Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q657069" start="74638" end="74648" title="Historical reenactment" label="reenactors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053484" start="74749" end="74757" title="Norstead (Newfoundland)" label="Norstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591548" start="74873" end="74885" title="Havhingsten fra Glendalough" label="Sea Stallion"/>
<link wikidata="Q640851" start="75786" end="75798" title="Gokstad ship" label="Gokstad ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q831457" start="75824" end="75833" title="Skuldelev ships" label="Skuldelev"/>
<link wikidata="Q831457" start="75896" end="75907" title="Skuldelev ships" label="Skuldelev I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163179" start="75908" end="75913" title="Knarr" label="Knarr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457130" start="76743" end="76760" title="Geatish Society" label="Götiska Förbundet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="76787" end="76796" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="76991" end="77010" title="Classical antiquity" label="Classical antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q263985" start="77253" end="77276" title="National Romanticism" label="national romantic ideas"/>
<link wikidata="Q605601" start="77320" end="77337" title="Nordic Bronze Age" label="Nordic Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q42195" start="77413" end="77423" title="petroglyph" label="petroglyph"/>
<link wikidata="Q209523" start="77467" end="77475" title="Bohuslän" label="Bohuslän"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918750" start="77480" end="77485" title="Vikso" label="Vikso"/>
<link wikidata="Q221099" start="77565" end="77583" title="Hägar the Horrible" label="Hägar the Horrible"/>
<link wikidata="Q713578" start="77600" end="77616" title="Vicky the Viking" label="Vicky the Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q221150" start="77661" end="77678" title="Minnesota Vikings" label="Minnesota Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936194" start="77683" end="77699" title="Canberra Raiders" label="Canberra Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q13719518" start="77940" end="77946" title="Vendel" label="Vendel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528917" start="78030" end="78047" title="Gjermundbu helmet" label="Gjermundbu helmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073056" start="78519" end="78542" title="Skull cup" label="drank out of the skulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q947305" start="78617" end="78622" title="skald" label="skald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358906" start="78630" end="78638" title="Krákumál" label="Krákumál"/>
<link wikidata="Q192771" start="78749" end="78762" title="drinking horn" label="drinking horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q428853" start="79177" end="79179" title="Haplogroup I-M253" label="I1"/>
<link wikidata="Q674896" start="79206" end="79209" title="Haplogroup R1b" label="R1b"/>
<link wikidata="Q80658" start="79227" end="79230" title="Haplogroup R1a" label="R1a"/>
<link wikidata="Q13464" start="79495" end="79501" title="Foggia" label="Foggia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="79734" end="79741" title="Normans" label="Normans"/>
<link wikidata="Q48343" start="79881" end="79891" title="Varangians" label="Varangians"/>
<link wikidata="Q15288" start="79904" end="79915" title="lake Ladoga" label="lake Ladoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569907" start="80491" end="80509" title="Salme ships" label="Salme ship burials"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="80849" end="80863" title="Orkney Islands" label="Orkney islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q202771" start="80935" end="80947" title="Y chromosome" label="Y-chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="80999" end="81008" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191558" start="81261" end="81267" title="Wirral Peninsula" label="Wirral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290796" start="81272" end="81287" title="West Lancashire" label="West Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="81421" end="81425" title="Celt" label="Celt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781786" start="81436" end="81444" title="Somerled" label="Somerled"/>
<link wikidata="Q595667" start="81518" end="81529" title="Clan Donald" label="Clan Donald"/>
<link wikidata="Q6622013" start="81548" end="81562" title="List of haplogroups of historical and famous figures" label="Viking descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q24948119" start="81656" end="81662" title="Bodzia Cemetery" label="Bodzia"/>
<link wikidata="Q311575" start="82118" end="82141" title="Sviatopolk I of Kiev" label="Sviatopolk the Accursed"/>
<link wikidata="Q60743394" start="82555" end="82560" title="Haplogroup I-Z63" label="S2077"/>
<link wikidata="Q223179" start="82636" end="82650" title="Faroese people" label="Faroese people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496339" start="82653" end="82658" title="Geats" label="Geats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449447" start="82661" end="82670" title="Gotlander" label="Gotlander"/>
<link wikidata="Q778191" start="82673" end="82681" title="Gutasaga" label="Gutasaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276428" start="82684" end="82693" title="Oeselians" label="Oeselians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671294" start="82696" end="82716" title="Proto-Norse language" label="Proto-Norse language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9297771" start="82719" end="82742" title="Scandinavian prehistory" label="Scandinavian prehistory"/>
<link wikidata="Q956420" start="82745" end="82768" title="Swedes (Germanic tribe)" label="Swedes (Germanic tribe)"/>
<link wikidata="Q975001" start="82771" end="82781" title="Ushkuiniks" label="Ushkuiniks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053398" start="82812" end="82848" title="Viking activity in the British Isles" label="Viking activity in the British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q23807965" start="82851" end="82882" title="Viking raid warfare and tactics" label="Viking raid warfare and tactics"/>
<link wikidata="Q697605" start="82885" end="82890" title="Wokou" label="Wokou"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="32611" wikidata="Q8740" url="?curid=32611" title="Vietnam War">
<text>The Vietnam War (1 November 1955 – 30 April 1975) was an armed conflict in Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia fought between North Vietnam (Democratic Republic of Vietnam) and South Vietnam (Republic of Vietnam) and their allies. North Vietnam was supported by the Soviet Union and China, while South Vietnam was supported by the United States and other anti-communist nations. The conflict was the second of the Indochina Wars and a major proxy war of the Cold War between the Soviet Union and US. Direct US military involvement greatly escalated from 1965 until its withdrawal in 1973. The fighting spilled over into the Laotian and Cambodian Civil Wars, which ended with all three countries becoming communist in 1975.

After the defeat of the French Union in the First Indochina War that began in 1946, Vietnam gained independence in the 1954 Geneva Conference but was divided into two parts at the 17th parallel: the Viet Minh, led by Ho Chi Minh, took control of North Vietnam, while the US assumed financial and military support for South Vietnam, led by Ngo Dinh Diem. The North Vietnamese began supplying and directing the Viet Cong (VC), a common front of dissidents in the south which intensified a guerrilla war from 1957. In 1958, North Vietnam invaded Laos, establishing the Ho Chi Minh trail to supply and reinforce the VC. By 1963, the north had covertly sent 40,000 soldiers of its own People&#x27;s Army of Vietnam (PAVN), armed with Soviet and Chinese weapons, to fight in the insurgency in the south. President John F. Kennedy increased US involvement from 900 military advisors in 1960 to 16,300 in 1963 and sent more aid to the Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN), which failed to produce results. In 1963, Diem was killed in a US-backed military coup, which added to the south&#x27;s instability.

Following the Gulf of Tonkin incident in 1964, the US Congress passed a resolution that gave President Lyndon B. Johnson authority to increase military presence without a declaration of war. Johnson launched a bombing campaign of the north and began sending combat troops, dramatically increasing deployment to 184,000 by the end of 1965, and to 536,000 by the end of 1968. US forces relied on air supremacy and overwhelming firepower to conduct search and destroy operations in rural areas. In 1968, North Vietnam launched the Tet Offensive, which was a tactical defeat but convinced many in the US that the war could not be won. The PAVN began engaging in more conventional warfare. Johnson&#x27;s successor, Richard Nixon, began a policy of &quot;Vietnamization&quot; from 1969, which saw the conflict fought by an expanded ARVN while US forces withdrew. A 1970 coup in Cambodia resulted in a PAVN invasion and a US–ARVN counter-invasion, escalating its civil war. US troops had mostly withdrawn from Vietnam by 1972, and the 1973 Paris Peace Accords saw the rest leave. The accords were broken almost immediately and fighting continued until the 1975 spring offensive and fall of Saigon to the PAVN, marking the war&#x27;s end. North and South Vietnam were reunified in 1976.

The war exacted an enormous human cost: estimates of Vietnamese soldiers and civilians killed range from 970,000 to 3 million. Some 275,000–310,000 Cambodians, 20,000–62,000 Laotians, and 58,220 US service members died. Its end would precipitate the Vietnamese boat people and the larger Indochina refugee crisis, which saw millions leave Indochina, of which an estimated 250,000 perished at sea. The US destroyed 20% of South Vietnam&#x27;s jungle and 20–50% of the mangrove forests, by spraying over of toxic herbicides; a notable example of ecocide. The Khmer Rouge carried out the Cambodian genocide, while conflict between them and the unified Vietnam escalated into the Cambodian–Vietnamese War. In response, China invaded Vietnam, with border conflicts lasting until 1991. Within the US, the war gave rise to Vietnam syndrome, a public aversion to American overseas military involvement, which, with the Watergate scandal, contributed to the crisis of confidence that affected America throughout the 1970s.

==Names==
Various names have been applied and have shifted over time, though &quot;Vietnam War&quot; is the most commonly used title in English. It has been called the &quot;Second Indochina War&quot; since it spread to Laos and Cambodia, the &quot;Vietnam Conflict&quot;, and &quot;Nam&quot; (colloquially &#x27;Nam). In Vietnam it is commonly known as &quot;Kháng chiến chống Mỹ&quot; (). The Government of Vietnam officially refers to it as the &quot;Resistance War against America to Save the Nation.&quot; It is sometimes called the &quot;American War&quot;.

== Background ==

Vietnam had been under French control as part of French Indochina since the mid-19th century. Under French rule, Vietnamese nationalism was suppressed, so revolutionary groups conducted their activities abroad, particularly in France and China. One such nationalist, Nguyen Sinh Cung, established the Indochinese Communist Party in 1930, a Marxist–Leninist political organization which operated primarily in Hong Kong and the Soviet Union. The party aimed to overthrow French rule and establish an independent communist state in Vietnam.

=== Japanese occupation of Indochina ===
In September 1940, Japan invaded French Indochina, following France&#x27;s capitulation to Nazi Germany. French influence was suppressed by the Japanese, and in 1941 Cung, now known as Ho Chi Minh, returned to Vietnam to establish the Viet Minh, an anti-Japanese resistance movement that advocated for independence. The Viet Minh received aid from the Allies, namely the US, Soviet Union, and Republic of China. Beginning in 1944, the US Office of Strategic Services (O.S.S.) provided the Viet Minh with weapons, ammunition, and training to fight the occupying Japanese and Vichy French forces. Throughout the war, Vietnamese guerrilla resistance against the Japanese grew dramatically, and by the end of 1944 the Viet Minh had grown to over 500,000 members. US President Franklin D. Roosevelt continued to support Vietnamese resistance throughout the war, and proposed that Vietnam&#x27;s independence be granted under an international trusteeship after the war was over.

In March 1945, Japan, losing the war, overthrew the French government in Indochina, establishing the Empire of Vietnam and installing Vietnamese Emperor Bảo Đại as its figurehead leader. Following the surrender of Japan in August, the Viet Minh launched the August Revolution, overthrowing the Japanese-backed state and seizing weapons from the surrendering Japanese forces. On 2 September, Ho Chi Minh proclaimed the Declaration of independence of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam (DRV). However, on 23 September, French forces overthrew the DRV and reinstated French rule. American support for the Viet Minh promptly ended, and O.S.S. forces left as the French sought to reassert control of the country.

=== First Indochina War ===
Tensions between the Viet Minh and French authorities had erupted into full-scale war by 1946, a conflict which soon became entwined with the wider Cold War. On 12 March 1947, US president Harry S. Truman announced the Truman Doctrine, an anticommunist foreign policy which pledged US support to nations resisting &quot;attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by outside pressures&quot;. In Indochina, this doctrine was first put into practice in February 1950, when the United States recognized the French-backed State of Vietnam in Saigon, led by former Emperor Bảo Đại, as the legitimate government of Vietnam, after the communist states of the Soviet Union and People&#x27;s Republic of China recognized the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, led by Ho Chi Minh, as the legitimate Vietnamese government the previous month. The outbreak of the Korean War in June convinced Washington policymakers that the war in Indochina was another example of communist expansionism, directed by the Soviet Union.

Military advisors from China began assisting the Viet Minh in July 1950. Chinese weapons, expertise, and laborers transformed the Viet Minh from a guerrilla force into a regular army. In September 1950, the US further enforced the Truman Doctrine by creating a Military Assistance and Advisory Group (MAAG) to screen French requests for aid, advise on strategy, and train Vietnamese soldiers. By 1954, the US had spent $1 billion in support of the French military effort, shouldering 80% of the cost of the war.

==== Battle of Dien Bien Phu ====

During the Battle of Dien Bien Phu in 1954, US carriers sailed to the Gulf of Tonkin and the US conducted reconnaissance flights. France and the US discussed the use of tactical nuclear weapons, though reports of how seriously this was considered and by whom, are vague. According to then-Vice President Richard Nixon, the Joint Chiefs of Staff drew up plans to use nuclear weapons to support the French. Nixon, a so-called &quot;hawk&quot;, suggested the US might have to &quot;put American boys in&quot;. President Dwight D. Eisenhower made American participation contingent on British support, but the British were opposed. Eisenhower, wary of involving the US in an Asian land war, decided against intervention. Throughout the conflict, US intelligence estimates remained skeptical of France&#x27;s chance of success.

On 7 May 1954, the French garrison at Dien Bien Phu surrendered. The defeat marked the end of French military involvement in Indochina. At the Geneva Conference, they negotiated a ceasefire with the Viet Minh, and independence was granted to Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam.

==Transition period==
At the 1954 Geneva Conference, Vietnam was temporarily partitioned at the 17th parallel. Ho Chi Minh wished to continue war in the south, but was restrained by Chinese allies who convinced him he could win control by electoral means. Under the Geneva Accords, civilians were allowed to move freely between the two provisional states for a 300-day period. Elections throughout the country were to be held in 1956 to establish a unified government. However, the US, represented at the conference by Secretary of State John Foster Dulles, objected to the resolution; Dulles&#x27; objection was supported only by the representative of Bảo Đại. John Foster&#x27;s brother, Allen Dulles, who was director of the Central Intelligence Agency, then initiated a psychological warfare campaign which exaggerated anti-Catholic sentiment among the Viet Minh and distributed propaganda attributed to Viet Minh threatening an American attack on Hanoi with atomic bombs.

During the 300-day period, up to one million northerners, mainly minority Catholics, moved south, fearing persecution by the Communists. The exodus was coordinated by a U.S.-funded $93 million relocation program, which involved the French Navy and the US Seventh Fleet to ferry refugees. The northern refugees gave the later Ngô Đình Diệm regime a strong anti-communist constituency. Over 100,000 Viet Minh fighters went to the north for &quot;regroupment&quot;, expecting to return south within two years. The Viet Minh left roughly 5,000 to 10,000 cadres in the south as a base for future insurgency. The last French soldiers left South Vietnam in April 1956 and the PRC also completed its withdrawal from North Vietnam.
Between 1953 and 1956, the North Vietnamese government instituted agrarian reforms, including &quot;rent reduction&quot; and &quot;land reform&quot;, which resulted in political oppression. During land reform, North Vietnamese witnesses suggested a ratio of one execution for every 160 village residents, which extrapolates to 100,000 executions. Because the campaign was mainly in the Red River Delta area, 50,000 executions became accepted by scholars. However, declassified documents from Vietnamese and Hungarian archives indicate executions were much lower, though likely greater than 13,500. In 1956, leaders in Hanoi admitted to &quot;excesses&quot; in implementing this program and restored much of the land to the original owners.

The south, meanwhile, constituted the State of Vietnam, with Bảo Đại as Emperor, and Ngô Đình Diệm as prime minister. Neither the US, nor Diệm&#x27;s State of Vietnam, signed anything at the Geneva Conference. The non-communist Vietnamese delegation objected strenuously to any division of Vietnam, but lost when the French accepted the proposal of Viet Minh delegate Phạm Văn Đồng, who proposed Vietnam eventually be united by elections under the supervision of &quot;local commissions&quot;. The US countered with what became known as the &quot;American Plan&quot;, with the support of South Vietnam and the UK. It provided for unification elections under the supervision of the UN, but was rejected by the Soviet delegation. The US said, &quot;With respect to the statement made by the representative of the State of Vietnam, the United States reiterates its traditional position that peoples are entitled to determine their own future and that it will not join in any arrangement which would hinder this&quot;.
US President Eisenhower wrote in 1954:

According to the &quot;Pentagon Papers&quot;, which commented on Eisenhower&#x27;s observation, Diệm would have been a more popular candidate than Bảo Đại against Hồ, stating that &quot;It is almost certain that by 1956 the proportion which might have voted for Ho - in a free election against Diem - would have been much smaller than 80%.&quot; In 1957, independent observers from India, Poland, and Canada representing the International Control Commission (ICC) stated that fair elections were impossible, with the ICC reporting that neither South nor North Vietnam had honored the armistice agreement.

From April to June 1955, Diệm eliminated political opposition in the south by launching operations against religious groups: the Cao Đài and Hòa Hảo of Ba Cụt. The campaign also attacked the Bình Xuyên organized crime group, which was allied with members of the communist party secret police and had military elements. The group was defeated in April following a battle in Saigon. As broad-based opposition to his harsh tactics mounted, Diệm increasingly sought to blame the communists.

In a referendum on the future of the State of Vietnam in October 1955, Diệm rigged the poll supervised by his brother Ngô Đình Nhu and was credited with 98% of the vote, including 133% in Saigon. His American advisors had recommended a more &quot;modest&quot; winning margin of &quot;60 to 70 percent.&quot; Diệm, however, viewed the election as a test of authority. He declared South Vietnam to be an independent state under the name Republic of Vietnam (ROV), with him as president. Likewise, Ho Chi Minh and other communists won at least 99% of the vote in North Vietnamese &quot;elections&quot;.

The domino theory, which argued that if a country fell to communism, all surrounding countries would follow, was first proposed by the Eisenhower administration. John F. Kennedy, then a senator, said in a speech to the American Friends of Vietnam: &quot;Burma, Thailand, India, Japan, the Philippines and obviously Laos and Cambodia are among those whose security would be threatened if the Red Tide of Communism overflowed into Vietnam.&quot;

==Diệm era, 1954–1963==
===Rule===

A devout Catholic, Diệm was fervently anti-communist, nationalist, and socially conservative. Historian Luu Doan Huynh notes &quot;Diệm represented narrow and extremist nationalism coupled with autocracy and nepotism.&quot; Most Vietnamese were Buddhist, and alarmed by Diệm&#x27;s actions, like his dedication of the country to the Virgin Mary.

On 11 April 1955, Diệm launched the &quot;Denounce the Communists&quot; campaign, during which suspected communists and other anti-government elements were arrested, imprisoned, tortured, or executed. He instituted the death penalty in August 1956 against activity deemed communist. The North Vietnamese government claimed that, by November 1957, over 65,000 individuals were imprisoned and 2,148 killed in the process. According to Gabriel Kolko, 40,000 political prisoners had been jailed by the end of 1958. In October 1956, Diệm launched a land reform program limiting the size of rice farms per owner. 1.8m acres of farm land became available for purchase by landless people. By 1960, the process had stalled because many of Diem&#x27;s biggest supporters were large landowners.

In May 1957, Diệm undertook a 10-day state visit to the US. President Eisenhower pledged his continued support, and a parade was held in Diệm&#x27;s honor. But Secretary of State Dulles privately conceded Diệm had to be backed because they could find no better alternative.

===Insurgency in the South, 1954–1960===

Between 1954 and 1957, the Diệm government succeeded in preventing large-scale organized unrest in the countryside. In April 1957, insurgents launched an assassination campaign, referred to as &quot;extermination of traitors&quot;. 17 people were killed in the Châu Đốc massacre at a bar in July, and in September a district chief was killed with his family. By early 1959, Diệm had come to regard the violence as an organized campaign and implemented Law 10/59, which made political violence punishable by death and property confiscation. There had been division among former Viet Minh, whose main goal was to hold elections promised in the Geneva Accords, leading to &quot;wildcat&quot; activities separate from the other communists and anti-GVN activists. Douglas Pike estimated that insurgents carried out 2,000 abductions, and 1,700 assassinations of government officials, village chiefs, hospital workers and teachers from 1957 to 1960. Violence between insurgents and government forces increased drastically from 180 clashes in January 1960, to 545 clashes in September.

In September 1960, COSVN, North Vietnam&#x27;s southern headquarters, ordered a coordinated uprising in South Vietnam against the government and a third of the population was soon living in areas of communist control. In December 1960, North Vietnam formally created the Viet Cong (VC) with the intent of uniting all anti-GVN insurgents, including non-communists. It was formed in Memot, Cambodia, and directed through COSVN. The VC &quot;placed heavy emphasis on the withdrawal of American advisors and influence, on land reform and liberalization of the GVN, on coalition government and the neutralization of Vietnam.&quot; The identities of the leaders of the organization were often kept secret.

Support for the VC was driven by resentment of Diem&#x27;s reversal of Viet Minh land reforms in the countryside. The Viet Minh had confiscated large private landholdings, reduced rents and debts, and leased communal lands, mostly to poorer peasants. Diem brought the landlords back, people who had been farming land for years had to return it to landlords and pay years of back rent. Marilyn B. Young wrote that &quot;The divisions within villages reproduced those that had existed against the French: 75% support for the NLF, 20% trying to remain neutral and 5% firmly pro-government&quot;.

====North Vietnamese involvement====

In March 1956, southern communist leader Lê Duẩn presented a plan to revive the insurgency entitled &quot;The Road to the South&quot; to the Politburo in Hanoi. However, as China and the Soviets opposed confrontation, his plan was rejected. Despite this, the North Vietnamese leadership approved tentative measures to revive southern insurgency in December 1956. Communist forces were under a single command structure set up in 1958. In May 1958, North Vietnamese forces seized the transportation hub at Tchepone in Southern Laos near the demilitarized zone, between North and South Vietnam.

The North Vietnamese Communist Party approved a &quot;people&#x27;s war&quot; on the South at a session in January 1959, and, in May, Group 559 was established to maintain and upgrade the Ho Chi Minh trail, at this time a six-month mountain trek through Laos. On 28 July, North Vietnamese and Pathet Lao forces invaded Laos, fighting the Royal Lao Army all along the border. About 500 of the &quot;regroupees&quot; of 1954 were sent south on the trail during its first year of operation. The first arms delivery via the trail was completed in August 1959. In April 1960, North Vietnam imposed universal military conscription for men. About 40,000 communist soldiers infiltrated the south from 1961 to 1963.

==Kennedy&#x27;s escalation, 1961–1963==
In the 1960 U.S. presidential election, Senator John F. Kennedy defeated incumbent Vice President Richard Nixon. Although Eisenhower warned Kennedy about Laos and Vietnam, Europe and Latin America &quot;loomed larger than Asia on his sights.&quot; 

The Kennedy administration remained committed to the Cold War foreign policy inherited from the Truman and Eisenhower administrations. In 1961, the US had 50,000 troops based in South Korea, and Kennedy faced four crisis situations: the failure of the Bay of Pigs Invasion he had approved in April, settlement negotiations between the pro-Western government of Laos and the Pathet Lao communist movement in May, construction of the Berlin Wall in August, and the Cuban Missile Crisis in October. Kennedy believed another failure to stop communist expansion would irreparably damage US credibility. He was determined to &quot;draw a line in the sand&quot; and prevent a communist victory in Vietnam. He told James Reston of &quot;The New York Times&quot; after the Vienna summit with Khrushchev, &quot;Now we have a problem making our power credible and Vietnam looks like the place.&quot;

Kennedy&#x27;s policy toward South Vietnam assumed Diệm and his forces had to defeat the guerrillas on their own. He was against the deployment of American combat troops and observed &quot;to introduce U.S. forces in large numbers there today, while it might have an initially favorable military impact, would almost certainly lead to adverse political and, in the long run, adverse military consequences.&quot; The quality of the South Vietnamese military, however, remained poor. Poor leadership, corruption, and political promotions weakened the ARVN. The frequency of guerrilla attacks rose as the insurgency gathered steam. While Hanoi&#x27;s support for the VC played a role, South Vietnamese governmental incompetence was at the core of the crisis.
One major issue Kennedy raised was whether the Soviet space and missile programs had surpassed those of the US. Although Kennedy stressed long-range missile parity with the Soviets, he was interested in using special forces for counterinsurgency warfare in Third World countries threatened by communist insurgencies. Although they were intended for use behind front lines after a conventional Soviet invasion of Europe, Kennedy believed guerrilla tactics employed by special forces, such as the Green Berets, would be effective in a &quot;brush fire&quot; war in Vietnam.

Kennedy advisors Maxwell Taylor and Walt Rostow recommended US troops be sent to South Vietnam disguised as flood relief workers. Kennedy rejected the idea but increased military assistance. In April 1962, John Kenneth Galbraith warned Kennedy of the &quot;danger we shall replace the French as a colonial force in the area and bleed as the French did.&quot; Eisenhower put 900 advisors in Vietnam, and by November 1963, Kennedy had put 16,000 military personnel there.

The Strategic Hamlet Program was initiated in late 1961. This joint U.S.–South Vietnamese program attempted to resettle the rural population into fortified villages. It was implemented in early 1962 and involved some forced relocation and segregation of rural South Vietnamese, into new communities where the peasantry would be isolated from the VC. It was hoped these new communities would provide security for the peasants and strengthen the tie between them and the central government. However, by November 1963 the program had waned, and it ended in 1964. In July 1962, 14 nations, including China, South Vietnam, the Soviet Union, North Vietnam, and the US, signed an agreement promising to respect Laos&#x27; neutrality.

===Ousting and assassination of Ngô Đình Diệm===
The inept performance of the ARVN was exemplified by failed actions such as the Battle of Ấp Bắc on 2 January 1963, in which the VC won a battle against a much larger and better-equipped South Vietnamese force, many of whose officers seemed reluctant even to engage in combat. The ARVN lost 83 soldiers and 5 US helicopters, serving to ferry troops shot down by VC forces, while the VC lost only 18 soldiers. The ARVN forces were led by Diệm&#x27;s most trusted general, Huỳnh Văn Cao. Cao was a Catholic, promoted due to religion and fidelity rather than skill, and his main job was to preserve his forces to stave off coups. Policymakers in Washington began to conclude Diệm was incapable of defeating the communists and might even make a deal with Ho Chi Minh. He seemed concerned only with fending off coups and had become paranoid after attempts in 1960 and 1962, which he partly attributed to US encouragement. As Robert F. Kennedy noted, &quot;Diệm wouldn&#x27;t make even the slightest concessions. He was difficult to reason with...&quot; Historian James Gibson summed up the situation:

Discontent with Diệm&#x27;s policies exploded in May 1963, following the Huế Phật Đản shootings of nine Buddhists protesting the ban on displaying the Buddhist flag on Vesak, Buddha&#x27;s birthday. This resulted in mass protests—the Buddhist crisis—against discriminatory policies that gave privileges to Catholics over the Buddhist majority. Diệm&#x27;s elder brother Ngô Đình Thục was the Archbishop of Huế and aggressively blurred the separation between church and state. Thuc&#x27;s anniversary celebrations occurred shortly before Vesak had been bankrolled by the government, and Vatican flags were displayed prominently. There had been reports of Catholic paramilitaries demolishing Buddhist pagodas throughout Diệm&#x27;s rule. Diệm refused to make concessions to the Buddhist majority or take responsibility for the deaths. On 21 August 1963, the ARVN Special Forces of Colonel Lê Quang Tung, loyal to Diệm&#x27;s younger brother Ngô Đình Nhu, raided pagodas, causing widespread destruction and leaving a death toll into the hundreds.
US officials began discussing regime change during the middle of 1963. The United States Department of State wanted to encourage a coup, while the Pentagon favored Diệm. Chief among the proposed changes was removal of Diệm&#x27;s younger brother Nhu, who controlled the secret police and special forces, and was seen as being behind the Buddhist repression and the architect of the Ngô family&#x27;s rule. This proposal was conveyed to the US embassy in Saigon in Cable 243. The CIA contacted generals planning to remove Diệm, and told them the US would not oppose such a move, nor punish them by cutting off aid. Diệm was overthrown and then executed, along with his brother, on 2 November 1963. When Kennedy was informed, Maxwell Taylor remembered he &quot;rushed from the room with a look of shock and dismay on his face.&quot; Kennedy had not anticipated Diệm&#x27;s murder. The U.S. ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge, invited the coup leaders to the embassy and congratulated them. Lodge informed Kennedy that &quot;the prospects now are for a shorter war&quot;. Kennedy wrote Lodge a letter congratulating him for &quot;a fine job&quot;.

Following the coup, chaos ensued. Hanoi took advantage and increased its support for the VC. South Vietnam entered extreme political instability, as one military government toppled another in quick succession. Increasingly, each new regime was viewed by the communists as a puppet of the Americans; whatever the failings of Diệm, his credentials as a nationalist had been impeccable. US advisors were embedded at every level of the South Vietnamese armed forces. They were however criticized for ignoring the political nature of the insurgency. The Kennedy administration sought to refocus US efforts on pacification – which in this case was defined as countering the growing threat of insurgency – and &quot;winning the hearts and minds&quot; of the population. Military leadership in Washington, however, was hostile to any role for U.S. advisors other than troop training. General Paul Harkins, the commander of U.S. forces in South Vietnam, confidently predicted victory by Christmas 1963. The CIA was less optimistic, however, warning that &quot;the Viet Cong by and large retain de facto control of much of the countryside and have steadily increased the overall intensity of the effort&quot;.

Paramilitary officers from the CIA&#x27;s Special Activities Division trained and led Hmong tribesmen in Laos and into Vietnam. The indigenous forces were in the tens of thousands and conducted direct action missions, led by paramilitary officers, against the Communist Pathet Lao forces and their North Vietnamese supporters. The CIA ran the Phoenix Program and participated in the Military Assistance Command, Vietnam – Studies and Observations Group (MAC-V SOG).

==Gulf of Tonkin and Johnson&#x27;s escalation, 1963–1969==
Kennedy was assassinated on 22 November 1963. Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson had not been heavily involved with policy toward Vietnam; however, upon becoming president, he immediately focused it. On 24 November 1963, he said, &quot;the battle against communism... must be joined... with strength and determination.&quot; Johnson knew he had inherited a deteriorating situation in South Vietnam, but adhered to the widely accepted domino argument for defending the South: Should they retreat or appease, either action would imperil other nations. Findings from RAND&#x27;s Viet Cong Motivation and Morale Project bolstered his confidence that an air war would weaken the insurgency. Some argue the policy of North Vietnam was not to topple other non-communist governments in South East Asia.

The military revolutionary council, meeting in lieu of a strong South Vietnamese leader, had 12 members. It was headed by General Dương Văn Minh, whom journalist Stanley Karnow, recalled as &quot;a model of lethargy&quot;. Lodge cabled home about Minh: &quot;Will he be strong enough to get on top of things?&quot; Minh&#x27;s regime was overthrown in January 1964 by General Nguyễn Khánh. There was persistent instability in the military: several coups—not all successful—occurred in a short period of time.

===Gulf of Tonkin incident===

On 2 August 1964, , on an intelligence mission along North Vietnam&#x27;s coast, fired upon and damaged torpedo boats approaching it in the Gulf of Tonkin. A second attack was reported two days later on and &quot;Maddox&quot;. The circumstances were murky. Johnson commented to Undersecretary of State George Ball that &quot;those sailors out there may have been shooting at flying fish.&quot; An NSA publication declassified in 2005 revealed there was no attack on 4 August.

The second &quot;attack&quot; led to retaliatory airstrikes, and prompted Congress to approve the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution on 7 August 1964. The resolution granted the president power &quot;to take all necessary measures to repel any armed attack against the forces of the United States and to prevent further aggression&quot; and Johnson relied on this as giving him authority to expand the war. Johnson pledged he was not &quot;committing American boys to fighting a war that I think ought to be fought by the boys of Asia to help protect their own land&quot;.

The National Security Council recommended a three-stage escalation of the bombing of North Vietnam. Following an attack on a U.S. Army base on 7 February 1965, airstrikes were initiated, while Soviet Premier Alexei Kosygin was on a state visit to North Vietnam. Operation Rolling Thunder and Operation Arc Light expanded aerial bombardment and ground support operations. The bombing campaign, which lasted three years, was intended to force North Vietnam to cease its support for the VC by threatening to destroy North Vietnamese air defenses and infrastructure. It was additionally aimed at bolstering South Vietnamese morale. Between March 1965 and November 1968, &quot;Rolling Thunder&quot; deluged the north with a million tons of missiles, rockets and bombs.

===Bombing of Laos===

Bombing was not restricted to North Vietnam. Other aerial campaigns, targeted different parts of the VC and PAVN infrastructure. These included the Ho Chi Minh Trail through Laos and Cambodia. The ostensibly neutral Laos had become the scene of a civil war, pitting the Laotian government backed by the US, against the Pathet Lao and its North Vietnamese allies.

Massive aerial bombardment against the Pathet Lao and PAVN forces was carried out by the US to prevent the collapse of the Royal central government, and deny use of the Ho Chi Minh Trail. Between 1964 and 1973, the U.S. dropped two million tons of bombs on Laos, nearly equal to the 2.1 million tons of bombs it dropped on Europe and Asia during World War II, making Laos the most heavily bombed country in history, relative to its population.

The objective of stopping North Vietnam and the VC was never reached. The Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force Curtis LeMay, however, had long advocated saturation bombing in Vietnam and wrote of the communists that &quot;we&#x27;re going to bomb them back into the Stone Age&quot;.

===The 1964 offensive===

Following the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, Hanoi anticipated the arrival of US troops and began expanding the VC, as well as sending increasing numbers of PAVN personnel southwards. They were outfitting the VC forces and standardizing their equipment with AK-47 rifles and other supplies, as well as forming the 9th Division. &quot;From a strength of approximately 5,000 at the start of 1959 the Viet Cong&#x27;s ranks grew to about 100,000 at the end of 1964... Between 1961 and 1964 the Army&#x27;s strength rose from about 850,000 to nearly a million men.&quot; U.S. troop numbers deployed to Vietnam during the same period were much lower: 2,000 in 1961, rising to 16,500 in 1964. The use of captured equipment decreased, while greater numbers of ammunition and supplies were required to maintain regular units. Group 559 was tasked with expanding the Ho Chi Minh Trail, in light of the bombardment by US warplanes. The war had shifted into the final, conventional phase of Hanoi&#x27;s three-stage protracted warfare model. The VC was now tasked with destroying the ARVN and capturing and holding areas; however, it was not yet strong enough to assault major towns and cities.

In December 1964, ARVN forces suffered heavy losses at the Battle of Bình Giã, in a battle both sides viewed as a watershed. Previously, the VC had utilized hit-and-run guerrilla tactics. At Binh Gia, however, they defeated a strong ARVN force in a conventional battle and remained in the field for four days. Tellingly, South Vietnamese forces were again defeated in June 1965 at the Battle of Đồng Xoài.

===American ground war===
On 8 March 1965, 3,500 U.S. Marines were landed near Da Nang, South Vietnam. This marked the beginning of the American ground war. U.S. public opinion overwhelmingly supported the deployment. The Marines&#x27; initial assignment was defense of Da Nang Air Base. The first deployment was increased to nearly 200,000 by December. U.S. military had long been schooled in offensive warfare. Regardless of political policies, U.S. commanders were institutionally and psychologically unsuited to a defensive mission.

General William Westmoreland informed Admiral U. S. Grant Sharp Jr., commander of U.S. Pacific forces, that the situation was critical, &quot;I am convinced that U.S. troops with their energy, mobility, and firepower can successfully take the fight to the NLF (Viet Cong)&quot;. With this recommendation, Westmoreland was advocating an aggressive departure from America&#x27;s defensive posture and the sidelining of the South Vietnamese. By ignoring ARVN units, the U.S. commitment became open-ended. Westmoreland outlined a three-point plan to win the war:
* Phase 1. Commitment of U.S. and allied forces necessary to halt the losing trend by the end of 1965.
* Phase 2. U.S. and allied forces mount major offensive actions to seize the initiative to destroy guerrilla and organized enemy forces. This phase would end when the enemy had been worn down and driven back from major populated areas.
* Phase 3. If the enemy persisted, a period of 12–18 months following Phase 2 would be required for final destruction of enemy forces remaining in remote base areas.

The plan was approved by Johnson and marked a profound departure from the insistence that South Vietnam was responsible for defeating the VC. Westmoreland predicted victory by the end of 1967. Johnson did not communicate this change in strategy to the media. Instead he emphasized continuity. The change in policy depended on matching the North Vietnamese and VC in a contest of attrition and morale. The opponents were locked in a cycle of escalation. Westmoreland and McNamara touted the body count system for gauging victory, a metric that would prove flawed.
The American buildup transformed the South Vietnamese economy and had a profound effect on society. South Vietnam was inundated with manufactured goods. Washington encouraged its SEATO allies to contribute troops; Australia, New Zealand, Thailand and the Philippines agreed to do so. South Korea would ask to join the Many Flags program in return for economic compensation. Major allies, however, notably NATO countries Canada and the UK, declined troop requests.

The U.S. and its allies mounted complex search and destroy operations. In November 1965, the U.S. engaged in its first major battle with the PAVN, the Battle of Ia Drang. The operation was the first large scale helicopter air assault by the U.S., and first to employ Boeing B-52 Stratofortress strategic bombers in support. These tactics continued in 1966–67, however, the PAVN/VC insurgents remained elusive and demonstrated tactical flexibility. By 1967, the war had generated large-scale internal refugees, 2 million in South Vietnam, with 125,000 people evacuated and rendered homeless during Operation Masher alone, which was the largest search and destroy operation to that point. Operation Masher would have negligible impact, however, as the PAVN/VC returned to the province just four months after it ended. Despite major operations, which the VC and PAVN would typically evade, the war was characterized by smaller-unit contacts or engagements. The VC and PAVN would initiate 90% of large firefights, and thus the PAVN/VC would retain strategic initiative despite overwhelming US force and fire-power deployment. The PAVN and Viet Cong had developed strategies capable of countering US military doctrines and tactics: see NLF and PAVN battle tactics.

Meanwhile, the political situation in South Vietnam began to stabilize with the arrival of prime minister Air Marshal Nguyễn Cao Kỳ and figurehead chief of state, General Nguyễn Văn Thiệu, in mid-1965 at the head of a junta. In 1967, Thieu became president with Ky as his deputy, after rigged elections. Although they were nominally a civilian government, Kỳ was supposed to maintain real power through a behind-the-scenes military body. However, Thiệu outmanoeuvred and sidelined Kỳ. Thiệu was accused of murdering Kỳ loyalists through contrived military accidents. Thiệu remained president until 1975, having won a one-candidate election in 1971.

Johnson employed a &quot;policy of minimum candor&quot; with the media. Military information officers sought to manage coverage by emphasizing stories that portrayed progress. This policy damaged the public trust in official pronouncements. As coverage of the war and the Pentagon diverged, a so-called credibility gap developed. Despite Johnson and Westmoreland publicly proclaiming victory and Westmoreland stating the &quot;end is coming into view&quot;, internal reports in the &quot;Pentagon Papers&quot; indicate that VC forces retained strategic initiative and controlled their losses. VC attacks against static US positions accounted for 30% of engagements, VC/PAVN ambushes and encirclements for 23%, American ambushes against VC/PAVN forces for 9%, and American forces attacking Viet Cong emplacements only 5%.

== Tet Offensive and its aftermath ==

In late 1967, the PAVN lured American forces into the hinterlands at Đắk Tô and at the Marine Khe Sanh combat base, where the U.S. fought The Hill Fights. These were part of a diversionary strategy meant to draw US forces towards the Central Highlands. Preparations were underway for the Tet Offensive, with the intention of Văn Tiến Dũng forces to launch &quot;direct attacks on the American and puppet nerve centers—Saigon, Huế, Danang, all the cities, towns and main bases...&quot; Le Duan sought to placate critics of the stalemate by planning a decisive victory. He reasoned this could be achieved through sparking an uprising within the towns and cities, along with mass defections among ARVN units, who were on leave during the truce period.

The Tet Offensive began on 30 January 1968, as over 100 cities were attacked by over 85,000 VC/PAVN troops, including assaults on military installations, headquarters, and government buildings, including the U.S. Embassy in Saigon. U.S. and South Vietnamese forces were shocked by the scale, intensity and deliberative planning, as infiltration of personnel and weapons into the cities was accomplished covertly; the offensive constituted an intelligence failure on the scale of Pearl Harbor. Most cities were recaptured within weeks, except the former imperial capital Huế, which PAVN/VC troops held on for 26 days. They executed approximately 2,800 unarmed Huế civilians and foreigners they considered to be spies. In the following Battle of Huế American forces employed massive firepower that left 80% of the city in ruins. At Quảng Trị City, the ARVN Airborne Division, the 1st Division and a regiment of the US 1st Cavalry Division managed to hold out and overcome an assault intended to capture the city. In Saigon, VC/PAVN fighters had captured areas in and around the city, attacking key installations before US and ARVN forces dislodged them after three weeks. During one battle, Peter Arnett reported an infantry commander saying of the Battle of Bến Tre that &quot;it became necessary to destroy the village in order to save it.&quot;
During the first month of the offensive, 1,100 Americans and other allied troops, 2,100 ARVN and 14,000 civilians were killed. After two months, nearly 5,000 ARVN and over 4,000 U.S. forces had been killed and 45,820 wounded. The U.S. claimed 17,000 PAVN/VC had been killed and 15,000 wounded. A month later a second offensive known as the May Offensive was launched; it demonstrated the VC were still capable of carrying out orchestrated nationwide offensives. Two months later a third offensive was launched, Phase III Offensive. PAVN records of their losses across all three offensives was 45,267 killed and 111,179 total casualties. It had become the bloodiest year up to then. The failure to spark a general uprising and lack of defections among the ARVN units meant both war goals of Hanoi had fallen flat at enormous cost.

Prior to Tet, in November 1967, Westmoreland had spearheaded a public relations drive for the Johnson administration to bolster flagging public support. In a speech to the National Press Club he said a point had been reached &quot;where the end comes into view.&quot; Thus, the public was shocked and confused when Westmoreland&#x27;s predictions were trumped by the Tet Offensive. Public approval of his performance dropped from 48% to 36%, and endorsement for the war fell from 40% to 26%.&quot; The public and media began to turn against Johnson as the offensives contradicted claims of progress.

At one point in 1968, Westmoreland considered the use of nuclear weapons in a contingency plan codenamed Fracture Jaw, which was abandoned when it became known to the White House. Westmoreland requested 200,000 additional troops, which was leaked to the media, and the fallout combined with intelligence failures caused him to be removed from command in March 1968, succeeded by his deputy Creighton Abrams.

On 10 May 1968, peace talks began between the US and North Vietnam in Paris. Negotiations stagnated for five months, until Johnson gave orders to halt the bombing of North Vietnam. Hanoi realized it could not achieve a &quot;total victory&quot; and employed a strategy known as &quot;talking while fighting, fighting while talking&quot;, in which offensives would occur concurrently with negotiations.

Johnson declined to run for re-election as his approval rating slumped from 48% to 36%. His escalation of the war divided Americans, cost 30,000 American lives by that point and was regarded to have destroyed his presidency. Refusal to send more troops was seen as Johnson&#x27;s admission that the war was lost. As McNamara said, &quot;the dangerous illusion of victory by the United States was therefore dead.&quot;

Vietnam was a major political issue during the United States presidential election in 1968. The election was won by Republican Richard Nixon who claimed to have a secret plan to end the war.

==Vietnamization (1969–1972)==
===Nuclear threats and diplomacy===
Nixon began troop withdrawals in 1969. His plan to build up the ARVN so it could take over the defense of South Vietnam became known as &quot;Vietnamization&quot;. As the PAVN/VC recovered from their 1968 losses and avoided contact, Abrams conducted operations aimed at disrupting logistics, with better use of firepower and more cooperation with the ARVN. In October 1969, Nixon had ordered B-52s loaded with nuclear weapons to race to the border of Soviet airspace to convince the Soviet Union, in accord with the madman theory, he was capable of anything to end the Vietnam War. Nixon had sought &quot;détente&quot; with the Soviet Union and rapprochement with China, which decreased tensions and led to nuclear arms reductions. However, the Soviets continued to supply the North Vietnamese.

===Hanoi&#x27;s war strategy===

On 2 September 1969, Ho Chi Minh died aged 79. The failure of the 1968 Tet Offensive to spark a popular uprising in the south caused a shift in Hanoi&#x27;s war strategy, and the Giáp-Chinh &quot;Northern-First&quot; faction regained control over military affairs from the Lê Duẩn-Hoàng Văn Thái &quot;Southern-First&quot; faction. An unconventional victory was sidelined in favor of a conventional victory through conquest. Large-scale offensives were rolled back in favor of small-unit and sapper attacks as well as targeting the pacification and Vietnamization strategy. Following Tet, the PAVN had transformed from a light-infantry, limited mobility force into a high-mobile and mechanized combined arms force. By 1970, over 70% of communist troops in the south were northerners, and southern-dominated VC units no longer existed.

===U.S. domestic controversies===
The anti-war movement was gaining strength in the US. Nixon appealed to the &quot;silent majority&quot; who he said supported the war without showing it. But revelations of the 1968 My Lai massacre, in which a US Army unit raped and killed civilians, and the 1969 &quot;Green Beret Affair&quot;, where eight Special Forces soldiers, were arrested for the murder of a suspected double agent, provoked national and international outrage.

In 1971, the &quot;Pentagon Papers&quot; were leaked to &quot;The New York Times&quot;. The top-secret history of US involvement in Vietnam, commissioned by the Department of Defense, detailed public deceptions on the part of the government. The Supreme Court ruled its publication was legal.

===Collapsing U.S. morale===

Following the Tet Offensive and decreasing support among the US public, US forces began a period of morale collapse, and disobedience. At home, desertion rates quadrupled from 1966 levels. Among the enlisted, only 2.5% chose infantry combat positions in 1969–70. ROTC enrollment decreased from 191,749 in 1966 to 72,459 by 1971, and reached a low of 33,220 in 1974, depriving US forces of much-needed military leadership.

Open refusal to engage in patrols or carry out orders emerged, with a notable case of an entire company refusing orders to carry out operations. Unit cohesion began to dissipate and focused on minimizing contact with the PAVN/VC. A practice known as &quot;sand-bagging&quot; started, where units ordered to patrol would go into the country-side, find a site out of view from superiors and radio in false coordinates and unit reports. Drug usage increased among US forces, 30% regularly used marijuana, while a House subcommittee found 10% regularly used high-grade heroin. From 1969 on, search-and-destroy operations became referred to as &quot;search and avoid&quot; operations, falsifying battle reports while avoiding guerrillas. 900 fragging and suspected fragging incidents were investigated, most occurring between 1969 and 1971. In 1969, field-performance was characterized by lowered morale, lack of motivation, and poor leadership. The significant decline in US morale was demonstrated by the Battle of FSB Mary Ann in March 1971, in which a sapper attack inflicted serious losses on the U.S. defenders. Westmoreland, no longer in command but tasked with investigation of the failure, cited a dereliction of duty, lax defensive postures and lack of officers in charge.

On the collapse of morale, historian Shelby Stanton wrote:

===ARVN taking the lead and U.S. ground force withdrawal===

Beginning in 1969, American troops were withdrawn from border areas where most of the fighting took place and redeployed along the coast and interior. US casualties in 1970 were less than half of 1969, after being relegated to less active combat. While US forces were redeployed, the ARVN took over combat operations, with casualties double US casualties in 1969, and more than triple US ones in 1970. In the post-Tet environment, membership in the South Vietnamese Regional Force and Popular Force militias grew, and they were now more capable of providing village security, which the Americans had not accomplished.

In 1970, Nixon announced the withdrawal of an additional 150,000 American troops, reducing US numbers to 265,500. By 1970, VC forces were no longer southern-majority, nearly 70% of units were northerners. Between 1969 and 1971 the VC and some PAVN units had reverted to small unit tactics typical of 1967 and prior, instead of nationwide offensives. In 1971, Australia and New Zealand withdrew their soldiers and US troops were further reduced to 196,700, with a deadline to remove another 45,000 troops by February 1972. The US reduced support troops, and in March 1971 the 5th Special Forces Group, the first American unit deployed to South Vietnam, withdrew.

===Cambodia===
Prince Norodom Sihanouk had proclaimed Cambodia neutral since 1955, but permitted the PAVN/VC to use the port of Sihanoukville and the Sihanouk Trail. In March 1969 Nixon launched a secret bombing campaign, called Operation Menu, against communist sanctuaries along the Cambodia/Vietnam border. Only five high-ranking congressional officials were informed.

In March 1970, Sihanouk was deposed by his pro-American prime minister Lon Nol, who demanded North Vietnamese troops leave Cambodia or face military action. Nol began rounding up Vietnamese civilians in Cambodia into internment camps and massacring them, provoking reactions from the North and South Vietnamese governments. In April–May 1970, North Vietnam invaded Cambodia at the request of the Khmer Rouge, following negotiations with deputy leader Nuon Chea. Nguyen Co Thach recalls: &quot;Nuon Chea has asked for help and we have liberated five provinces of Cambodia in ten days.&quot; US and ARVN forces launched the Cambodian Campaign in May to attack PAVN/VC bases. A counter-offensive in 1971, as part of Operation Chenla II by the PAVN, would recapture most of the border areas and decimate most of Nol&#x27;s forces.

The US incursion into Cambodia sparked nationwide U.S. protests as Nixon had promised to deescalate American involvement. Four students were killed by National Guardsmen in May 1970 during a protest at Kent State University, which provoked further public outrage. The reaction by the administration was seen as callous, reinvigorating the declining anti-war movement. The US Air Force continued to bomb Cambodia in support of the Cambodian government as part of Operation Freedom Deal.

===Laos===

Building on the success of ARVN units in Cambodia, and further testing the Vietnamization program, the ARVN were tasked with Operation Lam Son 719 in February 1971, the first major ground operation to attack the Ho Chi Minh Trail, at the crossroad of Tchepone. This offensive was the first time the PAVN would field-test its combined arms force. The first few days were a success, but momentum slowed after fierce resistance. Thiệu had halted the general advance, leaving PAVN armored divisions able to surround them.

Thieu ordered air assault troops to capture Tchepone and withdraw, despite facing four-times larger numbers. During the withdrawal, the PAVN counterattack had forced a panicked rout. Half of the ARVN troops were either captured or killed, half of the ARVN/US support helicopters were downed and the operation was considered a fiasco, demonstrating operational deficiencies within the ARVN. Nixon and Thieu had sought to use to showcase victory simply by capturing Tchepone, and it was spun off as an &quot;operational success&quot;.

=== Easter Offensive and Paris Peace Accords (1972) ===

Vietnamization was again tested by the Easter Offensive of 1972, a conventional PAVN invasion of South Vietnam. The PAVN overran the northern provinces and attacked from Cambodia, threatening to cut the country in half. US troop withdrawals continued, but American airpower responded, beginning Operation Linebacker, and the offensive was halted. The US Navy also initiated Operation Pocket Money in May, an aerial mining campaign in Haiphong Harbor that prevented North Vietnam&#x27;s allies from resupplying it with weapons and aid by sea.

The war was central to the 1972 U.S. presidential election as Nixon&#x27;s opponent, George McGovern, campaigned on immediate withdrawal. Nixon&#x27;s Security Advisor, Henry Kissinger, had continued secret negotiations with North Vietnam&#x27;s Lê Đức Thọ and in October 1972 reached an agreement. Thiệu demanded changes to the peace accord upon its discovery, and when North Vietnam went public with the details, the Nixon administration claimed they were attempting to embarrass the president. The negotiations became deadlocked when Hanoi demanded changes. To show his support for South Vietnam and force Hanoi back to the negotiating table, Nixon ordered Operation Linebacker II, a bombing of Hanoi and Haiphong in December 1972. Nixon pressured Thiệu to accept the agreement or face military action.

On 15 January 1973, all US combat activities were suspended. Lê Đức Thọ and Henry Kissinger, along with the PRG Foreign Minister Nguyễn Thị Bình and a reluctant Thiệu, signed the Paris Peace Accords on 27 January 1973. This ended direct U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War, created a ceasefire between North Vietnam/PRG and South Vietnam, guaranteed the territorial integrity of Vietnam under the Geneva Conference of 1954, called for elections or a political settlement between the PRG and South Vietnam, allowed 200,000 communist troops to remain in the south, and agreed to a POW exchange. There was a 60-day period for the withdrawal of US forces. &quot;This article&quot;, noted Peter Church, &quot;proved... to be the only one of the Paris Agreements which was fully carried out.&quot; All US forces personnel were withdrawn by March 1973.

==U.S. exit and final campaigns (1973–1975)==

In the lead-up to the ceasefire on 28 January, both sides attempted to maximize land and population under their control in a campaign known as the War of the flags. Fighting continued after the ceasefire, without US participation, and throughout the year. North Vietnam was allowed to continue supplying troops in the South but only to replace expended material. The Nobel Peace Prize was awarded to Kissinger and Thọ, but Thọ declined it saying true peace did not yet exist.

On 15 March 1973, Nixon implied the US would intervene militarily if the North launched a full offensive, and Secretary of Defense Schlesinger re-affirmed this during his June confirmation hearings. Public and congressional reaction to Nixon&#x27;s statement was unfavorable, prompting the Senate to pass the Case–Church Amendment to prohibit any intervention.

Northern leaders expected the ceasefire terms would favor their side, but Saigon, bolstered by a surge of US aid just before the ceasefire went into effect, began to roll them back. The North responded with a new strategy hammered out in meetings in Hanoi in March 1973, according to the memoirs of Trần Văn Trà. With US bombings suspended, work on the Ho Chi Minh Trail and other logistical structures could proceed. Logistics would be upgraded until the North was in a position to launch a massive invasion of the South, projected for the 1975–76 dry season. Trà calculated this date would be Hanoi&#x27;s last opportunity to strike, before Saigon&#x27;s army could be fully trained. The PAVN resumed offensive operations when the dry season began in 1973, and by January 1974 had recaptured territory it lost during the previous dry season.
Within South Vietnam, the departure of the US and the global recession after the 1973 oil crisis hurt an economy partly dependent on US financial support and troop presence. After clashes that left 55 ARVN soldiers dead, Thiệu announced on 4 January 1974, that the war had restarted and the Peace Accords were no longer in effect. There were over 25,000 South Vietnamese casualties during the ceasefire period. Gerald Ford took over as US president in August 1974, and Congress cut financial aid to South Vietnam from $1 billion a year to $700 million. Congress voted in restrictions on funding to be phased in through 1975 and then total cutoff in 1976.

The success of the 1973–1974 dry season offensive inspired Trà to return to Hanoi in October 1974 and plead for a larger offensive the next dry season. This time, Trà could travel on a drivable highway with fueling stops, a vast change from when the Ho Chi Minh Trail was a dangerous mountain trek. Giáp, the North Vietnamese defense minister, was reluctant to approve Trà&#x27;s plan since a larger offensive might provoke US reaction and interfere with the big push planned for 1976. Trà appealed to Giáp&#x27;s superior, Lê Duẩn, who approved it. Trà&#x27;s plan called for a limited offensive from Cambodia into Phước Long Province. The strike was designed to solve logistical problems, gauge the reaction of South Vietnamese forces, and determine whether the US would return. On 13 December 1974, PAVN forces attacked Phước Long. Phuoc Binh fell on 6 January 1975. Ford desperately asked Congress for funds to assist and re-supply the South before it was overrun. Congress refused. The fall of Phuoc Binh and lack of American response left the South Vietnamese elite demoralized.

The speed of this success led the Politburo to reassess its strategy. It decided operations in the Central Highlands would be turned over to General Văn Tiến Dũng and that Pleiku should be seized, if possible. Dũng said to Lê Duẩn: &quot;Never have we had military and political conditions so perfect or a strategic advantage as great as we have now.&quot; At the start of 1975, the South Vietnamese had three times as much artillery and twice as many tanks and armored vehicles as the PAVN. However, heightened oil prices meant many assets could not be leveraged. Moreover, the rushed nature of Vietnamization, intended to cover the US retreat, resulted in a lack of spare parts, ground-crew, and maintenance personnel, which rendered most of it inoperable.

===Campaign 275===
On 10 March 1975, Dũng launched Campaign 275, a limited offensive into the Central Highlands, supported by tanks and heavy artillery. The target was Ban Ma Thuột; if the town could be taken, the provincial capital Pleiku and the road to the coast, would be exposed for a campaign in 1976. The ARVN proved incapable of resisting the onslaught, and its forces collapsed. Again, Hanoi was surprised by the speed of their success. Dung urged the Politburo to allow him to seize Pleiku immediately and turn his attention to Kon Tum. He argued that with two months of good weather until onset of the monsoon, it would be irresponsible not to take advantage.

Thiệu, a former general, ordered the abandonment of the Central Highlands and less defensible positions in a rushed policy described as &quot;light at the top, heavy at the bottom&quot;. While the bulk of ARVN forces attempted to flee, isolated units fought desperately. ARVN general Phu abandoned Pleiku and Kon Tum and retreated toward the coast, in what became known as the &quot;convoy of tears&quot;. On 20 March, Thiệu reversed himself and ordered Huế, Vietnam&#x27;s third-largest city, be held at all costs, and then changed policy several times. As the PAVN launched their attack, panic set in, and ARVN resistance withered. On 22 March, the PAVN attacked Huế. Civilians flooded the airport and docks hoping for escape. As resistance in Huế collapsed, PAVN rockets rained down on Da Nang and its airport. By 28 March 35,000 PAVN troops were poised to attack the suburbs. By 30 March 100,000 leaderless ARVN troops surrendered as the PAVN marched through Da Nang. With the fall of the city, the defense of the Central Highlands and Northern provinces ended.

===Final North Vietnamese offensive===

With the north half of the country under their control, the Politburo ordered Dũng to launch the final offensive against Saigon. The operational plan for the Ho Chi Minh Campaign called for Saigon&#x27;s capture before 1 May. Hanoi wished to avoid the coming monsoon and prevent redeployment of ARVN forces defending the capital. PAVN forces, their morale boosted by their recent victories, rolled on, taking Nha Trang, Cam Ranh and Da Lat.

On 7 April, three PAVN divisions attacked Xuân Lộc, northeast of Saigon. For two weeks, fighting raged as the ARVN defenders made a last stand to try to block PAVN advance. On 21 April, however, the exhausted garrison was ordered to withdraw towards Saigon. An embittered and tearful Thiệu resigned, declaring that the US had betrayed South Vietnam. In a scathing attack, he suggested Kissinger had tricked him into signing the Paris peace agreement, promising military aid that failed to materialize. Having transferred power to Trần Văn Hương on 21 April, he left for Taiwan. After having appealed unsuccessfully to Congress for $722 million in emergency aid for South Vietnam, Ford gave a televised speech on 23 April, declaring an end to the War and US aid.

By the end of April, the ARVN had collapsed except in the Mekong Delta. Refugees streamed southward, ahead of the main PAVN onslaught. By 27 April, 100,000 PAVN troops encircled Saigon. The city was defended by about 30,000 ARVN troops. To hasten a collapse and foment panic, the PAVN shelled Tan Son Nhut Airport and forced its closure. With the runways closed, large numbers of civilians had no way out.

===Fall of Saigon===
Chaos and panic broke out as South Vietnamese officials and civilians scrambled to leave. Martial law was declared. American helicopters began evacuating South Vietnamese, US and foreign nationals from Tan Son Nhut and the U.S. embassy compound. Operation Frequent Wind had been delayed until the last possible moment, because of Ambassador Graham Martin&#x27;s belief Saigon could be held and a political settlement reached. Frequent Wind was the largest helicopter evacuation in history. It began on 29 April, in an atmosphere of desperation, as hysterical crowds of Vietnamese vied for limited space. Frequent Wind continued around the clock, as PAVN tanks breached defenses near Saigon. In the early morning of 30 April, the last US Marines evacuated the embassy by helicopter, as civilians swamped the perimeter and poured into the grounds.

On 30 April 1975, PAVN troops entered Saigon and overcame all resistance, capturing key buildings and installations. Tanks from the 2nd Corps crashed through the gates of the Independence Palace and the VC flag was raised above it. President Dương Văn Minh, who had succeeded Huong two days earlier, surrendered to Lieutenant colonel Bùi Văn Tùng, political commissar of the 203rd Tank Brigade. Minh was then escorted to Radio Saigon to announce the surrender declaration. The statement was on air at 2:30 pm.

==Opposition to U.S. involvement==

During the course of the war a large segment of Americans became opposed to U.S. involvement. In January 1967, only 32% of Americans thought the US had made a mistake in sending troops. Public opinion steadily turned against the war following 1967 and by 1970 only a third believed the U.S. had not made a mistake by sending troops.

Early opposition to US involvement drew its inspiration from the Geneva Conference of 1954. American support of Diệm in refusing elections was seen as thwarting the democracy America claimed to support. Kennedy, while senator, opposed involvement. It is possible to specify groups who led the anti-war movement at its peak in the late 1960s and the reasons why. Many young people protested because they were being drafted, while others were against because the anti-war movement grew popular among the counterculture. Some advocates within the peace movement advocated a unilateral withdrawal of forces. Opposition to the war tended to unite groups opposed to U.S. anti-communism and imperialism, and for those involved with the New Left. Others, such as Stephen Spiro, opposed the war based on the theory of Just War. Some wanted to show solidarity with the people of Vietnam, such as Norman Morrison emulating Thích Quảng Đức.

High-profile opposition to the war increasingly turned to mass protests to shift public opinion. Riots broke out at the 1968 Democratic National Convention. After reports of American military abuses, such as the My Lai massacre, brought attention and support to the anti-war movement, some veterans joined Vietnam Veterans Against the War. On 15 October 1969, the Vietnam Moratorium attracted millions of Americans. The fatal shooting of four students at Kent State University in 1970 led to nationwide university protests. Anti-war protests declined after the Paris Peace Accords and the end of the draft in January 1973, and the withdrawal of American troops.

==Involvement of other countries==
===Pro-Hanoi===
====People&#x27;s Republic of China====

China provided significant support for North Vietnam when the US started to intervene, including financial aid and the deployment of hundreds of thousands of military personnel in support roles. China said its military and economic aid to North Vietnam totaled $20 billion ($160 billion adjusted for 2022 prices) during the Vietnam War; included were 5 million tons of food to North Vietnam (equivalent to a year&#x27;s food production), accounting for 10–15% of their food supply by the 1970s.

In the summer of 1962, Mao Zedong agreed to supply Hanoi with 90,000 rifles and guns free of charge, and starting in 1965, China began sending anti-aircraft units and engineering battalions, to repair the damage caused by American bombing. They helped man anti-aircraft batteries, rebuild roads and railroads, transport supplies, and perform other engineering works. This freed PAVN units for combat. China sent 320,000 troops and annual arms shipments worth $180 million. China claims to have caused 38% of American air losses in the war. China also began financing the Khmer Rouge as a counterweight to North Vietnam. China &quot;armed and trained&quot; the Khmer Rouge during the civil war, and continued to aid them afterward.

====Soviet Union====
The Soviet Union supplied North Vietnam with medical supplies, arms, tanks, planes, helicopters, artillery, anti-aircraft missiles and other military equipment. Soviet crews fired Soviet-made surface-to-air missiles at US aircraft in 1965. Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, Russian officials acknowledged that the USSR had stationed up to 3,000 troops in Vietnam.

According to Russian sources, between 1953 and 1991, the hardware donated by the Soviet Union included: 2,000 tanks; 1,700 APCs; 7,000 artillery guns; over 5,000 anti-aircraft guns; 158 surface-to-air missile launchers; and 120 helicopters. In total, the Soviets sent North Vietnam annual arms shipments worth $450 million. From July 1965 to the end of 1974, fighting in Vietnam was observed by some 6,500 officers and generals, as well as more than 4,500 soldiers and sergeants of the Soviet Armed Forces, amounting to 11,000 military personnel. The KGB helped develop the signals intelligence capabilities of the North Vietnamese.

===Pro-Saigon===

As South Vietnam was formally part of a military alliance with the US, Australia, New Zealand, France, the UK, Pakistan, Thailand and the Philippines, the alliance was invoked during the war. The UK, France and Pakistan declined to participate, and South Korea, Taiwan, and Spain were non-treaty participants.

==United Front for the Liberation of Oppressed Races==

The ethnic minority peoples of South Vietnam, like the Montagnards in the Central Highlands, the Hindu and Muslim Cham, and the Buddhist Khmer Krom, were actively recruited in the war. There was a strategy of recruitment and favorable treatment of Montagnard tribes for the VC, as they were pivotal for control of infiltration routes. Some groups split off and formed the &quot;United Front for the Liberation of Oppressed Races&quot; (FULRO) to fight for autonomy or independence. FULRO fought against the South Vietnamese and VC, later fighting against the unified Socialist Republic of Vietnam, after the fall of South Vietnam.

During the war, South Vietnamese president Diem began a program to settle ethnic Vietnamese Kinh on Montagnard lands in the Central Highlands region. This provoked a backlash from the Montagnards, some joining the VC as a result. The Cambodians under pro-China Sihanouk and pro-American Lon Nol, supported their fellow co-ethnic Khmer Krom in South Vietnam, following an anti-ethnic Vietnamese policy. Following Vietnamization, many Montagnard groups and fighters were incorporated into the South Vietnamese Rangers as border sentries.

==War crimes==

Many war crimes took place, by both sides, including: rape, massacres of civilians, bombings of civilian targets, terrorism, torture, and murder of prisoners of war. Additional common crimes included theft, arson, and the destruction of property not warranted by military necessity.

===South Vietnamese, Korean and American===
In 1966, the Russell Tribunal was organized by a number of public figures opposed to the war led by Bertrand Russell in an effort to apply the precepts of international law to the actions of the United States and its allies in Vietnam. The tribunal found the US and its allies guilty of acts of aggression, use of weapons forbidden by the laws of war, bombardment of targets of a purely civilian character, mistreatment of prisoners, and genocide. Though the tribunal&#x27;s lack of juridical authority meant its findings were largely ignored by the United States and other governments, the hearings contributed to a growing body of evidence and documentation which established the factual basis for a counter-narrative to the United States&#x27; justifications for the war and inspired future hearings, tribunals and legal investigations.

In 1968, the Vietnam War Crimes Working Group (VWCWG) was established by the Pentagon task force set up in the wake of the My Lai massacre, to ascertain the veracity of emerging claims of US war crimes. Of the war crimes reported to military authorities, sworn statements by witnesses and status reports indicated 320 incidents had a factual basis. The substantiated cases included seven massacres between 1967 and 1971 in which at least 137 civilians were killed; 78 further attacks targeting non-combatants resulting in at least 57 deaths, 56 wounded and 15 sexually assaulted; and 141 cases of US soldiers torturing civilian detainees, or prisoners of war with fists, sticks, bats, water or electric shock. Journalists since have documented overlooked and uninvestigated war crimes, involving every active army division, including atrocities committed by Tiger Force. R. J. Rummel estimated that American forces committed around 5,500 democidal killings between 1960 and 1972.

US forces established free-fire zones to prevent VC fighters from sheltering in South Vietnamese villages. Such practice, which involved the assumption that anyone appearing in the designated zones was an enemy combatant that could be freely targeted by weapons, was regarded by journalist Lewis Simons as &quot;a severe violation of the laws of war&quot;. Nick Turse argues that a relentless drive toward higher body counts, widespread use of free-fire zones, rules of engagement where civilians who ran from soldiers or helicopters could be viewed as VC and disdain for Vietnamese civilians, led to massive civilian casualties and war crimes inflicted by US troops. One example cited by Turse is Operation Speedy Express, which was described by John Paul Vann as, in effect, &quot;many Mỹ Lais&quot;. A report by &quot;Newsweek&quot; magazine suggested that at least 5,000 civilians may have been killed during six months of the operation, and there were 748 recovered weapons and an official US military body count of 10,889 enemy combatants killed.

Rummel estimated that 39,000 were killed by South Vietnam during the Diem-era in democide; for 1964–75, Rummel estimated 50,000 people were killed in democide. Thus, the total for 1954 to 1975 is about 80,000 deaths caused by South Vietnam. Benjamin Valentino estimates 110,000–310,000 deaths as a &quot;possible case&quot; of &quot;counter-guerrilla mass killings&quot; by US and South Vietnamese forces. The Phoenix Program, coordinated by the CIA and involving US and South Vietnamese security forces, was aimed at destroying the political infrastructure of the VC. The program killed 26,000 to 41,000 people, with an unknown number being innocent civilians.

Torture and ill-treatment were frequently applied by the South Vietnamese to POWs, as well as civilian prisoners. During their visit to the Con Son Prison in 1970, US congressmen Augustus Hawkins and William R. Anderson witnessed detainees either confined in minute &quot;tiger cages&quot; or chained to their cells, and provided with poor-quality food. American doctors inspecting the prison found many inmates suffering symptoms resulting from forced immobility and torture. During their visits to US detention facilities in 1968 and 1969, the International Red Cross recorded many cases of torture and inhumane treatment before the captives were handed over to South Vietnamese authorities. Torture was conducted by the South Vietnamese government in collusion with the CIA.

South Korean forces were accused of war crimes. One documented event was the Phong Nhị and Phong Nhất massacre where the 2nd Marine Brigade reportedly killed between 69 and 79 civilians on 12 February 1968 in Phong Nhị and Phong Nhất village, Điện Bàn District. South Korean forces are accused of perpetrating other massacres: Bình Hòa massacre, Binh Tai Massacre and Hà My massacre.

===North Vietnamese and Viet Cong===

Ami Pedahzur has written that &quot;the overall volume and lethality of Viet Cong terrorism rivals or exceeds all but a handful of terrorist campaigns waged over the last third of the twentieth century&quot;, based on the definition of terrorists as a non-state actor, and examining targeted killings and civilian deaths which are estimated at over 18,000 from 1966 to 1969. The US Department of Defense estimates the VC/PAVN had conducted 36,000 murders and 58,000 kidnappings from 1967 to 1972, . Benjamin Valentino attributes 45,000–80,000 &quot;terrorist mass killings&quot; to the VC. Statistics for 1968–1972 suggest &quot;about 80 percent of the terrorist victims were ordinary civilians and only about 20 percent were government officials, policemen, members of the self-defence forces or pacification cadres.&quot; VC tactics included frequent mortaring of civilians in refugee camps, and placing of mines on highways frequented by villagers taking goods to urban markets. Some mines were set only to go off after heavy vehicle passage, causing slaughter aboard packed civilian buses.

Notable VC atrocities include the massacre of over 3,000 unarmed civilians at Huế during the Tet Offensive and the killing of 252 civilians during the Đắk Sơn massacre. 155,000 refugees fleeing the final North Vietnamese Spring Offensive were reported to have been killed, or abducted, on the road to Tuy Hòa in 1975. PAVN/VC troops killed 164,000 civilians in democide between 1954 and 1975 in South Vietnam. North Vietnam was known for its abusive treatment of American POWs, most notably in Hỏa Lò Prison (the &quot;Hanoi Hilton&quot;), where torture was employed to extract confessions.

==Women==
Women were active in a large variety of roles, making significant impacts and the war having significant impacts on them. Several million Vietnamese women served in the military and in militias, particularly in the VC, with the slogan &quot;when war comes, even the women must fight&quot; being widely used. These women made vital contributions on the Ho Chi Minh Trail, espionage, medical care, logistical and administrative work, and sometimes direct combat. Women workers took on more roles in the economy and Vietnam saw an increase in women&#x27;s rights. In Vietnam and elsewhere, women emerged as leaders of anti-war peace campaigns and made significant contributions to war journalism.

However, women still faced significant levels of discrimination during and were often targets of sexual violence and war crimes. Post-war, some Vietnamese women veterans faced difficulty reintegrating into society and having their contributions recognised, as well as advances in women&#x27;s rights failing to be sustained. Portrayals of the war have been criticised for their depictions of women, both for overlooking the role women played and reducing Vietnamese women to racist stereotypes. Women are at the forefront of campaigns to deal with the war&#x27;s aftermath, such as the long-terms effect of Agent Orange use and the Lai Đại Hàn.

==Black servicemen==
The experience of African-American military personnel has received significant attention. The site &quot;African-American Involvement in the Vietnam War&quot; compiles examples, as does the work of journalist Wallace Terry whose book &quot;Bloods: An Oral History of the Vietnam War by Black Veterans&quot;, includes observations about the impact on the black community and black servicemen. He notes: the higher proportion of combat casualties among African-American servicemen than other races, the shift toward and different attitudes of black military volunteers and conscripts, the discrimination encountered by black servicemen &quot;on the battlefield in decorations, promotion and duty assignments&quot;, as well as having to endure &quot;the racial insults, cross-burnings and Confederate flags of their white comrades&quot;—and the experiences faced by black soldiers stateside, during the war and after withdrawal.

Civil rights leaders protested the disproportionate casualties and overrepresentation in hazardous duty, experienced by African American servicemen, prompting reforms that were implemented beginning in 1967. As a result, by the war&#x27;s completion in 1975, black casualties had declined to 13% of US combat deaths, approximately equal to percentage of draft-eligible black men, though still slightly higher than the 10% who served in the military.

==Weapons==
Nearly all US-allied forces were armed with US weapons including the M1 Garand, M1 carbine, M14 rifle, and M16 rifle. The Australian and New Zealand forces employed the 7.62 mm L1A1 Self-Loading Rifle, with occasional use of the M16 rifle.

The PAVN/VC, although having inherited US, French, and Japanese weapons from World War II and the First Indochina War, were largely armed and supplied by China, the Soviet Union, and its Warsaw Pact allies. Some weapons—notably anti-personnel explosives, the K-50M, and &quot;home-made&quot; versions of the RPG-2—were manufactured in North Vietnam. By 1969 the US Army had identified 40 rifle/carbine types, 22 machine gun types, 17 types of mortar, 20 recoilless rifle or rocket launcher types, nine types of antitank weapons, and 14 anti-aircraft artillery weapons used by ground troops on all sides. Also in use, mostly by anti-communist forces, were 24 types of armored vehicles and self-propelled artillery, and 26 types of field artillery and rocket launchers.

==Extent of U.S. bombings==

The US dropped over 7 million tons of bombs on Indochina during the war, more than triple the 2.1 million tons it dropped on Europe and Asia during World War II, and more than ten times the amount during the Korean War. 500 thousand tons were dropped on Cambodia, 1 million tons on North Vietnam, and 4 million tons on South Vietnam. On a per person basis, the 2 million tons dropped on Laos make it the most heavily bombed country in history; &quot;The New York Times&quot; noted this was &quot;nearly a ton for every person in Laos.&quot; Due to the particularly heavy impact of cluster bombs, Laos was a strong advocate of the Convention on Cluster Munitions to ban the weapons, and was host to its first meeting in 2010.

Former US Air Force official Earl Tilford recounted &quot;repeated bombing runs of a lake in central Cambodia. The B-52s literally dropped their payloads in the lake.&quot; The Air Force ran many missions like this to secure additional funding during budget negotiations, so the tonnage expended does not directly correlate with the resulting damage.

== Casualties ==


Casualty estimates vary, with one source suggesting up to 3.8 million violent war deaths in Vietnam for 1955 to 2002. A demographic study calculated 791,000–1,141,000 war-related deaths for all of Vietnam, for military and civilians. Between 195,000 and 430,000 South Vietnamese civilians died. Guenter Lewy estimated 65,000 North Vietnamese civilians died. Estimates of civilian deaths caused by American bombing of North Vietnam range from 30,000 to 182,000. A 1975 US Senate subcommittee estimated 1.4 million South Vietnamese civilians casualties during the war, including 415,000 deaths. The military of South Vietnam suffered an estimated 254,256 killed between 1960-74, and additional deaths from 1954 to 1959 and in 1975. Other estimates point to higher figures of 313,000 casualties.

The US Department of Defense figure for PAVN/VC killed in Vietnam from 1965 to 1974 was 950,765. Officials believed these body count figures need to be deflated by 30 percent. Lewy asserts that one-third of the reported &quot;enemy&quot; killed may have been civilians, concluding that the figure was closer to 444,000.

According to figures released by the Vietnamese government there were 849,018 confirmed military deaths on the PAVN/VC side. The Vietnamese government released its estimate of war deaths for the more lengthy period of 1955 to 1975. This includes battle deaths of Vietnamese soldiers in the Laotian and Cambodian Civil Wars, in which the PAVN was a participant. Non-combat deaths account for 30-40% of these. However, the figures do not include deaths of South Vietnamese and allied soldiers. These do not include the estimated 300,000–500,000 PAVN/VC missing in action. Vietnamese government figures estimate 1.1 million dead and 300,000 missing from 1945 to 1979, with approximately 849,000 dead and 232,000 missing from 1960 to 1975.

US reports of &quot;enemy KIA&quot;, referred to as body count, were thought to have been subject to &quot;falsification and glorification&quot;, and a true estimate of PAVN/VC combat deaths is difficult to assess, as US victories were assessed by having a &quot;greater kill ratio&quot;. It was difficult to distinguish between civilians and military personnel in the VC, as many were part-time guerrillas or impressed laborers who did not wear uniforms and civilians killed were sometimes written off as enemy killed, because high enemy casualties was directly tied to promotions and commendation.

Between 275,000 and 310,000 Cambodians died, including 50,000–150,000 combatants and civilians from US bombings. 20,000–62,000 Laotians died, and 58,281 U.S. military personnel were killed, of which 1,584 are still listed missing .

==Aftermath==
===In Southeast Asia===
==== In Vietnam ====
On 2 July 1976, North and South Vietnam were merged to form the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. Despite speculation that the victorious North Vietnamese would, in Nixon&#x27;s words, &quot;massacre the civilians there [South Vietnam] by the millions,&quot; no mass executions took place.
However many South Vietnamese were sent to re-education camps where they endured torture, starvation, and disease while being forced to perform hard labor. According to Amnesty International, this figure varied depending on different observers: &quot;...&quot;50,000 to 80,000&quot; (&quot;Le Monde&quot;, April 1978), &quot;150,000&quot; (Reuters from Bien Hoa, November 1977), &quot;150,000 to 200,000&quot; (&quot;The Washington Post&quot;, December 1978), and &quot;300,000&quot; (Agence France Presse from Hanoi, February 1978).&quot; Such variations are because &quot;Some estimates may include not only detainees but also people sent from the cities to the countryside.&quot; According to a native observer, 443,360 people had to register for a period in re-education camps in Saigon alone, and while some were released after a few days, others stayed for more than a decade. Between 1975 and 1980, more than 1 million northerners migrated south, to regions formerly in the Republic of Vietnam, while, as part of the New Economic Zones program, around 750,000 to over 1 million southerners were moved mostly to mountainous forested areas. Gabriel García Márquez, a Nobel Prize winning writer, described South Vietnam as a &quot;False paradise&quot; after the war, when he visited in 1980:

The US used its security council veto to block Vietnam&#x27;s UN recognition three times, an obstacle to it receiving international aid.

==== Laos and Cambodia ====
By 1975, the North Vietnamese had lost influence over the Khmer Rouge. Phnom Penh, Cambodia&#x27;s capital, fell to the Khmer Rouge in April 1975. Under Pol Pot, the Khmer Rouge would kill 1–3 million Cambodians out of a population of around 8 million, in one of the bloodiest genocides ever.

The relationship between Vietnam and Democratic Kampuchea (Cambodia) escalated after the end of the war. In response to the Khmer Rouge taking over Phu Quoc and Tho Chu, and the belief they were responsible for the disappearance of 500 Vietnamese natives on Tho Chu, Vietnam launched a counterattack to take back these islands. After failed attempts to negotiate, Vietnam invaded Democratic Kampuchea in 1978 and ousted the Khmer Rouge, who were being supported by China, in the Cambodian–Vietnamese War. In response, China invaded Vietnam in 1979. The two countries fought a border war: the Sino-Vietnamese War. From 1978 to 1979, some 450,000 ethnic Chinese left Vietnam by boat as refugees or were deported.

The Pathet Lao overthrew the monarchy of Laos in December 1975, establishing the Lao People&#x27;s Democratic Republic. The change in regime was &quot;quite peaceful, a sort of Asiatic &#x27;velvet revolution&#x27;&quot;—although 30,000 former officials were sent to reeducation camps, often enduring harsh conditions.

==== Unexploded ordnance ====
Unexploded ordnance, mostly from US bombing, continues to kill people, and has rendered much land hazardous and impossible to cultivate. Ordnance has killed 42,000 people since the war ended. In Laos, 80 million bombs failed to explode and still remain. Unexploded ordnance has killed or injured over 20,000 Laotians since the war and about 50 people are killed or maimed annually. It is estimated the explosives buried will not be removed entirely for centuries.

==== Refugee crisis ====

Over 3 million people left Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia in the Indochina refugee crisis after 1975. Most Asian countries were unwilling to accept them, many of whom fled by boat and were known as boat people. Between 1975 and 1998, an estimated 1.2 million refugees from Vietnam and other Southeast Asian countries resettled in the US, while Canada, Australia, and France resettled over 500,000, China accepted 250,000 people. Laos experienced the largest refugee flight proportionally, 300,000 out of a population of 3 million crossed the border into Thailand. Included among their ranks were &quot;about 90%&quot; of Laos&#x27; &quot;intellectuals, technicians, and officials.&quot; An estimated 200,000 to 400,000 Vietnamese boat people died at sea, according to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

===In the United States===
Failure of US goals is often placed at different institutions and levels. Some have suggested it was due to political failures of leadership. Others point to a failure of military doctrine. Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara stated that &quot;the achievement of a military victory by U.S. forces in Vietnam was indeed a dangerous illusion.&quot; The inability to bring Hanoi to the bargaining table by bombing illustrated another US miscalculation, and the limitations of military abilities in achieving political goals. Army Chief of Staff Harold Keith Johnson noted, &quot;if anything came out of Vietnam, it was that air power couldn&#x27;t do the job.&quot; General William Westmoreland admitted bombing had been ineffective, saying he doubted &quot;that the North Vietnamese would have relented.&quot; Kissinger wrote in a memo to President Ford that &quot;in terms of military tactics ... our armed forces are not suited to this kind of war. Even the Special Forces who had been designed for it could not prevail.&quot; Hanoi had persistently sought unification since the Geneva Accords, and the effects of US bombing had negligible impact on North Vietnam&#x27;s goals. US bombing mobilized people throughout North Vietnam and international support, due to the perception of a superpower attempting to bomb a significantly smaller, agrarian society into submission.

In the post-war era, Americans struggled to absorb the lessons of the military intervention. President Ronald Reagan coined the term &quot;Vietnam Syndrome&quot; to describe the reluctance of the American public and politicians to support military interventions abroad. US polling in 1978 revealed nearly 72% of Americans believed the war was &quot;fundamentally wrong and immoral.&quot; Six months after the beginning of Operation Rolling Thunder, Gallup, Inc. found 60% of Americans did not believe that sending troops to Vietnam was a mistake in September 1965, and only 24% believed it was. Subsequent polling did not find that a plurality of Americans believed that sending troops was a mistake until October 1967, and did not find a majority believing it was until August 1968, during the third phase of the Tet Offensive. Thereafter, Gallup found majorities believing sending troops was a mistake through the signing of the Peace Accords in January 1973, when 60% believed sending troops was a mistake, and retrospective polls by Gallup between 1990 and 2000, found 69-74% of Americans believed sending troops was a mistake. The Vietnam War POW/MIA issue, concerning the fate of US service personnel listed as missing in action, persisted for years afterwards. The costs loom large in American consciousness; a 1990 poll showed the public incorrectly believed more Americans died in Vietnam than World War II.

====Financial cost====
Between 1953 and 1975, the US was estimated to have spent $168 billion on the war (equivalent to $ trillion in ). This resulted in a large budget deficit. Other figures point to $139 billion from 1965 to 1974 (not inflation-adjusted), 10 times all education spending in the US, and 50 times more than housing and community development spending within that period. It was stated that war-spending could have paid off every mortgage in the US, with money leftover. , the US government pays Vietnam veterans and their families more than $22 billion a year in war-related claims.

====Impact on the U.S. military====
More than 3 million Americans served in the war, 1.5 million of whom saw combat. James Westheider wrote that &quot;At the height of American involvement in 1968, for example, 543,000 American military personnel were stationed in Vietnam, but only 80,000 were considered combat troops.&quot; Conscription in the US existed since World War II, but ended in 1973.

58,220 American soldiers were killed, more than 150,000 wounded, and at least 21,000 permanently disabled. The average age of US troops killed was 23. According to Dale Kueter, &quot;Of those killed in combat, 86% were white, 13% were black...&quot; Approximately 830,000 veterans, 15%, suffered posttraumatic stress disorder. This unprecedented number was because the military had routinely provided heavy psychoactive drugs to servicemen, which left them unable to process trauma. Drug use, racial tensions, and the growing incidence of fragging—attempting to kill unpopular officers with grenades or other weapons—created problems for the military and impacted its capability to undertake operations. 125,000 Americans left for Canada to avoid the draft, and approximately 50,000 servicemen deserted. In 1977, President Jimmy Carter granted an unconditional pardon to all Vietnam-era draft evaders with Proclamation 4483.

The war called into question army doctrine. Marine general Victor H. Krulak criticized Westmoreland&#x27;s attrition strategy, calling it &quot;wasteful of American lives... with small likelihood of a successful outcome.&quot; Doubts surfaced about the ability of the military to train foreign forces. There was found to be considerable flaws and dishonesty by commanders, due to promotions being tied to the body count system touted by Westmoreland and McNamara. Secretary of Defense McNamara wrote to President Johnson his doubts: &quot;The picture of the world&#x27;s greatest superpower killing or seriously injuring 1,000 noncombatants a week, while trying to pound a tiny backward nation into submission on an issue whose merits are hotly disputed, is not a pretty one.&quot;

===Effects of U.S. chemical defoliation===
One of the most controversial aspects of the US military effort, was the widespread use of chemical defoliants between 1961 and 1971. 20 million gallons of toxic herbicides (like Agent Orange) were sprayed on 6 million acres of forests and crops by the air force. They were used to large parts of the countryside to prevent the Viet Cong from being able to hide weaponry and encampments under the foliage, and to deprive them of food. Defoliation was used to clear sensitive areas, including base perimeters and possible ambush sites along roads and canals. More than 20% of South Vietnam&#x27;s forests and 3% of its cultivated land was sprayed at least once. 90% of herbicide use was directed at forest defoliation. The chemicals used continue to change the landscape, cause diseases and birth defects, and poison the food chain. US military records have listed figures including the destruction of 20% of the jungles of South Vietnam and 20-36% of the mangrove forests. The environmental destruction caused was described by Swedish Prime Minister Olof Palme, lawyers, historians and other academics as an ecocide.

Agent Orange and similar chemical substances used by the US have caused many deaths and injuries in the intervening years, including among the US Air Force crews that handled them. Scientific reports have concluded that refugees exposed to chemical sprays while in South Vietnam continued to experience pain in the eyes and skin as well as gastrointestinal upsets. In one study, 92% of participants suffered incessant fatigue; others reported monstrous births. Analysis of studies on the association between Agent Orange and birth defects, have found a statistically significant correlation such that having a parent who was exposed to Agent Orange at any point, will increase one&#x27;s likelihood of possessing or acting as a genetic carrier of birth defects. The most common deformity appears to be spina bifida. There is substantial evidence that birth defects carry on for three generations or more. In 2012, the US and Vietnam began a cooperative cleaning toxic chemicals on Danang International Airport, marking the first time Washington has been involved in cleaning up Agent Orange in Vietnam.
Vietnamese victims affected by Agent Orange attempted a class action lawsuit against Dow Chemical and other US chemical manufacturers, but a US District Court dismissed their case. They appealed, but the dismissal was cemented in 2008 by an appeals court. , the Vietnamese government estimated there were over 4,000,000 victims of dioxin poisoning in Vietnam, although the US government denies any conclusive scientific links between Agent Orange and Vietnamese victims of dioxin poisoning. In some areas of southern Vietnam, dioxin levels remain at over 100 times the accepted international standard.

The U.S. Veterans Administration has listed prostate cancer, respiratory cancers, multiple myeloma, type 2 diabetes, B-cell lymphomas, soft-tissue sarcoma, chloracne, porphyria cutanea tarda, peripheral neuropathy as, &quot;presumptive diseases associated with exposure to Agent Orange or other herbicides during military service.&quot; Spina bifida is the sole birth defect in children of veterans recognized as being caused by exposure to Agent Orange.

===In popular culture===
The war has featured extensively in television, film, video games, music and literature. In Vietnam, a notable film set during Operation Linebacker II was &quot;Girl from Hanoi&quot; (1974) depicting war-time life. Another notable work was the diary of Đặng Thùy Trâm, a North Vietnamese doctor who enlisted in the Southern battlefield, and was killed aged 27 by US forces near Quảng Ngãi. Her diaries were published in Vietnam as &quot;Đặng Thùy Trâm&#x27;s Diary&quot; (&quot;Last Night I Dreamed of Peace&quot;), where it became a bestseller and was made into a film &quot;Don&#x27;t Burn&quot;. In Vietnam, the diary has been compared to &quot;The Diary of Anne Frank&quot;, and both are used in literary education.

One of the first major films based on the war was John Wayne&#x27;s pro-war &quot;The Green Berets&quot; (1968). Further cinematic representations were released during the 1970s and 1980s, the most noteworthy examples being Michael Cimino&#x27;s &quot;The Deer Hunter&quot; (1978), Francis Ford Coppola&#x27;s &quot;Apocalypse Now&quot; (1979), Oliver Stone&#x27;s &quot;Platoon&quot; (1986) and Stanley Kubrick&#x27;s &quot;Full Metal Jacket&quot; (1987). Other films include &quot;Good Morning, Vietnam&quot; (1987), &quot;Casualties of War&quot; (1989), &quot;Born on the Fourth of July&quot; (1989), &quot;Forrest Gump&quot; (1994), &quot;We Were Soldiers&quot; (2002), and &quot;Rescue Dawn&quot; (2007).

The war influenced a generation of musicians and songwriters in Vietnam, the US, and elsewhere, both pro/anti-war and pro/anti-communist, with the Vietnam War Song Project having identified 5,000+ songs referencing the conflict. The band Country Joe and the Fish recorded &quot;The &quot;Fish&quot; Cheer/I-Feel-Like-I&#x27;m-Fixin&#x27;-to-Die Rag&quot; in 1965, and it became one of the most influential protest anthems.

====Myths==== 

Myths play a role in the historiography of the war, and have become part of the culture of the United States. Discussion of myth has focused on US experiences, but changing myths of war have played a role in Vietnamese and Australian historiography. Scholarship has focused on &quot;myth-busting&quot;, attacking orthodox and revisionist schools of American historiography, and challenging myths about American society and soldiery in the war.

Kuzmarov in &quot;The Myth of the Addicted Army: Vietnam and the Modern War on Drugs&quot; challenges the popular and Hollywood narrative that US soldiers were heavy drug users, in particular the notion that the My Lai massacre was caused by drug use. According to Kuzmarov, Nixon is primarily responsible for creating the drug myth. Michael Allen in &quot;Until The Last Man Comes Home&quot; accuses Nixon of mythmaking, by exploiting the plight of the National League of POW/MIA Families to allow the government to appear caring, as the war was increasingly considered lost. Allen&#x27;s analysis ties the position of potential missing Americans, or prisoners into post-war politics and presidential elections, including the Swift boat controversy.

==See also==

* List of conflicts in Asia
* Soviet–Afghan War
* Third Indochina War
* United States Army during Vietnam War

==Annotations==
== References ==

The references for this article are grouped in three sections.
* Citations: references for the in-line, numbered superscript references contained within the article.
* Main sources: the main works used to build the content of the article, but not referenced as in-line citations.
* Additional sources: additional works used to build the article

=== Citations ===
=== Works cited ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


===Main sources===

* Central Intelligence Agency. &quot;Laos&quot;. &quot;The World Factbook&quot;.
* Materials related to war resistance and peace activism movements during the Vietnam War.
* &quot;Foreign Relations of the United States&quot;
** 
** 
* Autobiography of controversial former Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force.
* 
* 
* 5 volumes. Combination of narrative and secret documents compiled by Pentagon.
* &quot;Public Papers of the Presidents, 1965&quot; (1966). Official documents of U.S. presidents.
* A first-hand account of the Kennedy administration by one of his principal advisors.
* Describes the geopolitical situation of Cambodia.
* &quot;United States – Vietnam Relations, 1945–1967: A Study Prepared by the Department of Defense&quot;. Washington, D.C.: Office of the Secretary of Defense, 1971, 12 volumes.


===Additional sources===
*&quot;See Bibliography of the Vietnam War&quot;

===Historiography===
* 
* Olson, James Stuart, ed. &quot;The Vietnam War: Handbook of the literature and research&quot; (Greenwood, 1993) [ excerpt].
* 

==External links==

* Documents Relating to American Foreign Policy–Vietnam primary sources on U.S. involvement
* Fallout of the War from the Dean Peter Krogh Foreign Affairs Digital Archives
* Glossary of Military Terms &amp; Slang from the Vietnam War
* Impressions of Vietnam and descriptions of the daily life of a soldier from the oral history of Elliott Gardner, U.S. Army 
* Stephen H. Warner Southeast Asia Photograph Collection at Gettysburg College
* Timeline US – Vietnam (1947–2001) in Open-Content project
* The U.S. Army in Vietnam the official history of the United States Army
* The Vietnam War at The History Channel
* UC Berkeley Library Social Activism Sound Recording Project: Anti-Vietnam War Protests
* Vietnam war timeline comprehensive timeline of the Vietnam War
* Virtual Vietnam Archive – Texas Tech University
* 1965–1975 Another Vietnam; Unseen images of the war from the winning side – Mashable
* Archival collections about the Vietnam War, University Archives and Special Collections, Joseph P. Healey Library, University of Massachusetts Boston</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="4" end="15" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="75" end="82" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="84" end="88" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="94" end="102" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172640" start="118" end="131" title="North Vietnam" label="North Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="169" end="182" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="258" end="270" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="275" end="280" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="323" end="336" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="347" end="361" title="anti-communist" label="anti-communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342102" start="406" end="420" title="Indochina Wars" label="Indochina Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q864113" start="433" end="442" title="proxy war" label="proxy war"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="450" end="458" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360646" start="499" end="522" title="United States in the Vietnam War" label="US military involvement"/>
<link wikidata="Q877450" start="616" end="623" title="Laotian Civil War" label="Laotian"/>
<link wikidata="Q817206" start="628" end="647" title="Cambodian Civil War" label="Cambodian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q848478" start="740" end="752" title="French Union" label="French Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q748780" start="760" end="779" title="First Indochina War" label="First Indochina War"/>
<link wikidata="Q482407" start="835" end="857" title="1954 Geneva Conference" label="1954 Geneva Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204177" start="896" end="909" title="17th parallel north" label="17th parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q190949" start="915" end="924" title="Viet Minh" label="Viet Minh"/>
<link wikidata="Q36014" start="933" end="944" title="Ho Chi Minh" label="Ho Chi Minh"/>
<link wikidata="Q192502" start="1055" end="1068" title="Ngo Dinh Diem" label="Ngo Dinh Diem"/>
<link wikidata="Q174423" start="1125" end="1134" title="Viet Cong" label="Viet Cong"/>
<link wikidata="Q532855" start="1143" end="1155" title="common front" label="common front"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="1203" end="1216" title="guerrilla war" label="guerrilla war"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057119" start="1251" end="1263" title="North Vietnamese invasion of Laos" label="invaded Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q695916" start="1282" end="1299" title="Ho Chi Minh trail" label="Ho Chi Minh trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3936506" start="1396" end="1425" title="People&amp;#x27;s Army of Vietnam" label="People&amp;#x27;s Army of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="1524" end="1539" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11781252" start="1574" end="1591" title="Military Assistance Advisory Group" label="military advisors"/>
<link wikidata="Q18917" start="1643" end="1674" title="Army of the Republic of Vietnam" label="Army of the Republic of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078181" start="1744" end="1769" title="1963 South Vietnamese coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="a US-backed military coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q482402" start="1831" end="1854" title="Gulf of Tonkin incident" label="Gulf of Tonkin incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q240352" start="1887" end="1899" title="Gulf of Tonkin Resolution" label="a resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="1920" end="1937" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q547247" start="2025" end="2056" title="Operation Rolling Thunder" label="a bombing campaign of the north"/>
<link wikidata="Q898788" start="2211" end="2224" title="air supremacy" label="air supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247281" start="2263" end="2281" title="search and destroy" label="search and destroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q82542" start="2345" end="2358" title="Tet Offensive" label="Tet Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q429245" start="2480" end="2500" title="conventional warfare" label="conventional warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="2528" end="2541" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q927708" start="2567" end="2581" title="Vietnamization" label="Vietnamization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919446" start="2677" end="2686" title="1970 Cambodian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1970 coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994973" start="2741" end="2757" title="Cambodian campaign" label="counter-invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q696802" start="2851" end="2870" title="Paris Peace Accords" label="Paris Peace Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821674" start="2967" end="2988" title="1975 spring offensive" label="1975 spring offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q482456" start="2993" end="3007" title="fall of Saigon" label="fall of Saigon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982121" start="3117" end="3136" title="Vietnam War casualties" label="enormous human cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q201028" start="3246" end="3256" title="Khmer people" label="Cambodians"/>
<link wikidata="Q383946" start="3272" end="3280" title="Lao people" label="Laotians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6449297" start="3348" end="3370" title="Vietnamese boat people" label="Vietnamese boat people"/>
<link wikidata="Q16211248" start="3386" end="3410" title="Indochina refugee crisis" label="Indochina refugee crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q19756" start="3565" end="3573" title="mangrove" label="mangrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q296486" start="3642" end="3649" title="ecocide" label="ecocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q191764" start="3655" end="3666" title="Khmer Rouge" label="Khmer Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885072" start="3683" end="3701" title="Cambodian genocide" label="Cambodian genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q635533" start="3774" end="3798" title="Cambodian–Vietnamese War" label="Cambodian–Vietnamese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q623171" start="3819" end="3834" title="Sino-Vietnamese War" label="invaded Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741182" start="3841" end="3857" title="Sino-Vietnamese conflicts (1979–1991)" label="border conflicts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408490" start="3914" end="3930" title="Vietnam syndrome" label="Vietnam syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="4009" end="4026" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="4249" end="4256" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="4333" end="4337" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="4342" end="4350" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589338" start="4508" end="4529" title="Government of Vietnam" label="Government of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q185682" start="4745" end="4761" title="French Indochina" label="French Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q36014" start="4963" end="4979" title="Nguyen Sinh Cung" label="Nguyen Sinh Cung"/>
<link wikidata="Q14658619" start="4997" end="5024" title="Indochinese Communist Party" label="Indochinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="5036" end="5052" title="Marxism–Leninism" label="Marxist–Leninist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="5104" end="5113" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="5122" end="5134" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q140025" start="5295" end="5308" title="Japanese invasion of French Indochina" label="Japan invaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="5351" end="5363" title="Battle of France" label="capitulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="5367" end="5379" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q36014" start="5461" end="5472" title="Ho Chi Minh" label="Ho Chi Minh"/>
<link wikidata="Q190949" start="5511" end="5520" title="Viet Minh" label="Viet Minh"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="5628" end="5634" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="5669" end="5686" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q658626" start="5714" end="5742" title="Office of Strategic Services" label="Office of Strategic Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="5850" end="5862" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy French"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="6048" end="6069" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633177" start="6288" end="6319" title="Japanese coup d&amp;#x27;état in French Indochina" label="overthrew the French government"/>
<link wikidata="Q701337" start="6351" end="6368" title="Empire of Vietnam" label="Empire of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q223771" start="6403" end="6410" title="Bảo Đại" label="Bảo Đại"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540361" start="6451" end="6469" title="surrender of Japan" label="surrender of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q769960" start="6508" end="6525" title="August Revolution" label="August Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925172" start="6668" end="6733" title="Declaration of independence of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam" label="Declaration of independence of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365438" start="6915" end="6956" title="War in Vietnam (1945–1946)" label="sought to reassert control of the country"/>
<link wikidata="Q748780" start="7058" end="7072" title="First Indochina War" label="full-scale war"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="7135" end="7143" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="7176" end="7191" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q171375" start="7206" end="7221" title="Truman Doctrine" label="Truman Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="7226" end="7239" title="Anti-communism" label="anticommunist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193879" start="7506" end="7522" title="State of Vietnam" label="State of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854" start="7526" end="7532" title="Saigon" label="Saigon"/>
<link wikidata="Q849866" start="7616" end="7631" title="communist state" label="communist state"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="7640" end="7652" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="7657" end="7688" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q172640" start="7704" end="7734" title="Democratic Republic of Vietnam" label="Democratic Republic of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="7836" end="7846" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11781252" start="8254" end="8292" title="Military Assistance Advisory Group" label="Military Assistance and Advisory Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="8588" end="8596" title="Aircraft carrier" label="carriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q212428" start="8611" end="8625" title="Gulf of Tonkin" label="Gulf of Tonkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050866" start="8710" end="8733" title="tactical nuclear weapon" label="tactical nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="8845" end="8858" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185212" start="8971" end="8975" title="War Hawk" label="hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="9058" end="9078" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q482407" start="9507" end="9524" title="Geneva Conference (1954)" label="Geneva Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204177" start="9732" end="9745" title="17th parallel north" label="17th parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q223677" start="10174" end="10192" title="John Foster Dulles" label="John Foster Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q317243" start="10326" end="10338" title="Allen Dulles" label="Allen Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="10364" end="10391" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q163698" start="10410" end="10431" title="psychological warfare" label="psychological warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q217406" start="10846" end="10857" title="French Navy" label="French Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q484950" start="10869" end="10882" title="Seventh Fleet" label="Seventh Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q192502" start="10939" end="10952" title="Ngô Đình Diệm" label="Ngô Đình Diệm"/>
<link wikidata="Q19705074" start="11164" end="11170" title="Cadre (politics)" label="cadres"/>
<link wikidata="Q358051" start="12446" end="12459" title="Phạm Văn Đồng" label="Phạm Văn Đồng"/>
<link wikidata="Q6049802" start="13558" end="13590" title="International Control Commission" label="International Control Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q470364" start="13868" end="13875" title="Cao Đài" label="Cao Đài"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369404" start="13880" end="13887" title="Hòa Hảo" label="Hòa Hảo"/>
<link wikidata="Q460252" start="13891" end="13897" title="Ba Cụt" label="Ba Cụt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019520" start="13930" end="13940" title="Bình Xuyên" label="Bình Xuyên"/>
<link wikidata="Q46952" start="13941" end="13956" title="organized crime" label="organized crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3380491" start="14102" end="14118" title="Battle of Saigon (1955)" label="battle in Saigon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257296" start="14232" end="14280" title="1955 State of Vietnam referendum" label="referendum on the future of the State of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q692209" start="14303" end="14309" title="electoral fraud" label="rigged"/>
<link wikidata="Q650194" start="14345" end="14357" title="Ngô Đình Nhu" label="Ngô Đình Nhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q221608" start="14832" end="14845" title="domino theory" label="domino theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241094" start="14963" end="14988" title="Presidency of Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Eisenhower administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="14990" end="15005" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="15014" end="15021" title="United States Senate" label="senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q215222" start="15047" end="15074" title="American Friends of Vietnam" label="American Friends of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q161165" start="15517" end="15525" title="nepotism" label="nepotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="15554" end="15562" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="15642" end="15653" title="Virgin Mary" label="Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140181" start="16089" end="16102" title="Gabriel Kolko" label="Gabriel Kolko"/>
<link wikidata="Q217105" start="16111" end="16129" title="political prisoner" label="political prisoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801927" start="16200" end="16219" title="Land reform in South Vietnam" label="land reform program"/>
<link wikidata="Q7022420" start="16471" end="16499" title="Ngô Đình Diệm presidential visit to the United States" label="10-day state visit to the US"/>
<link wikidata="Q5088005" start="17019" end="17036" title="Châu Đốc massacre" label="Châu Đốc massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198713" start="17433" end="17440" title="wildcat strike" label="wildcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301893" start="17517" end="17529" title="Douglas Pike" label="Douglas Pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q704829" start="17856" end="17861" title="Central Office for South Vietnam" label="COSVN"/>
<link wikidata="Q174423" start="18108" end="18117" title="Viet Cong" label="Viet Cong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2221903" start="18218" end="18233" title="Memot District" label="Memot, Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="18401" end="18421" title="coalition government" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q6763494" start="18923" end="18939" title="Marilyn B. Young" label="Marilyn B. Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q466001" start="19211" end="19218" title="Lê Duẩn" label="Lê Duẩn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6468535" start="19674" end="19682" title="Tchepone" label="Tchepone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611100" start="19897" end="19906" title="Group 559" label="Group 559"/>
<link wikidata="Q695916" start="19951" end="19968" title="Ho Chi Minh trail" label="Ho Chi Minh trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q858887" start="20056" end="20066" title="Pathet Lao" label="Pathet Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947620" start="20101" end="20115" title="Royal Lao Army" label="Royal Lao Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q699590" start="20519" end="20550" title="1960 U.S. presidential election" label="1960 U.S. presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q191721" start="21014" end="21034" title="Bay of Pigs Invasion" label="Bay of Pigs Invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086" start="21194" end="21205" title="Berlin Wall" label="Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="21491" end="21509" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q234497" start="22617" end="22631" title="special forces" label="special forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q760037" start="22636" end="22653" title="counterinsurgency" label="counterinsurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q180194" start="22665" end="22676" title="Third World" label="Third World"/>
<link wikidata="Q482421" start="22903" end="22915" title="Special Forces (United States Army)" label="Green Berets"/>
<link wikidata="Q313972" start="22998" end="23012" title="Maxwell D. Taylor" label="Maxwell Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q359560" start="23017" end="23028" title="Walt Rostow" label="Walt Rostow"/>
<link wikidata="Q16888154" start="23029" end="23040" title="Taylor-Rostow Report" label="recommended"/>
<link wikidata="Q186042" start="23187" end="23209" title="John Kenneth Galbraith" label="John Kenneth Galbraith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164077" start="23456" end="23480" title="Strategic Hamlet Program" label="Strategic Hamlet Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q6048126" start="24125" end="24134" title="International Agreement on the Neutrality of Laos" label="agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q280468" start="24309" end="24325" title="Battle of Ap Bac" label="Battle of Ấp Bắc"/>
<link wikidata="Q5951476" start="24700" end="24713" title="Huỳnh Văn Cao" label="Huỳnh Văn Cao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935163" start="25083" end="25087" title="1960 South Vietnamese coup attempt" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627940" start="25092" end="25096" title="1962 South Vietnamese Independence Palace bombing" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q25310" start="25149" end="25166" title="Robert F. Kennedy" label="Robert F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4388358" start="25399" end="25421" title="Huế Phật Đản shootings" label="Huế Phật Đản shootings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130142" start="25477" end="25490" title="Buddhist flag" label="Buddhist flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q215700" start="25494" end="25499" title="Vesak" label="Vesak"/>
<link wikidata="Q635624" start="25560" end="25575" title="Buddhist crisis" label="Buddhist crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q738148" start="25696" end="25709" title="Ngô Đình Thục" label="Ngô Đình Thục"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913590" start="26182" end="26201" title="Army of the Republic of Vietnam Special Forces" label="ARVN Special Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q6507551" start="26213" end="26226" title="Lê Quang Tung" label="Lê Quang Tung"/>
<link wikidata="Q11108995" start="26279" end="26293" title="Xá Lợi Pagoda raids" label="raided pagodas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673271" start="26400" end="26413" title="regime change" label="regime change"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="26445" end="26478" title="United States Department of State" label="United States Department of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015627" start="26834" end="26843" title="Cable 243" label="Cable 243"/>
<link wikidata="Q450984" start="27269" end="27286" title="Henry Cabot Lodge Jr." label="Henry Cabot Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5692995" start="28213" end="28253" title="Hearts and Minds (Vietnam War)" label="&amp;quot;winning the hearts and minds&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048041" start="28394" end="28406" title="Paul D. Harkins" label="Paul Harkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q485921" start="28412" end="28453" title="COMUSMACV" label="commander of U.S. forces in South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974176" start="28753" end="28780" title="Special Activities Division" label="Special Activities Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q219205" start="28797" end="28802" title="Hmong people" label="Hmong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755657" start="29054" end="29069" title="Phoenix Program" label="Phoenix Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q673330" start="29094" end="29163" title="Military Assistance Command, Vietnam – Studies and Observations Group" label="Military Assistance Command, Vietnam – Studies and Observations Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q193484" start="29246" end="29262" title="Assassination of John F. Kennedy" label="was assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="29299" end="29316" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q117706216" start="29812" end="29851" title="Viet Cong Motivation and Morale Project" label="Viet Cong Motivation and Morale Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q334419" start="30162" end="30176" title="Dương Văn Minh" label="Dương Văn Minh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543703" start="30194" end="30208" title="Stanley Karnow" label="Stanley Karnow"/>
<link wikidata="Q504362" start="30408" end="30420" title="Nguyễn Khánh" label="Nguyễn Khánh"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="30970" end="30973" title="National Security Agency" label="NSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2231356" start="31087" end="31109" title="Operation Pierce Arrow" label="retaliatory airstrikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q240352" start="31148" end="31173" title="Gulf of Tonkin Resolution" label="Gulf of Tonkin Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q851756" start="31619" end="31644" title="United States National Security Council" label="National Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281540" start="31728" end="31754" title="Attack on Camp Holloway" label="attack on a U.S. Army base"/>
<link wikidata="Q202770" start="31823" end="31837" title="Alexei Kosygin" label="Alexei Kosygin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324916" start="31847" end="31858" title="state visit" label="state visit"/>
<link wikidata="Q547247" start="31877" end="31902" title="Operation Rolling Thunder" label="Operation Rolling Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q742687" start="31907" end="31926" title="Operation Arc Light" label="Operation Arc Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q877450" start="32635" end="32659" title="Laotian Civil War" label="the scene of a civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q870055" start="32673" end="32691" title="Kingdom of Laos" label="Laotian government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072417" start="33286" end="33331" title="Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force" label="Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q15866" start="33332" end="33344" title="Curtis LeMay" label="Curtis LeMay"/>
<link wikidata="Q37116" start="33785" end="33790" title="AK-47" label="AK-47"/>
<link wikidata="Q16480436" start="33841" end="33853" title="9th Division (Vietnam)" label="9th Division"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34520" end="34556" title="Viet Cong and PAVN strategy, organization and structure#The Protracted War conflict model" label="three-stage protracted warfare model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320031" start="34771" end="34789" title="Battle of Bình Giã" label="Battle of Bình Giã"/>
<link wikidata="Q588774" start="35097" end="35116" title="Battle of Đồng Xoài" label="Battle of Đồng Xoài"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="35168" end="35180" title="United States Marine Corps" label="U.S. Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q25282" start="35198" end="35205" title="Da Nang" label="Da Nang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656800" start="35389" end="35405" title="Da Nang Air Base" label="Da Nang Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q298793" start="35665" end="35685" title="William Westmoreland" label="William Westmoreland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863536" start="35703" end="35724" title="U. S. Grant Sharp Jr." label="U. S. Grant Sharp Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q831550" start="37101" end="37110" title="attrition warfare" label="attrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465318" start="37115" end="37121" title="morale" label="morale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160184" start="37163" end="37173" title="Conflict escalation" label="escalation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37212" end="37222" title="Body count#Vietnam War" label="body count"/>
<link wikidata="Q277252" start="37464" end="37469" title="Southeast Asia Treaty Organization" label="SEATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q6753335" start="37603" end="37613" title="Many Flags" label="Many Flags"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="37690" end="37694" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247281" start="37790" end="37808" title="search and destroy" label="search and destroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q714749" start="37901" end="37919" title="Battle of Ia Drang" label="Battle of Ia Drang"/>
<link wikidata="Q174534" start="38017" end="38043" title="Boeing B-52 Stratofortress" label="Boeing B-52 Stratofortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q682195" start="38347" end="38363" title="Operation Masher" label="Operation Masher"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954641" start="38981" end="39008" title="NLF and PAVN battle tactics" label="NLF and PAVN battle tactics"/>
<link wikidata="Q372591" start="39129" end="39142" title="Nguyễn Cao Kỳ" label="Nguyễn Cao Kỳ"/>
<link wikidata="Q313707" start="39182" end="39198" title="Nguyễn Văn Thiệu" label="Nguyễn Văn Thiệu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568749" start="39628" end="39658" title="1971 South Vietnamese presidential election" label="one-candidate election in 1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183698" start="39964" end="39979" title="credibility gap" label="credibility gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q9724" start="40149" end="40164" title="Pentagon Papers" label="Pentagon Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q901263" start="40591" end="40597" title="Battle of Dak To" label="Đắk Tô"/>
<link wikidata="Q247253" start="40616" end="40636" title="Battle of Khe Sanh" label="Khe Sanh combat base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230358" start="40660" end="40675" title="The Hill Fights" label="The Hill Fights"/>
<link wikidata="Q82542" start="40810" end="40823" title="Tet Offensive" label="Tet Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q700516" start="40847" end="40860" title="Văn Tiến Dũng" label="Văn Tiến Dũng"/>
<link wikidata="Q36399" start="40948" end="40951" title="Huế" label="Huế"/>
<link wikidata="Q65069176" start="41480" end="41502" title="Tet offensive attack on the United States embassy" label="U.S. Embassy in Saigon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429712" start="41714" end="41734" title="intelligence failure" label="intelligence failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="41751" end="41763" title="Attack on Pearl Harbor" label="Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q697053" start="41807" end="41845" title="Battle of Huế" label="except the former imperial capital Huế"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641195" start="41894" end="41934" title="Massacre at Huế" label="executed approximately 2,800 unarmed Huế"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872138" start="42102" end="42116" title="Battle of Quang Tri (1968)" label="Quảng Trị City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314523" start="42122" end="42144" title="Republic of Vietnam Airborne Division" label="ARVN Airborne Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q142025" start="42461" end="42473" title="Peter Arnett" label="Peter Arnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q85745819" start="42519" end="42536" title="Battle of Bến Tre" label="Battle of Bến Tre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294189" start="42958" end="42971" title="May Offensive" label="May Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q55137852" start="43129" end="43148" title="Phase III Offensive" label="Phase III Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036350" start="43621" end="43640" title="National Press Club (United States)" label="National Press Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="44107" end="44121" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q485921" start="44155" end="44167" title="Fracture Jaw" label="Fracture Jaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q280290" start="44440" end="44456" title="Creighton Abrams" label="Creighton Abrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q696802" start="44475" end="44486" title="Paris Peace Accords" label="peace talks"/>
<link wikidata="Q693742" start="45328" end="45371" title="1968 United States presidential election" label="United States presidential election in 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q927708" start="45682" end="45696" title="Vietnamization" label="Vietnamization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4137990" start="45966" end="46006" title="Operation Giant Lance" label="to race to the border of Soviet airspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q493127" start="46056" end="46069" title="madman theory" label="madman theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q155705" start="46145" end="46152" title="détente" label="détente"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46185" end="46209" title="Sino-American relations#Rapprochement" label="rapprochement with China"/>
<link wikidata="Q179910" start="46548" end="46552" title="Võ Nguyên Giáp" label="Giáp"/>
<link wikidata="Q545539" start="46553" end="46558" title="Trường Chinh" label="Chinh"/>
<link wikidata="Q700897" start="46650" end="46664" title="Hoàng Văn Thái" label="Hoàng Văn Thái"/>
<link wikidata="Q369799" start="46846" end="46856" title="Low intensity conflict" label="small-unit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46861" end="46867" title="Sapper#PAVN and Viet Cong" label="sapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1598759" start="46990" end="47004" title="Light infantry" label="light-infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283371" start="47036" end="47047" title="Maneuver warfare" label="high-mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418029" start="47063" end="47076" title="combined arms" label="combined arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q794691" start="47243" end="47260" title="anti-war movement" label="anti-war movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555361" start="47321" end="47336" title="silent majority" label="silent majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q183421" start="47421" end="47436" title="My Lai massacre" label="My Lai massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249100" start="47509" end="47527" title="Green Beret Affair" label="Green Beret Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q482421" start="47547" end="47561" title="United States Army Special Forces" label="Special Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="47922" end="47935" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q489983" start="48263" end="48267" title="Reserve Officers&amp;#x27; Training Corps" label="ROTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q781757" start="49160" end="49168" title="fragging" label="fragging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678423" start="49425" end="49447" title="Battle of FSB Mary Ann" label="Battle of FSB Mary Ann"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568739" start="50272" end="50303" title="South Vietnamese Regional Force" label="South Vietnamese Regional Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568737" start="50308" end="50321" title="South Vietnamese Popular Force" label="Popular Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7543602" start="50712" end="50730" title="small unit tactics" label="small unit tactics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641457" start="51017" end="51041" title="5th Special Forces Group (United States)" label="5th Special Forces Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q160318" start="51127" end="51143" title="Norodom Sihanouk" label="Norodom Sihanouk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7513406" start="51233" end="51246" title="Sihanoukville Autonomous Port" label="Sihanoukville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7513404" start="51255" end="51269" title="Sihanouk Trail" label="Sihanouk Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q683271" start="51334" end="51348" title="Operation Menu" label="Operation Menu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919446" start="51493" end="51513" title="Cambodian coup of 1970" label="Sihanouk was deposed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844831" start="51521" end="51533" title="pro-American" label="pro-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q313400" start="51549" end="51556" title="Lon Nol" label="Lon Nol"/>
<link wikidata="Q191764" start="51874" end="51885" title="Khmer Rouge" label="Khmer Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q379225" start="51929" end="51938" title="Nuon Chea" label="Nuon Chea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994973" start="52100" end="52118" title="Cambodian Campaign" label="Cambodian Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096893" start="52191" end="52210" title="Operation Chenla II" label="Operation Chenla II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251688" start="52345" end="52369" title="Protests against the Vietnam War" label="nationwide U.S. protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q482635" start="52428" end="52475" title="Kent State shootings" label="Four students were killed by National Guardsmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473615" start="52508" end="52529" title="Kent State University" label="Kent State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097061" start="52768" end="52790" title="Operation Freedom Deal" label="Operation Freedom Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095768" start="52930" end="52951" title="Operation Lam Son 719" label="Operation Lam Son 719"/>
<link wikidata="Q939087" start="53338" end="53349" title="air assault" label="air assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395085" start="53954" end="53970" title="Easter Offensive" label="Easter Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q489959" start="54210" end="54230" title="Operation Linebacker" label="Operation Linebacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4335282" start="54289" end="54311" title="Operation Pocket Money" label="Operation Pocket Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q72818" start="54349" end="54357" title="Haiphong" label="Haiphong"/>
<link wikidata="Q644161" start="54485" end="54516" title="1972 United States presidential election" label="1972 U.S. presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q331742" start="54543" end="54558" title="George McGovern" label="George McGovern"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="54627" end="54642" title="Henry Kissinger" label="Henry Kissinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q233969" start="54704" end="54714" title="Lê Đức Thọ" label="Lê Đức Thọ"/>
<link wikidata="Q486866" start="55118" end="55141" title="Operation Linebacker II" label="Operation Linebacker II"/>
<link wikidata="Q446909" start="55394" end="55409" title="Nguyễn Thị Bình" label="Nguyễn Thị Bình"/>
<link wikidata="Q696802" start="55444" end="55463" title="Paris Peace Accords" label="Paris Peace Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790770" start="56306" end="56322" title="War of the flags" label="War of the flags"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="56526" end="56543" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q171989" start="56767" end="56778" title="James R. Schlesinger" label="Schlesinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048621" start="56945" end="56966" title="Case–Church Amendment" label="Case–Church Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206845" start="57297" end="57309" title="Trần Văn Trà" label="Trần Văn Trà"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="57923" end="57938" title="1973 oil crisis" label="1973 oil crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="58253" end="58264" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188369" start="59114" end="59133" title="Phước Long Province" label="Phước Long Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616310" start="59312" end="59331" title="Battle of Phuoc Long" label="attacked Phước Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q30599" start="59756" end="59762" title="Pleiku" label="Pleiku"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888227" start="60512" end="60524" title="Battle of Ban Me Thuot" label="Ban Ma Thuột"/>
<link wikidata="Q36493" start="60882" end="60889" title="Kon Tum" label="Kon Tum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616301" start="61672" end="61684" title="Hue–Da Nang Campaign" label="attacked Huế"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821674" start="62281" end="62301" title="Ho Chi Minh Campaign" label="Ho Chi Minh Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q19491" start="62532" end="62541" title="Nha Trang" label="Nha Trang"/>
<link wikidata="Q33116" start="62543" end="62551" title="Cam Ranh" label="Cam Ranh"/>
<link wikidata="Q25281" start="62556" end="62562" title="Da Lat" label="Da Lat"/>
<link wikidata="Q487076" start="62607" end="62615" title="Battle of Xuân Lộc" label="Xuân Lộc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817498" start="62697" end="62707" title="last stand" label="last stand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936777" start="63095" end="63109" title="Trần Văn Hương" label="Trần Văn Hương"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="63135" end="63141" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052867" start="63386" end="63398" title="Mekong Delta" label="Mekong Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q478595" start="63621" end="63641" title="Tan Son Nhut Airport" label="Tan Son Nhut Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q715625" start="63846" end="63857" title="Martial law" label="Martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q780730" start="64002" end="64025" title="Operation Frequent Wind" label="Operation Frequent Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q724360" start="64097" end="64110" title="Graham Martin" label="Graham Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633643" start="64735" end="64744" title="2nd Corps (Vietnam)" label="2nd Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q933384" start="64778" end="64797" title="Independence Palace" label="Independence Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q85795588" start="65024" end="65036" title="Radio Saigon" label="Radio Saigon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162775" start="65898" end="65905" title="Conscription in the United States" label="drafted"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995893" start="65986" end="66000" title="counterculture of the 1960s" label="counterculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q785893" start="66055" end="66065" title="unilateral" label="unilateral"/>
<link wikidata="Q605269" start="66168" end="66179" title="American imperialism" label="imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q160637" start="66213" end="66221" title="New Left" label="New Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610581" start="66239" end="66252" title="Stephen Spiro" label="Stephen Spiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q847198" start="66293" end="66301" title="Just War" label="Just War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2229812" start="66370" end="66385" title="Norman Morrison" label="Norman Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q271847" start="66396" end="66411" title="Thích Quảng Đức" label="Thích Quảng Đức"/>
<link wikidata="Q83516" start="66534" end="66569" title="1968 Democratic National Convention" label="1968 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928558" start="66720" end="66752" title="Vietnam Veterans Against the War" label="Vietnam Veterans Against the War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909299" start="66778" end="66796" title="Moratorium to End the War in Vietnam" label="Vietnam Moratorium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67003" end="67019" title="Conscription in the United States#End of conscription" label="end of the draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="67688" end="67698" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="67808" end="67821" title="Anti-aircraft warfare" label="anti-aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q466704" start="68610" end="68632" title="surface-to-air missile" label="surface-to-air missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="68672" end="68703" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="68713" end="68719" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407246" start="68927" end="68931" title="Armoured personnel carrier" label="APCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915590" start="69290" end="69309" title="Soviet Armed Forces" label="Soviet Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="69355" end="69358" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q836610" start="69378" end="69398" title="signals intelligence" label="signals intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261258" start="69878" end="69889" title="Montagnard (Vietnam)" label="Montagnards"/>
<link wikidata="Q383256" start="69937" end="69941" title="Chams" label="Cham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370078" start="69960" end="69970" title="Khmer Krom" label="Khmer Krom"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="70390" end="70419" title="Socialist Republic of Vietnam" label="Socialist Republic of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277073" start="70946" end="70970" title="South Vietnamese Rangers" label="South Vietnamese Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="71013" end="71023" title="war crimes" label="war crimes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="71122" end="71131" title="Viet Cong and PAVN strategy, organization and structure#VC/NVA use of terror" label="terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="71156" end="71172" title="prisoners of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857704" start="71271" end="71289" title="military necessity" label="military necessity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688021" start="71349" end="71365" title="Russell Tribunal" label="Russell Tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q33760" start="71436" end="71452" title="Bertrand Russell" label="Bertrand Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394526" start="71491" end="71508" title="international law" label="international law"/>
<link wikidata="Q474138" start="71623" end="71641" title="War of aggression" label="acts of aggression"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="71774" end="71782" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928569" start="72190" end="72222" title="Vietnam War Crimes Working Group" label="Vietnam War Crimes Working Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q11208" start="72250" end="72262" title="the Pentagon" label="the Pentagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637368" start="72263" end="72273" title="task force" label="task force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184996" start="72365" end="72378" title="US war crimes" label="US war crimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520826" start="73035" end="73046" title="Tiger Force" label="Tiger Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q334918" start="73048" end="73060" title="R. J. Rummel" label="R. J. Rummel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186609" start="73115" end="73124" title="Democide" label="democidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4193799" start="73180" end="73194" title="free-fire zone" label="free-fire zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q15433633" start="73515" end="73525" title="Nick Turse" label="Nick Turse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435473" start="73571" end="73581" title="body count" label="body count"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026397" start="73856" end="73880" title="Operation Speedy Express" label="Operation Speedy Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q6252282" start="73905" end="73919" title="John Paul Vann" label="John Paul Vann"/>
<link wikidata="Q99659099" start="74453" end="74471" title="Benjamin Valentino" label="Benjamin Valentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755657" start="74622" end="74637" title="Phoenix Program" label="Phoenix Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879088" start="75015" end="75029" title="Con Dao Prison" label="Con Son Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q561547" start="75054" end="75070" title="Augustus Hawkins" label="Augustus Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577868" start="75075" end="75094" title="William Anderson (naval officer)" label="William R. Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="75421" end="75444" title="International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement" label="International Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q486226" start="75731" end="75764" title="Phong Nhị and Phong Nhất massacre" label="Phong Nhị and Phong Nhất massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633777" start="75775" end="75793" title="2nd Marine Division (South Korea)" label="2nd Marine Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q725063" start="75897" end="75914" title="Điện Bàn District" label="Điện Bàn District"/>
<link wikidata="Q497528" start="75981" end="75998" title="Bình Hòa massacre" label="Bình Hòa massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914342" start="76000" end="76017" title="Binh Tai Massacre" label="Binh Tai Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q488616" start="76022" end="76036" title="Hà My massacre" label="Hà My massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q709365" start="77323" end="77339" title="Đắk Sơn massacre" label="Đắk Sơn massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q35747" start="77473" end="77480" title="Tuy Hòa" label="Tuy Hòa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359941" start="77666" end="77679" title="Hỏa Lò Prison" label="Hỏa Lò Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q10896978" start="77718" end="77761" title="Forced confession" label="torture was employed to extract confessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q164236" start="78452" end="78466" title="war journalism" label="war journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408310" start="78566" end="78581" title="Wartime sexual violence" label="sexual violence"/>
<link wikidata="" start="78586" end="78596" title="List of war crimes#1955–1975: Vietnam War" label="war crimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q215946" start="79076" end="79088" title="Agent Orange" label="Agent Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q491117" start="79101" end="79112" title="Lai Đại Hàn" label="Lai Đại Hàn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962906" start="79345" end="79358" title="Wallace Terry" label="Wallace Terry"/>
<link wikidata="Q204046" start="80595" end="80604" title="M1 Garand" label="M1 Garand"/>
<link wikidata="Q695988" start="80606" end="80616" title="M1 carbine" label="M1 carbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15082" start="80618" end="80627" title="M14 rifle" label="M14 rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q170318" start="80633" end="80642" title="M16 rifle" label="M16 rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513317" start="80703" end="80726" title="L1A1 Self-Loading Rifle" label="L1A1 Self-Loading Rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q748780" start="80865" end="80884" title="First Indochina War" label="First Indochina War"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="80954" end="80965" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q153932" start="81026" end="81031" title="K-50M" label="K-50M"/>
<link wikidata="Q947247" start="81075" end="81080" title="RPG-2" label="RPG-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q331588" start="82195" end="82226" title="Convention on Cluster Munitions" label="Convention on Cluster Munitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896947" start="85737" end="85755" title="Re-education camp (Vietnam)" label="re-education camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q10835283" start="86718" end="86744" title="New Economic Zones program" label="New Economic Zones program"/>
<link wikidata="Q5878" start="86840" end="86862" title="Gabriel García Márquez" label="Gabriel García Márquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="86866" end="86877" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975651" start="87007" end="87028" title="United Nations Security Council veto power" label="security council veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850" start="87228" end="87238" title="Phnom Penh" label="Phnom Penh"/>
<link wikidata="Q39464" start="87310" end="87317" title="Pol Pot" label="Pol Pot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885072" start="87341" end="87368" title="Cambodian genocide" label="kill 1–3 million Cambodians"/>
<link wikidata="Q56487989" start="87424" end="87448" title="List of genocides by death toll" label="bloodiest genocides ever"/>
<link wikidata="Q330988" start="87488" end="87508" title="Democratic Kampuchea" label="Democratic Kampuchea"/>
<link wikidata="Q146695" start="87599" end="87607" title="Phu Quoc" label="Phu Quoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442181" start="87612" end="87619" title="Tho Chu" label="Tho Chu"/>
<link wikidata="Q623171" start="88043" end="88062" title="Sino-Vietnamese War" label="Sino-Vietnamese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193617" start="88103" end="88110" title="Hoa people" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="88244" end="88281" title="Lao People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Republic" label="Lao People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q182817" start="88354" end="88371" title="velvet revolution" label="velvet revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302880" start="88513" end="88532" title="Unexploded ordnance" label="Unexploded ordnance"/>
<link wikidata="Q16211248" start="89066" end="89090" title="Indochina refugee crisis" label="Indochina refugee crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6449297" start="89199" end="89210" title="boat people" label="boat people"/>
<link wikidata="Q131572" start="89260" end="89267" title="refugee" label="refugee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6449297" start="89720" end="89742" title="Vietnamese boat people" label="Vietnamese boat people"/>
<link wikidata="Q132551" start="89773" end="89818" title="United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees" label="United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q783785" start="90371" end="90390" title="Chief of Staff of the United States Army" label="Army Chief of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q12790767" start="90391" end="90411" title="Harold Keith Johnson" label="Harold Keith Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="91327" end="91340" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408490" start="91363" end="91379" title="Vietnam Syndrome" label="Vietnam Syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q65358" start="91673" end="91685" title="Gallup, Inc." label="Gallup, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q7928571" start="92360" end="92385" title="Vietnam War POW/MIA issue" label="Vietnam War POW/MIA issue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344557" start="92441" end="92458" title="missing in action" label="missing in action"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010135" start="92804" end="92818" title="budget deficit" label="budget deficit"/>
<link wikidata="Q202387" start="93936" end="93965" title="posttraumatic stress disorder" label="posttraumatic stress disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="94463" end="94475" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q85757599" start="94527" end="94540" title="Draft evasion in the Vietnam War" label="draft evaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q19065479" start="94546" end="94563" title="Proclamation 4483" label="Proclamation 4483"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557405" start="94625" end="94641" title="Victor H. Krulak" label="Victor H. Krulak"/>
<link wikidata="Q53744" start="95492" end="95501" title="defoliant" label="defoliant"/>
<link wikidata="Q215946" start="95571" end="95583" title="Agent Orange" label="Agent Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q19756" start="96347" end="96355" title="mangrove" label="mangrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q53713" start="96442" end="96452" title="Olof Palme" label="Olof Palme"/>
<link wikidata="Q296486" start="96500" end="96507" title="ecocide" label="ecocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902961" start="96953" end="96968" title="monstrous birth" label="monstrous birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q844717" start="97312" end="97324" title="spina bifida" label="spina bifida"/>
<link wikidata="Q773330" start="97491" end="97519" title="Danang International Airport" label="Danang International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q855639" start="97698" end="97710" title="Dow Chemical" label="Dow Chemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215769" start="97754" end="97771" title="United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York" label="US District Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q250479" start="97854" end="97867" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit" label="appeals court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227103" start="97944" end="97950" title="dioxin" label="dioxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q181257" start="98260" end="98275" title="prostate cancer" label="prostate cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q47912" start="98277" end="98296" title="lung cancer" label="respiratory cancers"/>
<link wikidata="Q467635" start="98298" end="98314" title="multiple myeloma" label="multiple myeloma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025883" start="98316" end="98331" title="Diabetes mellitus type 2" label="type 2 diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q208414" start="98333" end="98349" title="B-cell lymphomas" label="B-cell lymphomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q720020" start="98351" end="98370" title="soft-tissue sarcoma" label="soft-tissue sarcoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q426955" start="98372" end="98381" title="chloracne" label="chloracne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479497" start="98383" end="98406" title="porphyria cutanea tarda" label="porphyria cutanea tarda"/>
<link wikidata="Q945238" start="98408" end="98429" title="peripheral neuropathy" label="peripheral neuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656829" start="98858" end="98873" title="Girl from Hanoi" label="Girl from Hanoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33994" start="99075" end="99085" title="Quảng Ngãi" label="Quảng Ngãi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291493" start="99273" end="99288" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Burn" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6911" start="99345" end="99368" title="The Diary of a Young Girl" label="The Diary of Anne Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q40531" start="99468" end="99478" title="John Wayne" label="John Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q478333" start="99500" end="99516" title="The Green Berets (film)" label="The Green Berets"/>
<link wikidata="Q59129" start="99642" end="99656" title="Michael Cimino" label="Michael Cimino"/>
<link wikidata="Q201674" start="99670" end="99685" title="The Deer Hunter" label="The Deer Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q56094" start="99700" end="99720" title="Francis Ford Coppola" label="Francis Ford Coppola"/>
<link wikidata="Q182692" start="99734" end="99748" title="Apocalypse Now" label="Apocalypse Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q179497" start="99763" end="99775" title="Oliver Stone" label="Oliver Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q190643" start="99789" end="99796" title="Platoon (film)" label="Platoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001" start="99814" end="99829" title="Stanley Kubrick" label="Stanley Kubrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q243439" start="99843" end="99860" title="Full Metal Jacket" label="Full Metal Jacket"/>
<link wikidata="Q741878" start="99901" end="99922" title="Good Morning, Vietnam" label="Good Morning, Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126637" start="99943" end="99960" title="Casualties of War" label="Casualties of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q471159" start="99981" end="100007" title="Born on the Fourth of July (film)" label="Born on the Fourth of July"/>
<link wikidata="Q134773" start="100028" end="100040" title="Forrest Gump" label="Forrest Gump"/>
<link wikidata="Q623502" start="100061" end="100077" title="We Were Soldiers" label="We Were Soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q180706" start="100102" end="100113" title="Rescue Dawn" label="Rescue Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q107969608" start="100276" end="100300" title="Vietnam War Song Project" label="Vietnam War Song Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q869427" start="100367" end="100391" title="Country Joe and the Fish" label="Country Joe and the Fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1652829" start="100407" end="100477" title="The &amp;quot;Fish&amp;quot; Cheer/I-Feel-Like-I&amp;#x27;m-Fixin&amp;#x27;-to-Die Rag" label="The &amp;quot;Fish&amp;quot; Cheer/I-Feel-Like-I&amp;#x27;m-Fixin&amp;#x27;-to-Die Rag"/>
<link wikidata="Q50675" start="100594" end="100608" title="historiography" label="historiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044835" start="100649" end="100677" title="culture of the United States" label="culture of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974069" start="101468" end="101503" title="National League of POW/MIA Families" label="National League of POW/MIA Families"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372717" start="101741" end="101751" title="Swift Vets and POWs for Truth" label="Swift boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435153" start="101782" end="101807" title="List of conflicts in Asia" label="List of conflicts in Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="101810" end="101827" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="Soviet–Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q796498" start="101830" end="101849" title="Third Indochina War" label="Third Indochina War"/>
<link wikidata="Q131861060" start="101852" end="101889" title="United States Army during Vietnam War" label="United States Army during Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="101990" end="101999" title="#Citations" label="Citations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="102093" end="102105" title="#Main sources" label="Main sources"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="102207" end="102225" title="#Additional sources" label="Additional sources"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="102410" end="102428" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q131831006" start="103217" end="103248" title="Bibliography of the Vietnam War" label="Bibliography of the Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q619899" start="104326" end="104334" title="Mashable" label="Mashable"/>
<link wikidata="Q15144" start="104452" end="104486" title="University of Massachusetts Boston" label="University of Massachusetts Boston"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="32612" wikidata="Q170519" url="?curid=32612" title="Virtual reality">
<text>Virtual reality (VR) is a simulated experience that employs 3D near-eye displays and pose tracking to give the user an immersive feel of a virtual world. Applications of virtual reality include entertainment (particularly video games), education (such as medical, safety or military training) and business (such as virtual meetings). VR is one of the key technologies in the reality-virtuality continuum. As such, it is different from other digital visualization solutions, such as augmented virtuality and augmented reality.

Currently, standard virtual reality systems use either virtual reality headsets or multi-projected environments to generate some realistic images, sounds and other sensations that simulate a user&#x27;s physical presence in a virtual environment. A person using virtual reality equipment is able to look around the artificial world, move around in it, and interact with virtual features or items. The effect is commonly created by VR headsets consisting of a head-mounted display with a small screen in front of the eyes, but can also be created through specially designed rooms with multiple large screens. Virtual reality typically incorporates auditory and video feedback, but may also allow other types of sensory and force feedback through haptic technology.

==Etymology==
&quot;Virtual&quot; has had the meaning of &quot;being something in essence or effect, though not actually or in fact&quot; since the mid-1400s. The term &quot;virtual&quot; has been used in the computer sense of &quot;not physically existing but made to appear by software&quot; since 1959.

In 1938, French avant-garde playwright Antonin Artaud described the illusory nature of characters and objects in the theatre as &quot;la réalité virtuelle&quot; in a collection of essays, &quot;Le Théâtre et son double&quot;. The English translation of this book, published in 1958 as &quot;The Theater and its Double&quot;, is the earliest published use of the term &quot;virtual reality&quot;. The term &quot;artificial reality&quot;, coined by Myron Krueger, has been in use since the 1970s. The term &quot;virtual reality&quot; was first used in a science fiction context in &quot;The Judas Mandala&quot;, a 1982 novel by Damien Broderick.

Widespread adoption of the term &quot;virtual reality&quot; in the popular media is attributed to Jaron Lanier, who in the late 1980s designed some of the first business-grade virtual reality hardware under his firm VPL Research, and the 1992 film &quot;Lawnmower Man&quot;, which features use of virtual reality systems.

==Forms and methods==
One method of realizing virtual reality is through simulation-based virtual reality. For example, driving simulators give the driver the impression of actually driving a vehicle by predicting vehicular motion based on the driver&#x27;s input and providing corresponding visual, motion, and audio cues.

With avatar image-based virtual reality, people can join the virtual environment in the form of real video as well as an avatar. One can participate in the 3D distributed virtual environment in the form of either a conventional avatar or a real video. Users can select their own type of participation based on the system capability.

In projector-based virtual reality, modeling of the real environment plays a vital role in various virtual reality applications, including robot navigation, construction modeling, and airplane simulation. Image-based virtual reality systems have been gaining popularity in computer graphics and computer vision communities. In generating realistic models, it is essential to accurately register acquired 3D data; usually, a camera is used for modeling small objects at a short distance.

Desktop-based virtual reality involves displaying a 3D virtual world on a regular desktop display without use of any specialized VR positional tracking equipment. Many modern first-person video games can be used as an example, using various triggers, responsive characters, and other such interactive devices to make the user feel as though they are in a virtual world. A common criticism of this form of immersion is that there is no sense of peripheral vision, limiting the user&#x27;s ability to know what is happening around them.

A head-mounted display (HMD) more fully immerses the user in a virtual world. A virtual reality headset typically includes two small high resolution OLED or LCD monitors which provide separate images for each eye for stereoscopic graphics rendering a 3D virtual world, a binaural audio system, positional and rotational real-time head tracking for six degrees of movement. Options include motion controls with haptic feedback for physically interacting within the virtual world in an intuitive way with little to no abstraction and an omnidirectional treadmill for more freedom of physical movement allowing the user to perform locomotive motion in any direction.

Augmented reality (AR) is a type of virtual reality technology that blends what the user sees in their real surroundings with digital content generated by computer software. The additional software-generated images with the virtual scene typically enhance how the real surroundings look in some way. AR systems layer virtual information over a camera live feed into a headset or smartglasses or through a mobile device giving the user the ability to view three-dimensional images.

Mixed reality (MR) is the merging of the real world and virtual worlds to produce new environments and visualizations where physical and digital objects co-exist and interact in real time.

A cyberspace is sometimes defined as a networked virtual reality.

Simulated reality is a hypothetical virtual reality as truly immersive as the actual reality, enabling an advanced lifelike experience or even virtual eternity.

== History ==
The development of perspective in Renaissance European art and the stereoscope invented by Sir Charles Wheatstone were both precursors to virtual reality. The first references to the more modern-day concept of virtual reality came from science fiction.

=== 20th century ===
Morton Heilig wrote in the 1950s of an &quot;Experience Theatre&quot; that could encompass all the senses in an effective manner, thus drawing the viewer into the onscreen activity. He built a prototype of his vision dubbed the Sensorama in 1962, along with five short films to be displayed in it while engaging multiple senses (sight, sound, smell, and touch). Predating digital computing, the Sensorama was a mechanical device. Heilig also developed what he referred to as the &quot;Telesphere Mask&quot; (patented in 1960). The patent application described the device as &quot;a telescopic television apparatus for individual use... The spectator is given a complete sensation of reality, i.e. moving three dimensional images which may be in colour, with 100% peripheral vision, binaural sound, scents and air breezes.&quot;

In 1968, Harvard Professor Ivan Sutherland, with the help of his students including Bob Sproull, created what was widely considered to be the first head-mounted display system for use in immersive simulation applications, called The Sword of Damocles. It was primitive both in terms of user interface and visual realism, and the HMD to be worn by the user was so heavy that it had to be suspended from the ceiling, which gave the device a formidable appearance and inspired its name. Technically, the device was an augmented reality device due to optical passthrough. The graphics comprising the virtual environment were simple wire-frame model rooms.

==== 1970–1990 ====
The virtual reality industry mainly provided VR devices for medical, flight simulation, automobile industry design, and military training purposes from 1970 to 1990.

David Em became the first artist to produce navigable virtual worlds at NASA&#x27;s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) from 1977 to 1984. The Aspen Movie Map, a crude virtual tour in which users could wander the streets of Aspen in one of the three modes (summer, winter, and polygons), was created at MIT in 1978.

In 1979, Eric Howlett developed the Large Expanse, Extra Perspective (LEEP) optical system. The combined system created a stereoscopic image with a field-of-view wide enough to create a convincing sense of space. The users of the system have been impressed by the sensation of depth (field of view) in the scene and the corresponding realism. The original LEEP system was redesigned for NASA&#x27;s Ames Research Center in 1985 for their first virtual reality installation, the VIEW (Virtual Interactive Environment Workstation) by Scott Fisher. The LEEP system provides the basis for most of the modern virtual reality headsets.

By the late 1980s, the term &quot;virtual reality&quot; was popularized by Jaron Lanier, one of the modern pioneers of the field. Lanier had founded the company VPL Research in 1984. VPL Research has developed several VR devices like the DataGlove, the EyePhone, the Reality Built For Two (RB2), and the AudioSphere. VPL licensed the DataGlove technology to Mattel, which used it to make the Power Glove, an early affordable VR device, released in 1989. That same year Broderbund&#x27;s U-Force was released.

Atari, Inc. founded a research lab for virtual reality in 1982, but the lab was closed after two years due to the video game crash of 1983. However, its hired employees, such as Scott Fisher, Michael Naimark, and Brenda Laurel, kept their research and development on VR-related technologies.

In 1988, the Cyberspace Project at Autodesk was the first to implement VR on a low-cost personal computer. The project leader Eric Gullichsen left in 1990 to found Sense8 Corporation and develop the WorldToolKit virtual reality SDK, which offered the first real time graphics with Texture mapping on a PC, and was widely used throughout industry and academia.

==== 1990–2000 ====
The 1990s saw the first widespread commercial releases of consumer headsets. In 1992, for instance, &quot;Computer Gaming World&quot; predicted &quot;affordable VR by 1994&quot;.

In 1991, Sega announced the Sega VR headset for the Mega Drive home console. It used LCD screens in the visor, stereo headphones, and inertial sensors that allowed the system to track and react to the movements of the user&#x27;s head. In the same year, Virtuality launched and went on to become the first mass-produced, networked, multiplayer VR entertainment system that was released in many countries, including a dedicated VR arcade at Embarcadero Center. Costing up to $73,000 per multi-pod Virtuality system, they featured headsets and exoskeleton gloves that gave one of the first &quot;immersive&quot; VR experiences.

That same year, Carolina Cruz-Neira, Daniel J. Sandin and Thomas A. DeFanti from the Electronic Visualization Laboratory created the first cubic immersive room, the Cave automatic virtual environment (CAVE). Developed as Cruz-Neira&#x27;s PhD thesis, it involved a multi-projected environment, similar to the holodeck, allowing people to see their own bodies in relation to others in the room. Antonio Medina, a MIT graduate and NASA scientist, designed a virtual reality system to &quot;drive&quot; Mars rovers from Earth in apparent real time despite the substantial delay of Mars-Earth-Mars signals.

In 1992, Nicole Stenger created &quot;Angels&quot;, the first real-time interactive immersive movie where the interaction was facilitated with a dataglove and high-resolution goggles. That same year, Louis Rosenberg created the virtual fixtures system at the U.S. Air Force&#x27;s Armstrong Labs using a full upper-body exoskeleton, enabling a physically realistic mixed reality in 3D. The system enabled the overlay of physically real 3D virtual objects registered with a user&#x27;s direct view of the real world, producing the first true augmented reality experience enabling sight, sound, and touch.

By July 1994, Sega had released the VR-1 motion simulator ride attraction in Joypolis indoor theme parks, as well as the &quot;Dennou Senki Net Merc&quot; arcade game. Both used an advanced head-mounted display dubbed the &quot;Mega Visor Display&quot; developed in conjunction with Virtuality; it was able to track head movement in a 360-degree stereoscopic 3D environment, and in its &quot;Net Merc&quot; incarnation was powered by the Sega Model 1 arcade system board. Apple released QuickTime VR, which, despite using the term &quot;VR&quot;, was unable to represent virtual reality, and instead displayed 360-degree interactive panoramas.

Nintendo&#x27;s Virtual Boy console was released in 1995. A group in Seattle created public demonstrations of a &quot;CAVE-like&quot; 270 degree immersive projection room called the Virtual Environment Theater, produced by entrepreneurs Chet Dagit and Bob Jacobson. Forte released the VFX1, a PC-powered virtual reality headset that same year.

In 1999, entrepreneur Philip Rosedale formed Linden Lab with an initial focus on the development of VR hardware. In its earliest form, the company struggled to produce a commercial version of &quot;The Rig&quot;, which was realized in prototype form as a clunky steel contraption with several computer monitors that users could wear on their shoulders. The concept was later adapted into the personal computer-based, 3D virtual world program &quot;Second Life&quot;.

=== 21st century ===
The 2000s were a period of relative public and investment indifference to commercially available VR technologies.

In 2001, SAS Cube (SAS3) became the first PC-based cubic room, developed by Z-A Production (Maurice Benayoun, David Nahon), Barco, and Clarté. It was installed in Laval, France. The SAS library gave birth to Virtools VRPack. In 2007, Google introduced Street View, a service that shows panoramic views of an increasing number of worldwide positions such as roads, indoor buildings and rural areas. It also features a stereoscopic 3D mode, introduced in 2010.

====2010–present====
In 2010, Palmer Luckey designed the first prototype of the Oculus Rift. This prototype, built on a shell of another virtual reality headset, was only capable of rotational tracking. However, it boasted a 90-degree field of vision that was previously unseen in the consumer market at the time. Luckey eliminated distortion issues arising from the type of lens used to create the wide field of vision using software that pre-distorted the rendered image in real-time. This initial design would later serve as a basis from which the later designs came. In 2012, the Rift is presented for the first time at the E3 video game trade show by John Carmack. In 2014, Facebook (later Meta) purchased Oculus VR for what at the time was stated as $2 billion but later revealed that the more accurate figure was $3 billion. This purchase occurred after the first development kits ordered through Oculus&#x27; 2012 Kickstarter had shipped in 2013 but before the shipping of their second development kits in 2014. ZeniMax, Carmack&#x27;s former employer, sued Oculus and Facebook for taking company secrets to Facebook; the verdict was in favour of ZeniMax, settled out of court later.
In 2013, Valve discovered and freely shared the breakthrough of low-persistence displays which make lag-free and smear-free display of VR content possible. This was adopted by Oculus and was used in all their future headsets. In early 2014, Valve showed off their SteamSight prototype, the precursor to both consumer headsets released in 2016. It shared major features with the consumer headsets including separate 1K displays per eye, low persistence, positional tracking over a large area, and Fresnel lenses. HTC and Valve announced the virtual reality headset HTC Vive and controllers in 2015. The set included tracking technology called Lighthouse, which utilized wall-mounted &quot;base stations&quot; for positional tracking using infrared light.

In 2014, Sony announced Project Morpheus (its code name for the PlayStation VR), a virtual reality headset for the PlayStation 4 video game console. The Chinese headset AntVR was released in late 2014; it was briefly competitive in the Chinese market but ultimately unable to compete with the larger technology companies. In 2015, Google announced Cardboard, a do-it-yourself stereoscopic viewer: the user places their smartphone in the cardboard holder, which they wear on their head. Michael Naimark was appointed Google&#x27;s first-ever &#x27;resident artist&#x27; in their new VR division. The Kickstarter campaign for Gloveone, a pair of gloves providing motion tracking and haptic feedback, was successfully funded, with over $150,000 in contributions. Also in 2015, Razer unveiled its open source project OSVR.

By 2016, there were at least 230 companies developing VR-related products. Amazon, Apple, Facebook, Google, Microsoft, Sony and Samsung all had dedicated AR and VR groups. Dynamic binaural audio was common to most headsets released that year. However, haptic interfaces were not well developed, and most hardware packages incorporated button-operated handsets for touch-based interactivity. Visually, displays were still of a low-enough resolution and frame rate that images were still identifiable as virtual.

In 2016, HTC shipped its first units of the HTC Vive SteamVR headset. This marked the first major commercial release of sensor-based tracking, allowing for free movement of users within a defined space. A patent filed by Sony in 2017 showed they were developing a similar location tracking technology to the Vive for PlayStation VR, with the potential for the development of a wireless headset.

In 2019, Oculus released the Oculus Rift S and a standalone headset, the Oculus Quest. These headsets utilized inside-out tracking compared to external outside-in tracking seen in previous generations of headsets.

Later in 2019, Valve released the Valve Index. Notable features include a 130° field of view, off-ear headphones for immersion and comfort, open-handed controllers which allow for individual finger tracking, front facing cameras, and a front expansion slot meant for extensibility.

In 2020, Oculus released the Oculus Quest 2, later renamed the Meta Quest 2. Some new features include a sharper screen, reduced price, and increased performance. Facebook (which became Meta a year later) initially required users to log in with a Facebook account in order to use the new headset. In 2021 the Oculus Quest 2 accounted for 80% of all VR headsets sold.

In 2021, EASA approved the first Virtual Reality-based Flight Simulation Training Device. The device, made by Loft Dynamics for rotorcraft pilots, enhances safety by opening up the possibility of practicing risky maneuvers in a virtual environment. This addresses a key risk area in rotorcraft operations, where statistics show that around 20% of accidents occur during training flights.

In 2022, Meta released the Meta Quest Pro. This device utilised a thinner, visor-like design that was not fully enclosed, and was the first headset by Meta to target mixed reality applications using high-resolution colour video passthrough. It also included integrated face and eye tracking, pancake lenses, and updated Touch Pro controllers with on-board motion tracking.

In 2023, Sony released the PlayStation VR2, a follow-up to their 2016 headset. The device includes inside-out tracking, eye-tracked foveated rendering, higher-resolution OLED displays, controllers with adaptive triggers and haptic feedback, 3D audio, and a wider field of view. While initially exclusive for use with the PlayStation 5 console, a PC adapter is scheduled for August 2024.

Later in 2023, Meta released the Meta Quest 3, the successor to the Quest 2. It features the pancake lenses and mixed reality features of the Quest Pro, as well as an increased field of view and resolution compared to Quest 2. In October 2024 Meta released a lower cost entry headset the Meta Quest 3S with the same fresnel lenses as the Quest 2 and a lower resolution of 1832x1920 as compared to 2064x2208 on the Quest 3. 

In 2024, Apple released the Apple Vision Pro. The device is a fully enclosed mixed reality headset that strongly utilises video passthrough. While some VR experiences are available on the device, it lacks standard VR headset features such as external controllers or support for OpenXR and is instead branded as a &quot;spatial computer&quot;.

In 2024, the Federal Aviation Administration approved its first virtual reality flight simulation training device: Loft Dynamics&#x27; virtual reality Airbus Helicopters H125 FSTD—the same device EASA qualified. As of September 2024, Loft Dynamics remains the only VR FSTD qualified by EASA and the FAA.

==Technology==
===Hardware===

Modern virtual reality headset displays are based on technology developed for smartphones including: gyroscopes and motion sensors for tracking head, body, and hand positions; small HD screens for stereoscopic displays; and small, lightweight and fast computer processors. These components led to relative affordability for independent VR developers, and led to the 2012 Oculus Rift Kickstarter offering the first independently developed VR headset.

Independent production of VR images and video has increased alongside the development of affordable omnidirectional cameras, also known as 360-degree cameras or VR cameras, that have the ability to record 360 interactive photography, although at relatively low resolutions or in highly compressed formats for online streaming of 360 video. In contrast, photogrammetry is increasingly used to combine several high-resolution photographs for the creation of detailed 3D objects and environments in VR applications.

To create a feeling of immersion, special output devices are needed to display virtual worlds. Well-known formats include head-mounted displays or the CAVE. In order to convey a spatial impression, two images are generated and displayed from different perspectives (stereo projection). There are different technologies available to bring the respective image to the right eye. A distinction is made between active (e.g. shutter glasses) and passive technologies (e.g. polarizing filters or Infitec).

In order to improve the feeling of immersion, wearable multi-string cables offer haptics to complex geometries in virtual reality. These strings offer fine control of each finger joint to simulate the haptics involved in touching these virtual geometries.

Special input devices are required for interaction with the virtual world. Some of the most common input devices are motion controllers and optical tracking sensors. In some cases, wired gloves are used. Controllers typically use optical tracking systems (primarily infrared cameras) for location and navigation, so that the user can move freely without wiring. Some input devices provide the user with force feedback to the hands or other parts of the body, so that the user can orientate themselves in the three-dimensional world through haptics and sensor technology as a further sensory sensation and carry out realistic simulations. This allows for the viewer to have a sense of direction in the artificial landscape. Additional haptic feedback can be obtained from omnidirectional treadmills (with which walking in virtual space is controlled by real walking movements) and vibration gloves and suits.

Virtual reality cameras can be used to create VR photography using 360-degree panorama videos. VR cameras are available in various formats, with varying numbers of lenses installed in the camera.

===Software===
The Virtual Reality Modelling Language (VRML), first introduced in 1994, was intended for the development of &quot;virtual worlds&quot; without dependency on headsets. The Web3D consortium was subsequently founded in 1997 for the development of industry standards for web-based 3D graphics. The consortium subsequently developed X3D from the VRML framework as an archival, open-source standard for web-based distribution of VR content. WebVR is an experimental JavaScript application programming interface (API) that provides support for various virtual reality devices, such as the HTC Vive, Oculus Rift, Google Cardboard or OSVR, in a web browser.

== Visual immersion experience ==

=== Display resolution ===
Minimal Angle of Resolution (MAR) refers to the minimum distance between two display pixels. At the distance, viewer can clearly distinguish the independent pixels. Often measured in arc-seconds, MAR between two pixels has to do with the viewing distance. For the general public, resolution is about 30–65 arc-seconds, which is referred to as the spatial resolution when combined with distance. Given the viewing distance of 1m and 2m respectively, regular viewers won&#x27;t be able to perceive two pixels as separate if they are less than 0.29mm apart at 1m and less than 0.58mm apart at 2m.

=== Image latency and display refresh frequency ===
Most small-size displays have a refresh rate of 60 Hz, which adds about 15ms of additional latency. The number is reduced to less than 7ms if the refresh rate is increased to 120 Hz or even 240 Hz and more. Participants generally feel that the experience is more immersive with higher refresh rates as a result. However, higher refresh rates require a more powerful graphics processing unit.

=== Relationship between display and field of view ===

In assessing the achieved immersion by a VR device, we need to consider our field of view (FOV) in addition to image quality. Our eyes have a horizontal FOV from about 107 or 110 degrees to the temporal side to about 60 or 70 degrees toward the nose, and a vertical FOV from about 95 degrees downward to 85 degrees upward, and eye movements are estimated as roughly 30 deg to either side horizontally and 20 vertically. Binocular vision is limited to the 120 or 140 degrees where the right and the left visual fields overlap. With eye movements, we have a FOV of roughly 300 degrees x 175 degrees with two eyes, i.e., approximately one third of the full 360-deg sphere.

== Applications ==
Virtual reality is most commonly used in entertainment applications such as video games, 3D cinema, amusement park rides including dark rides and social virtual worlds. Consumer virtual reality headsets were first released by video game companies in the early-mid 1990s. Beginning in the 2010s, next-generation commercial tethered headsets were released by Oculus (Rift), HTC (Vive) and Sony (PlayStation VR), setting off a new wave of application development. 3D cinema has been used for sporting events, pornography, fine art, music videos and short films. Since 2015, roller coasters and theme parks have incorporated virtual reality to match visual effects with haptic feedback. VR not only fits the trend of the digital industry but also enhances the film&#x27;s visual effect. The film gives the audience more ways to interact through VR technology.

In social sciences and psychology, virtual reality offers a cost-effective tool to study and replicate interactions in a controlled environment. It can be used as a form of therapeutic intervention. For instance, there is the case of the virtual reality exposure therapy (VRET), a form of exposure therapy for treating anxiety disorders such as post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and phobias.

A VR therapy has been designed to help people with psychosis and agoraphobia manage their avoidance of outside environments. In the therapy, the user wears a headset and a virtual character provides psychological advice and guides them as they explore simulated environments (such as a cafe or a busy street). NICE is assessing the therapy to see if it should be recommended on the NHS.

During the COVID-19 pandemic, social VR has also been used as a mental-health tool in a form of self-administered, non-traditional cognitive behavioural therapy.

Virtual reality programs are being used in the rehabilitation processes with elderly individuals that have been diagnosed with Alzheimer&#x27;s disease. This gives these elderly patients the opportunity to simulate real experiences that they would not otherwise be able to experience due to their current state. 17 recent studies with randomized controlled trials have shown that virtual reality applications are effective in treating cognitive deficits with neurological diagnoses. Loss of mobility in elderly patients can lead to a sense of loneliness and depression. Virtual reality is able to assist in making aging in place a lifeline to an outside world that they cannot easily navigate. Virtual reality allows exposure therapy to take place in a safe environment.

In medicine, simulated VR surgical environments were first developed in the 1990s. Under the supervision of experts, VR can provide effective and repeatable training at a low cost, allowing trainees to recognize and amend errors as they occur.

Virtual reality has been used in physical rehabilitation since the 2000s. Despite numerous studies conducted, good quality evidence of its efficacy compared to other rehabilitation methods without sophisticated and expensive equipment is lacking for the treatment of Parkinson&#x27;s disease. A 2018 review on the effectiveness of mirror therapy by virtual reality and robotics for any type of pathology concluded in a similar way. Another study was conducted that showed the potential for VR to promote mimicry and revealed the difference between non-autistic and autistic individuals in their response to a two-dimensional avatar.

Immersive virtual reality technology with myoelectric and motion tracking control may represent a possible therapy option for treatment-resistant phantom limb pain. Pain scale measurements were taken into account and an interactive 3-D kitchen environment was developed based on the principles of mirror therapy to allow for control of virtual hands while wearing a motion-tracked VR headset. A systematic search in Pubmed and Embase was performed to determine results that were pooled in two meta-analysis. Meta-analysis showed a significant result in favor of VRT for balance.

In the fast-paced and globalised business world, meetings in VR are used to create an environment in which interactions with other people (e.g. colleagues, customers, partners) can feel more natural than a phone call or video chat. In the customisable meeting rooms all parties can join using the VR headset and interact as if they are in the same physical room. Presentations, videos or 3D models (of e.g. products or prototypes) can be uploaded and interacted with. Compared to traditional text-based CMC, Avatar-based interactions in 3D virtual environment lead to higher levels of consensus, satisfaction, and cohesion among group members.

VR can simulate real workspaces for workplace occupational safety and health purposes, educational purposes, and training purposes. It can be used to provide learners with a virtual environment where they can develop their skills without the real-world consequences of failing. It has been used and studied in primary education, anatomy teaching, military, astronaut training, flight simulators, mining and metallurgical operations training, medical education, geography education, architectural design, driver training, and bridge inspection. Immersive VR engineering systems enable engineers to see virtual prototypes prior to the availability of any physical prototypes. Supplementing training with virtual training environments has been claimed to offer avenues of realism in military and healthcare training while minimizing cost. It also has been claimed to reduce military training costs by minimizing the amounts of ammunition expended during training periods. VR can be used for the healthcare training and education for medical practitioners. Further, several application have been developed for multiple types of safety training. The latest results indicates that virtual reality safety training is more effective than traditional training in terms of knowledge acquisition and knowledge retention.

In the engineering field, VR has proved very useful for both engineering educators and the students. A previously expensive cost in the educational department now being much more accessible due to lowered overall costs, has proven to be a very useful tool in educating future engineers. The most significant element lies in the ability for the students to be able to interact with 3-D models that accurately respond based on real world possibilities. This added tool of education provides many the immersion needed to grasp complex topics and be able to apply them. As noted, the future architects and engineers benefit greatly by being able to form understandings between spatial relationships and providing solutions based on real-world future applications.

The first fine art virtual world was created in the 1970s. As the technology developed, more artistic programs were produced throughout the 1990s, including feature films. When commercially available technology became more widespread, VR festivals began to emerge in the mid-2010s. The first uses of VR in museum settings began in the 1990s, seeing a significant increase in the mid-2010s. Additionally, museums have begun making some of their content virtual reality accessible.

Virtual reality&#x27;s growing market presents an opportunity and an alternative channel for digital marketing. It is also seen as a new platform for e-commerce, particularly in the bid to challenge traditional &quot;brick and mortar&quot; retailers. However, a 2018 study revealed that the majority of goods are still purchased in physical stores.

In the case of education, the uses of virtual reality have demonstrated being capable of promoting higher order thinking, promoting the interest and commitment of students, the acquisition of knowledge, promoting mental habits and understanding that are generally useful within an academic context.

A case has also been made for including virtual reality technology in the context of public libraries. This would give library users access to cutting-edge technology and unique educational experiences. This could include giving users access to virtual, interactive copies of rare texts and artifacts and to tours of famous landmarks and archeological digs (as in the case with the Virtual Ganjali Khan Project).

Starting in the early 2020s, virtual reality has also been discussed as a technological setting that may support people&#x27;s grieving process, based on digital recreations of deceased individuals. In 2021, this practice received substantial media attention following a South Korean TV documentary, which invited a grieving mother to interact with a virtual replica of her deceased daughter. Subsequently, scientists have summarized several potential implications of such endeavours, including its potential to facilitate adaptive mourning, but also many ethical challenges.

Growing interest in the metaverse has resulted in organizational efforts to incorporate the many diverse applications of virtual reality into ecosystems like VIVERSE, reportedly offering connectivity between platforms for a wide range of uses.

== Medical uses of VR ==
Virtual reality (VR) technology has emerged as a significant tool in medical training and education. Specifically, there has been a major leap in innovation in surgical simulation and surgical real-time enhancement. Studies done at North Carolina medical institutions have demonstrated improvement in technical performance and skills among medical students and active surgeons using VR training as compared to traditional training, especially in procedures such as total hip arthroplasty. Alongside this, other VR simulation programs such as LapSim, improve basic coordination, instrument handling, and procedure-based skills. These simulations aim to have high ratings for feedback and haptic touch, which provides a more realistic surgical feel. 

Studies show significant improvement in task completion time and scores after 4-week training sessions of LapSim. This simulation environment also allows surgeons to practice without risk to real patients, promoting patient safety.

Based on data from research conducted from the University Hospitals Schleswig-Holstein and collaborators from other institutions, medical students and surgeons with years of experience, show marked performance boosts after practicing with LapSim VR technology.

Another recent study at North Carolina University of Chapel Hill has shown that developing VR and Augmented Reality (AR) systems have allowed surgeons to keep their eyes on a patient while accessing CT scans. This VR system allows for laparoscopic imaging integration, real-time skin layer visualization, and enhanced surgical precision capabilities.

These are both examples of how studies have shown surgeons can take advantage of additional virtual reality simulation practices, which can create incredible experiences, provide customized scenarios, and provide independent learning with haptic feedback. These VR systems need to be realistic enough for education tools alongside being able to measure performance of a surgeon.

Some potential future challenges of this technology would be enhancing complex scenarios alongside the realism aspects. These technologies would need to incorporate stress-inducing factors along with other realistic simulation ideas. Furthermore, there would be a need to have better AR integration to help the surgeon have better eyes-on precision guidance. Lastly, there would be a strong need to keep things cost-effective with an abundance of availability.

== Concerts ==
In June of 2020, Jean Michel Jarre performed in VRChat. In July, Brendan Bradley released the free FutureStages web-based virtual reality venue for live events and concerts throughout the 2020 shutdown, Justin Bieber performed on November 18, 2021 in WaveXR. On December 2, 2021, non-player characters performed at the Mugar Omni Theater with audiences interacting with a live performer in both virtual reality and projected on the IMAX dome screen. Meta&#x27;s Foo Fighters Super Bowl VR concert performed on Venues. Post Malone performed in Venues starting July 15, 2022. Megan Thee Stallion performed on AmazeVR at AMC Theaters throughout 2022.

On October 24, 2021, Billie Eilish performed on Oculus Venues. Pop group Imagine Dragons performed on June 15, 2022.

== Concerns and challenges ==
===Health and safety===
There are many health and safety considerations of virtual reality. A number of unwanted symptoms have been caused by prolonged use of virtual reality, and these may have slowed proliferation of the technology. Most virtual reality systems come with consumer warnings, including: seizures; developmental issues in children; trip-and-fall and collision warnings; discomfort; repetitive stress injury; and interference with medical devices. Some users may experience twitches, seizures or blackouts while using VR headsets, even if they do not have a history of epilepsy and have never had blackouts or seizures before. One in 4,000 people, or .025%, may experience these symptoms. Motion sickness, eyestrain, headaches, and discomfort are the most prevalent short-term adverse effects. In addition, because of the virtual reality headsets&#x27; heavy weight, discomfort may be more likely among children. Therefore, children are advised against using VR headsets. Other problems may occur in physical interactions with one&#x27;s environment. While wearing VR headsets, people quickly lose awareness of their real-world surroundings and may injure themselves by tripping over, or colliding with real-world objects.

VR headsets may regularly cause eye fatigue, as does all screened technology, because people tend to blink less when watching screens, causing their eyes to become more dried out. There have been some concerns about VR headsets contributing to myopia, but although VR headsets sit close to the eyes, they may not necessarily contribute to nearsightedness if the focal length of the image being displayed is sufficiently far away.

Virtual reality sickness (also known as cybersickness) occurs when a person&#x27;s exposure to a virtual environment causes symptoms that are similar to motion sickness symptoms. Women are significantly more affected than men by headset-induced symptoms, at rates of around 77% and 33% respectively. The most common symptoms are general discomfort, headache, stomach awareness, nausea, vomiting, pallor, sweating, fatigue, drowsiness, disorientation, and apathy. For example, Nintendo&#x27;s Virtual Boy received much criticism for its negative physical effects, including &quot;dizziness, nausea, and headaches&quot;. These motion sickness symptoms are caused by a disconnect between what is being seen and what the rest of the body perceives. When the vestibular system, the body&#x27;s internal balancing system, does not experience the motion that it expects from visual input through the eyes, the user may experience VR sickness. This can also happen if the VR system does not have a high enough frame rate, or if there is a lag between the body&#x27;s movement and the onscreen visual reaction to it. Because approximately 25–40% of people experience some kind of VR sickness when using VR machines, companies are actively looking for ways to reduce VR sickness.

Vergence-accommodation conflict (VAC) is one of the main causes of virtual reality sickness.

In January 2022 &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot; found that VR usage could lead to physical injuries including leg, hand, arm and shoulder injuries. VR usage has also been tied to incidents that resulted in neck injuries (especially injures to the cervical vertebrae).

===Children and teenagers in virtual reality===
Children are becoming increasingly aware of VR, with the number in the USA having never heard of it dropping by half from Autumn 2016 (40%) to Spring 2017 (19%).

A 2022 research report by Piper Sandler revealed that only 26% of U.S. teens own a VR device, 5% use it daily, while 48% of teen headset owners &quot;seldom&quot; use it. Of the teens who don&#x27;t own a VR headset, 9% plan to buy one. 50% of surveyed teens are unsure about the metaverse or don&#x27;t have any interest, and don&#x27;t have any plans to purchase a VR headset.

Studies show that young children, compared to adults, may respond cognitively and behaviorally to immersive VR in ways that differ from adults. VR places users directly into the media content, potentially making the experience very vivid and real for children. For example, children of 6–18 years of age reported higher levels of presence and &quot;realness&quot; of a virtual environment compared with adults 19–65 years of age.

Studies on VR consumer behavior or its effect on children and a code of ethical conduct involving underage users are especially needed, given the availability of VR porn and violent content. Related research on violence in video games suggests that exposure to media violence may affect attitudes, behavior, and even self-concept. Self-concept is a key indicator of core attitudes and coping abilities, particularly in adolescents. Early studies conducted on observing versus participating in violent VR games suggest that physiological arousal and aggressive thoughts, but not hostile feelings, are higher for participants than for observers of the virtual reality game.

Experiencing VR by children may further involve simultaneously holding the idea of the virtual world in mind while experiencing the physical world. Excessive usage of immersive technology that has very salient sensory features may compromise children&#x27;s ability to maintain the rules of the physical world, particularly when wearing a VR headset that blocks out the location of objects in the physical world. Immersive VR can provide users with multisensory experiences that replicate reality or create scenarios that are impossible or dangerous in the physical world. Observations of 10 children experiencing VR for the first time suggested that 8-12-years-old kids were more confident to explore VR content when it was in a familiar situation, e.g. the children enjoyed playing in the kitchen context of Job Simulator, and enjoyed breaking rules by engaging in activities they are not allowed to do in reality, such as setting things on fire.

===Privacy===
Digital privacy concerns have been associated with VR platforms; the persistent tracking required by all VR systems makes the technology particularly useful for, and vulnerable to, mass surveillance, including information gathering of personal actions, movements and responses. Data from eye tracking sensors, which are projected to become a standard feature in virtual reality headsets, may indirectly reveal information about a user&#x27;s ethnicity, personality traits, fears, emotions, interests, skills, and physical and mental health conditions.

The nature of VR technology means that it can gather a wide range of data about its users. This can include obvious information such as usernames and account information, but also extends to more personal data like physical movements, interaction habits, and responses to virtual environments. In addition, advanced VR systems can capture biometric data like voice patterns, eye movements, and physiological responses to VR experiences. Virtual reality technology has grown substantially since its inception, moving from a niche technology to a mainstream consumer product. As the user base has grown, so too has the amount of personal data collected by these systems. This data can be used to improve VR systems, to provide personalized experiences, or to collect demographic information for marketing purposes. However, it also raises significant privacy concerns, especially when this data is stored, shared, or sold without the user&#x27;s explicit consent.

Existing data protection and privacy laws like the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) in the EU, and the California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) in the United States, can be applied to VR. These regulations require companies to disclose how they collect and use data, and give users a degree of control over their personal information. Despite these regulations, enforcing privacy laws in VR can be challenging due to the global nature of the technology and the vast amounts of data collected. 

Due to its history of privacy issues, the involvement of Meta Platforms (formerly Facebook, Inc.) in the VR market has led to privacy concerns specific to its platforms. In August 2020, Facebook announced that Oculus products would become subject to the terms of use and privacy policy of the Facebook social network, and that a Facebook account would be required to use future Oculus headset models, and all existing models (via deprecation of the separate Oculus account system) beginning January 2023. The announcement was criticized for the mandatory integration of Oculus headsets with Facebook data collection and policies (including the Facebook real-name policy), and preventing use of the hardware if the user&#x27;s account is suspended. The following month, Facebook halted the sale of Oculus products in Germany due to concerns from regulators that the new policy was a violation of GDPR. In 2022, the company would later establish a separate &quot;Meta account&quot; system.

In 2024, researchers from the University of Chicago demonstrated a security vulnerability in Meta Quest&#x27;s Android-based system software (leveraging &quot;Developer Mode&quot; to inject an infected app), allowing them to obtain users&#x27; login credentials and inject false details during online banking sessions. This attack was considered to be difficult to execute outside of research settings but would make its target vulnerable to risks such as phishing, Internet fraud, and grooming.

==Virtual reality in fiction==
== See also ==
* 16K resolution
* 360-degree video
* AlloSphere
* Computer-mediated reality
* Diorama
* Extended reality
* Haptic suit 
* Holographic principle
* Hyperreality 
* Mixed reality
* Virtual body
* Virtual globe
* Virtual machining
* Virtual reality in nursing
* Virtual reality website
* Metaverse
* Gustatory technology
* List of virtual reality headsets
* MOO

== References ==
==Further reading==

== External links ==

* Basic Concepts of Virtual Reality along with Research Challenges explained in simple words.
* – Milgram and Kishino&#x27;s (1994) Virtuality Continuum paraphrase with examples.
* Interviews on the history and future of virtual reality by leaders in the field.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q170519" start="0" end="15" title="Virtual reality" label="Virtual reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q170519" start="17" end="19" title="Virtual reality" label="VR"/>
<link wikidata="Q45045" start="26" end="35" title="Simulation" label="simulated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191960" start="60" end="79" title="3D near-eye display" label="3D near-eye display"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324728" start="85" end="98" title="pose tracking" label="pose tracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q55080180" start="154" end="185" title="Applications of virtual reality" label="Applications of virtual reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="222" end="232" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q924436" start="375" end="403" title="Reality–virtuality continuum" label="reality-virtuality continuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758389" start="482" end="502" title="augmented virtuality" label="augmented virtuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q254183" start="507" end="524" title="augmented reality" label="augmented reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q19600329" start="582" end="605" title="virtual reality headset" label="virtual reality headset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333980" start="986" end="1006" title="head-mounted display" label="head-mounted display"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820027" start="1174" end="1182" title="Auditory feedback" label="auditory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4132092" start="1187" end="1201" title="video feedback" label="video feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030571" start="1272" end="1289" title="haptic technology" label="haptic technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935194" start="1312" end="1319" title="Virtual (philosophy)" label="Virtual"/>
<link wikidata="Q9510" start="1529" end="1548" title="Reality" label="physically existing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="1571" end="1579" title="software" label="software"/>
<link wikidata="Q187166" start="1638" end="1652" title="Antonin Artaud" label="Antonin Artaud"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1727" end="1759" title=":fr:Réalité virtuelle" label="&amp;quot;la réalité virtuelle&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768630" start="1890" end="1916" title="The Theater and its Double" label="The Theater and its Double"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801094" start="2010" end="2028" title="artificial reality" label="artificial reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q4243085" start="2046" end="2059" title="Myron W. Krueger" label="Myron Krueger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158494" start="2225" end="2241" title="Damien Broderick" label="Damien Broderick"/>
<link wikidata="Q92862" start="2342" end="2354" title="Jaron Lanier" label="Jaron Lanier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506391" start="2460" end="2472" title="VPL Research" label="VPL Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196384" start="2498" end="2511" title="The Lawnmower Man (film)" label="Lawnmower Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q45045" start="2640" end="2650" title="simulation" label="simulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q152402" start="2897" end="2909" title="Avatar (virtual reality)" label="avatar image"/>
<link wikidata="Q189177" start="3048" end="3050" title="3D computer graphics" label="3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600677" start="3499" end="3516" title="computer graphics" label="computer graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q844240" start="3521" end="3536" title="computer vision" label="computer vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q444835" start="3769" end="3782" title="virtual world" label="virtual world"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290" start="3796" end="3811" title="Visual display unit" label="desktop display"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324728" start="3843" end="3865" title="VR positional tracking" label="VR positional tracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299049" start="3889" end="3901" title="First-person (gaming)" label="first-person"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431287" start="4158" end="4175" title="peripheral vision" label="peripheral vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333980" start="4252" end="4272" title="head-mounted display" label="head-mounted display"/>
<link wikidata="Q19600329" start="4330" end="4353" title="virtual reality headset" label="virtual reality headset"/>
<link wikidata="Q209593" start="4399" end="4403" title="OLED" label="OLED"/>
<link wikidata="Q83341" start="4407" end="4410" title="LCD" label="LCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q35158" start="4467" end="4479" title="Stereoscopy" label="stereoscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636316" start="4521" end="4535" title="3D audio effect" label="binaural audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q676252" start="4580" end="4593" title="Motion capture" label="head tracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917780" start="4639" end="4654" title="Motion controller" label="motion controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030571" start="4660" end="4675" title="Haptic technology" label="haptic feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q7090380" start="4785" end="4810" title="omnidirectional treadmill" label="omnidirectional treadmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q254183" start="4915" end="4932" title="Augmented reality" label="Augmented reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q220499" start="5266" end="5275" title="live feed" label="live feed"/>
<link wikidata="Q15978715" start="5294" end="5306" title="smartglasses" label="smartglasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082128" start="5320" end="5333" title="mobile device" label="mobile device"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758389" start="5397" end="5410" title="Mixed reality" label="Mixed reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q204606" start="5589" end="5599" title="cyberspace" label="cyberspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q125547326" start="5654" end="5671" title="Simulated reality" label="Simulated reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058876" start="5732" end="5746" title="Real life" label="actual reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900281" start="5849" end="5860" title="Perspective (graphical)" label="perspective"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="5864" end="5875" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q11723296" start="5897" end="5908" title="stereoscope" label="stereoscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q156942" start="5921" end="5943" title="Sir Charles Wheatstone" label="Sir Charles Wheatstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="6066" end="6081" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6914872" start="6105" end="6118" title="Morton Heilig" label="Morton Heilig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093450" start="6333" end="6342" title="Sensorama" label="Sensorama"/>
<link wikidata="Q11019" start="6516" end="6533" title="Machine" label="mechanical device"/>
<link wikidata="Q62866" start="6961" end="6976" title="Ivan Sutherland" label="Ivan Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934059" start="7018" end="7029" title="Bob Sproull" label="Bob Sproull"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767749" start="7163" end="7184" title="The Sword of Damocles (virtual reality)" label="The Sword of Damocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146" start="7220" end="7234" title="user interface" label="user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q583169" start="7562" end="7578" title="wire-frame model" label="wire-frame model"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233375" start="7774" end="7782" title="David Em" label="David Em"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="7846" end="7850" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q189325" start="7858" end="7883" title="Jet Propulsion Laboratory" label="Jet Propulsion Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625272" start="7913" end="7928" title="Aspen Movie Map" label="Aspen Movie Map"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915546" start="7938" end="7950" title="virtual tour" label="virtual tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q205842" start="7994" end="7999" title="Aspen, Colorado" label="Aspen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276654" start="8047" end="8055" title="Polygon (computer graphics)" label="polygons"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="8073" end="8076" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386759" start="8096" end="8108" title="Eric Howlett" label="Eric Howlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076893" start="8371" end="8384" title="field of view" label="field of view"/>
<link wikidata="Q181052" start="8486" end="8506" title="Ames Research Center" label="Ames Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6543590" start="8619" end="8631" title="Scott Fisher (technologist)" label="Scott Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q92862" start="8793" end="8805" title="Jaron Lanier" label="Jaron Lanier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506391" start="8879" end="8891" title="VPL Research" label="VPL Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172433" start="8956" end="8965" title="DataGlove" label="DataGlove"/>
<link wikidata="Q596139" start="9076" end="9082" title="Mattel" label="Mattel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326011" start="9110" end="9121" title="Power Glove" label="Power Glove"/>
<link wikidata="Q995863" start="9187" end="9197" title="Broderbund" label="Broderbund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7862895" start="9205" end="9212" title="U-Force" label="U-Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409231" start="9228" end="9239" title="Atari, Inc." label="Atari, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q643802" start="9342" end="9366" title="video game crash of 1983" label="video game crash of 1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q6543590" start="9406" end="9418" title="Scott Fisher (technologist)" label="Scott Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833012" start="9420" end="9435" title="Michael Naimark" label="Michael Naimark"/>
<link wikidata="Q4960717" start="9441" end="9454" title="Brenda Laurel" label="Brenda Laurel"/>
<link wikidata="Q628051" start="9556" end="9564" title="Autodesk" label="Autodesk"/>
<link wikidata="Q752176" start="9802" end="9817" title="Texture mapping" label="Texture mapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q707182" start="10008" end="10029" title="Computer Gaming World" label="Computer Gaming World"/>
<link wikidata="Q122741" start="10091" end="10095" title="Sega" label="Sega"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446168" start="10110" end="10117" title="Sega VR" label="Sega VR"/>
<link wikidata="Q10676" start="10134" end="10144" title="Mega Drive" label="Mega Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4420972" start="10260" end="10265" title="tracking system" label="track"/>
<link wikidata="Q17148949" start="10336" end="10346" title="Virtuality (gaming)" label="Virtuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q260676" start="10512" end="10518" title="Amusement arcade" label="arcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493067" start="10522" end="10540" title="Embarcadero Center" label="Embarcadero Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q16727840" start="10725" end="10744" title="Carolina Cruz-Neira" label="Carolina Cruz-Neira"/>
<link wikidata="Q3701633" start="10746" end="10762" title="Daniel J. Sandin" label="Daniel J. Sandin"/>
<link wikidata="Q841127" start="10767" end="10784" title="Thomas A. DeFanti" label="Thomas A. DeFanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3721291" start="10794" end="10829" title="Electronic Visualization Laboratory" label="Electronic Visualization Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051821" start="10874" end="10908" title="Cave automatic virtual environment" label="Cave automatic virtual environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069486" start="11018" end="11026" title="holodeck" label="holodeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q7030192" start="11322" end="11336" title="Nicole Stenger" label="Nicole Stenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172433" start="11458" end="11467" title="dataglove" label="dataglove"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935103" start="11541" end="11556" title="virtual fixture" label="virtual fixture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="11572" end="11586" title="United States Air Force" label="U.S. Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793950" start="11594" end="11608" title="Armstrong Laboratory" label="Armstrong Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q191944" start="11633" end="11644" title="exoskeleton" label="exoskeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q107185769" start="11954" end="11958" title="VR-1" label="VR-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q11310533" start="11995" end="12003" title="Joypolis" label="Joypolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q113726751" start="12073" end="12084" title="arcade game" label="arcade game"/>
<link wikidata="Q16111625" start="12356" end="12368" title="Sega Model 1" label="Sega Model 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q192851" start="12369" end="12388" title="arcade system board" label="arcade system board"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="12390" end="12395" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315297" start="12405" end="12417" title="QuickTime VR" label="QuickTime VR"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931145" start="12539" end="12559" title="interactive panorama" label="interactive panorama"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="12563" end="12571" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q164651" start="12579" end="12590" title="Virtual Boy" label="Virtual Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051821" start="12675" end="12696" title="Cave automatic virtual environment" label="&amp;quot;CAVE-like&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437889" start="12848" end="12852" title="VFX1 Headgear" label="VFX1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978446" start="12930" end="12945" title="Philip Rosedale" label="Philip Rosedale"/>
<link wikidata="Q86853" start="12953" end="12963" title="Linden Lab" label="Linden Lab"/>
<link wikidata="Q106827" start="13356" end="13367" title="Second Life" label="Second Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300395" start="13604" end="13620" title="Maurice Benayoun" label="Maurice Benayoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q184154" start="13675" end="13680" title="Laval, Mayenne" label="Laval"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="13746" end="13752" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q213602" start="13764" end="13775" title="Google Street View" label="Street View"/>
<link wikidata="Q16269109" start="14002" end="14015" title="Palmer Luckey" label="Palmer Luckey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274429" start="14052" end="14063" title="Oculus Rift" label="Oculus Rift"/>
<link wikidata="Q336168" start="14600" end="14602" title="E3" label="E3"/>
<link wikidata="Q92605" start="14628" end="14640" title="John Carmack" label="John Carmack"/>
<link wikidata="Q380" start="14651" end="14659" title="Meta Platforms" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q34755" start="14894" end="14905" title="Kickstarter" label="Kickstarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q189557" start="14992" end="14999" title="ZeniMax Media" label="ZeniMax"/>
<link wikidata="Q193559" start="15173" end="15178" title="Valve Corporation" label="Valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q14672" start="15660" end="15672" title="Fresnel lens" label="Fresnel lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q186012" start="15676" end="15679" title="HTC" label="HTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q122977992" start="15728" end="15736" title="HTC Vive" label="HTC Vive"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="15902" end="15910" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="15928" end="15932" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q16011703" start="15983" end="15997" title="PlayStation VR" label="PlayStation VR"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014725" start="16034" end="16047" title="PlayStation 4" label="PlayStation 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q130336243" start="16088" end="16093" title="AntVR" label="AntVR"/>
<link wikidata="Q17558104" start="16267" end="16276" title="Google Cardboard" label="Cardboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="16338" end="16348" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833012" start="16405" end="16420" title="Michael Naimark" label="Michael Naimark"/>
<link wikidata="Q676252" start="16580" end="16595" title="motion capture" label="motion tracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q367412" start="16693" end="16698" title="Razer Inc." label="Razer"/>
<link wikidata="Q39162" start="16712" end="16723" title="open source" label="open source"/>
<link wikidata="Q20707759" start="16732" end="16736" title="Open Source Virtual Reality" label="OSVR"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="16814" end="16820" title="Amazon (company)" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="16847" end="16856" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716" start="16867" end="16874" title="Samsung" label="Samsung"/>
<link wikidata="Q119565" start="17191" end="17201" title="frame rate" label="frame rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q64021532" start="17676" end="17689" title="Oculus Rift S" label="Oculus Rift S"/>
<link wikidata="Q63777286" start="17720" end="17732" title="Oculus Quest" label="Oculus Quest"/>
<link wikidata="Q63847959" start="17896" end="17907" title="Valve Index" label="Valve Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q99620218" start="18174" end="18188" title="Oculus Quest 2" label="Oculus Quest 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q276255" start="18522" end="18526" title="European Aviation Safety Agency" label="EASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q131747676" start="18623" end="18636" title="Loft Dynamics" label="Loft Dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q115368568" start="18929" end="18943" title="Meta Quest Pro" label="Meta Quest Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428562" start="19171" end="19175" title="Facial motion capture" label="face"/>
<link wikidata="Q970687" start="19180" end="19192" title="eye tracking" label="eye tracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q3880577" start="19194" end="19208" title="Pancake lens" label="pancake lenses"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19222" end="19231" title="Oculus Touch#Touch Pro (Quest Pro)" label="Touch Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q107944338" start="19303" end="19318" title="PlayStation VR2" label="PlayStation VR2"/>
<link wikidata="Q30590644" start="19408" end="19426" title="foveated rendering" label="foveated rendering"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636316" start="19517" end="19525" title="3D audio effect" label="3D audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q63184502" start="19597" end="19610" title="PlayStation 5" label="PlayStation 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q119090835" start="19697" end="19709" title="Meta Quest 3" label="Meta Quest 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q130437846" start="19952" end="19965" title="Meta Quest 3S" label="Meta Quest 3S"/>
<link wikidata="Q99620218" start="20002" end="20009" title="Meta Quest 2" label="Quest 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q119090835" start="20078" end="20085" title="Meta Quest 3" label="Quest 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q117715451" start="20117" end="20133" title="Apple Vision Pro" label="Apple Vision Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q28957041" start="20367" end="20373" title="OpenXR" label="OpenXR"/>
<link wikidata="Q85802496" start="20408" end="20424" title="Spatial computing" label="spatial computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="20446" end="20477" title="Federal Aviation Administration" label="Federal Aviation Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q39668" start="20584" end="20607" title="Airbus Helicopters H125" label="Airbus Helicopters H125"/>
<link wikidata="Q214932" start="20608" end="20612" title="FSTD" label="FSTD"/>
<link wikidata="Q483400" start="20870" end="20879" title="gyroscope" label="gyroscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450251" start="20929" end="20943" title="hand tracking" label="hand positions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916762" start="20951" end="20953" title="High-definition video" label="HD"/>
<link wikidata="Q684116" start="21320" end="21342" title="omnidirectional camera" label="omnidirectional camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931145" start="21425" end="21452" title="360 interactive photography" label="360 interactive photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q4011366" start="21549" end="21558" title="360 video" label="360 video"/>
<link wikidata="Q190149" start="21573" end="21587" title="photogrammetry" label="photogrammetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156879" start="22154" end="22169" title="Active shutter 3D system" label="shutter glasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q11942175" start="22202" end="22220" title="Polarizer" label="polarizing filters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030078" start="22224" end="22231" title="Infitec" label="Infitec"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917780" start="22609" end="22626" title="motion controller" label="motion controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q676252" start="22632" end="22648" title="Optical tracking instruments" label="optical tracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172433" start="22673" end="22684" title="wired glove" label="wired glove"/>
<link wikidata="Q624587" start="22758" end="22773" title="infrared camera" label="infrared camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030571" start="22895" end="22909" title="Haptic technology" label="force feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q7090380" start="23263" end="23288" title="omnidirectional treadmill" label="omnidirectional treadmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931145" start="23447" end="23461" title="VR photography" label="VR photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q4011366" start="23468" end="23494" title="360-degree video" label="360-degree panorama videos"/>
<link wikidata="Q176061" start="23617" end="23651" title="VRML" label="Virtual Reality Modelling Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413769" start="23785" end="23790" title="Web3D" label="Web3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q930428" start="23942" end="23945" title="X3D" label="X3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130645" start="23986" end="23997" title="open source software" label="open-source"/>
<link wikidata="Q85868115" start="24049" end="24054" title="WebVR" label="WebVR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="24074" end="24084" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q165194" start="24085" end="24118" title="application programming interface" label="application programming interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q6368" start="24250" end="24261" title="web browser" label="web browser"/>
<link wikidata="Q183484" start="25339" end="25363" title="graphics processing unit" label="graphics processing unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076893" start="25513" end="25516" title="FOV" label="FOV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="26188" end="26198" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q229390" start="26201" end="26210" title="3D cinema" label="3D cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q64514817" start="26212" end="26232" title="amusement park rides" label="amusement park rides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934961" start="26243" end="26252" title="dark ride" label="dark ride"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26258" end="26279" title="Virtual world#Social" label="social virtual worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q194195" start="26703" end="26714" title="theme parks" label="theme parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q69886677" start="27207" end="27239" title="virtual reality exposure therapy" label="virtual reality exposure therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q446198" start="27258" end="27274" title="exposure therapy" label="exposure therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q202387" start="27346" end="27350" title="Posttraumatic stress disorder" label="PTSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q170082" start="27417" end="27426" title="psychosis" label="psychosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q174589" start="27431" end="27442" title="agoraphobia" label="agoraphobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425168" start="27676" end="27680" title="National Institute for Health and Care Excellence" label="NICE"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="27748" end="27751" title="National Health Service" label="NHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147152" start="27885" end="27914" title="Cognitive behavioral therapy" label="cognitive behavioural therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="28044" end="28068" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q186005" start="28967" end="28990" title="physical rehabilitation" label="physical rehabilitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11085" start="29201" end="29225" title="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q38404" start="29499" end="29507" title="Autism spectrum" label="autistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q39086895" start="31100" end="31120" title="Virtual reality in primary education" label="in primary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323528" start="33439" end="33456" title="digital marketing" label="digital marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q484847" start="33496" end="33506" title="e-commerce" label="e-commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632041" start="35011" end="35020" title="metaverse" label="metaverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557311" start="35129" end="35139" title="digital ecosystem" label="ecosystems"/>
<link wikidata="Q122977992" start="35145" end="35152" title="VIVERSE" label="VIVERSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q104326" start="37728" end="37745" title="Jean-Michel Jarre" label="Jean Michel Jarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q47044629" start="37759" end="37765" title="VRChat" label="VRChat"/>
<link wikidata="Q34086" start="37914" end="37927" title="Justin Bieber" label="Justin Bieber"/>
<link wikidata="Q466466" start="37991" end="38012" title="Non-player character" label="non-player characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6932085" start="38030" end="38048" title="Mugar Omni Theater" label="Mugar Omni Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q188575" start="38143" end="38152" title="IMAX Dome" label="IMAX dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q483718" start="38173" end="38185" title="Foo Fighters" label="Foo Fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q21621919" start="38229" end="38240" title="Post Malone" label="Post Malone"/>
<link wikidata="Q59268408" start="38285" end="38304" title="Megan Thee Stallion" label="Megan Thee Stallion"/>
<link wikidata="Q29564107" start="38381" end="38394" title="Billie Eilish" label="Billie Eilish"/>
<link wikidata="Q391348" start="38433" end="38448" title="Imagine Dragons" label="Imagine Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q4219957" start="40178" end="40202" title="Virtual reality sickness" label="Virtual reality sickness"/>
<link wikidata="Q309067" start="40331" end="40346" title="motion sickness" label="motion sickness"/>
<link wikidata="Q114434656" start="41449" end="41480" title="Vergence-accommodation conflict" label="Vergence-accommodation conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="41565" end="41588" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q900457" start="41794" end="41812" title="cervical vertebrae" label="cervical vertebrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3389022" start="42053" end="42066" title="Piper Sandler" label="Piper Sandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="42093" end="42097" title="United States" label="U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q19600329" start="42232" end="42242" title="VR headset" label="VR headset"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632041" start="42307" end="42316" title="metaverse" label="metaverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q23762874" start="44321" end="44334" title="Job Simulator" label="Job Simulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q17052099" start="44475" end="44490" title="Digital privacy" label="Digital privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q334401" start="44661" end="44673" title="surveillance" label="surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172506" start="46042" end="46076" title="General Data Protection Regulation" label="General Data Protection Regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q60754243" start="46103" end="46134" title="California Consumer Privacy Act" label="California Consumer Privacy Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q380" start="46550" end="46564" title="Meta Platforms" label="Meta Platforms"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46619" end="46661" title="Privacy concerns with Facebook#Oculus and metaverse platforms" label="privacy concerns specific to its platforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="46786" end="46794" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q18354615" start="47137" end="47162" title="Facebook real-name policy controversy" label="Facebook real-name policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="47512" end="47533" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q631425" start="47549" end="47571" title="Vulnerability (computing)" label="security vulnerability"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="47593" end="47600" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q620615" start="47684" end="47687" title="Mobile app" label="app"/>
<link wikidata="Q472302" start="47726" end="47731" title="login" label="login"/>
<link wikidata="Q188506" start="47776" end="47790" title="online banking" label="online banking"/>
<link wikidata="Q135005" start="47938" end="47946" title="phishing" label="phishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668020" start="47948" end="47962" title="Internet fraud" label="Internet fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q55627635" start="47968" end="47976" title="Online youth radicalization" label="grooming"/>
<link wikidata="Q30325407" start="48027" end="48041" title="16K resolution" label="16K resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4011366" start="48044" end="48060" title="360-degree video" label="360-degree video"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732972" start="48063" end="48073" title="AlloSphere" label="AlloSphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157399" start="48076" end="48101" title="Computer-mediated reality" label="Computer-mediated reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q207697" start="48104" end="48111" title="Diorama" label="Diorama"/>
<link wikidata="Q25052165" start="48114" end="48130" title="Extended reality" label="Extended reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q16252159" start="48133" end="48144" title="Haptic suit" label="Haptic suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q911473" start="48148" end="48169" title="Holographic principle" label="Holographic principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479785" start="48172" end="48184" title="Hyperreality" label="Hyperreality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758389" start="48188" end="48201" title="Mixed reality" label="Mixed reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935073" start="48204" end="48216" title="Virtual body" label="Virtual body"/>
<link wikidata="Q577697" start="48219" end="48232" title="Virtual globe" label="Virtual globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q21137581" start="48235" end="48252" title="Virtual machining" label="Virtual machining"/>
<link wikidata="Q110158186" start="48255" end="48281" title="Virtual reality in nursing" label="Virtual reality in nursing"/>
<link wikidata="Q22905898" start="48284" end="48307" title="Virtual reality website" label="Virtual reality website"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632041" start="48310" end="48319" title="Metaverse" label="Metaverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054731" start="48322" end="48342" title="Gustatory technology" label="Gustatory technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q24565125" start="48345" end="48377" title="List of virtual reality headsets" label="List of virtual reality headsets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252405" start="48380" end="48383" title="MOO" label="MOO"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="32616" wikidata="Q641" url="?curid=32616" title="Venice">
<text>Venice ( ; ; , formerly ) is a city in northeastern Italy and the capital of the Veneto region. It is built on a group of 118 islands that are separated by expanses of open water and by canals; portions of the city are linked by 438 bridges. The islands are in the shallow Venetian Lagoon, an enclosed bay lying between the mouths of the Po and the Piave rivers (more exactly between the Brenta and the Sile). In 2020, around 258,685 people resided in greater Venice or the &quot;Comune di Venezia&quot;, of whom around 51,000 live in the historical island city of Venice (&quot;centro storico&quot;) and the rest on the mainland (&quot;terraferma&quot;). Together with the cities of Padua and Treviso, Venice is included in the Padua-Treviso-Venice Metropolitan Area (PATREVE), which is considered a statistical metropolitan area, with a total population of 2.6 million.

The name is derived from the ancient Veneti people who inhabited the region by the 10th century BC. The city was historically the capital of the Republic of Venice for almost a millennium, from 810 to 1797. It was a major financial and maritime power during the Middle Ages and Renaissance, and a staging area for the Crusades and the Battle of Lepanto, as well as an important centre of commerce—especially silk, grain, and spice, and of art from the 13th century to the end of the 17th. The then-city-state is considered to have been the first real international financial centre, emerging in the 9th century and reaching its greatest prominence in the 14th century. This made Venice a wealthy city throughout most of its history. For centuries Venice possessed numerous territories along the Adriatic Sea and within the Italian peninsula, leaving a significant impact on the architecture and culture that can still be seen today. The Venetian Arsenal is considered by several historians to be the first factory in history and was the base of Venice&#x27;s naval power. The sovereignty of Venice came to an end in 1797, at the hands of Napoleon. Subsequently, in 1866, the city became part of the Kingdom of Italy.

Venice has been known as &quot;La Dominante&quot;, &quot;La Serenissima&quot;, &quot;Queen of the Adriatic&quot;, &quot;City of Water&quot;, &quot;City of Masks&quot;, &quot;City of Bridges&quot;, &quot;The Floating City&quot;, and &quot;City of Canals&quot;. The lagoon and the city within the lagoon were inscribed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1987, covering an area of . Venice is known for several important artistic movements – especially during the Italian Renaissance – and has played an important role in the history of instrumental and operatic music; it is the birthplace of Baroque music composers Tomaso Albinoni and Antonio Vivaldi.

In the 21st century, Venice remains a very popular tourist destination, a major cultural centre, and has often been ranked one of the most beautiful cities in the world. It has been described by &quot;The Times&quot; as one of Europe&#x27;s most romantic cities and by &quot;The New York Times&quot; as &quot;undoubtedly the most beautiful city built by man&quot;. However, the city faces challenges including an excessive number of tourists, pollution, tide peaks and cruise ships sailing too close to buildings. In light of the fact that Venice and its lagoon are under constant threat, Venice&#x27;s UNESCO listing has been under constant examination.

== History ==

=== Origins ===
Although no surviving historical records deal directly with the founding or building of Venice, tradition and the available evidence have led several historians to agree that the original population of Venice consisted of refugees – from nearby Roman cities such as Patavium (Padua), Aquileia, Tarvisium (Treviso), Altinum, and Concordia (modern Portogruaro), as well as from the undefended countryside – who were fleeing successive waves of Germanic and Hun invasions. This is further supported by the documentation on the so-called &quot;apostolic families&quot;, the twelve founding families of Venice who elected the first doge, who in most cases trace their lineage back to Roman families. Some late Roman sources reveal the existence of fishermen, on the islands in the original marshy lagoons, who were referred to as &quot;incolae lacunae&quot; (&quot;lagoon dwellers&quot;). The traditional founding is identified with the dedication of the first church, that of San Giacomo on the islet of Rialto (&quot;Rivoalto&quot;, &quot;High Shore&quot;)—said to have taken place at the stroke of noon on 25 March 421 (the Feast of the Annunciation).

Beginning as early as AD 166–168, the Quadi and Marcomanni destroyed the main Roman town in the area, present-day Oderzo. This part of Roman Italy was again overrun in the early 5th century by the Visigoths and, some 50 years later, by the Huns led by Attila. The last and most enduring immigration into the north of the Italian peninsula, that of the Lombards in 568, left the Eastern Roman Empire only a small strip of coastline in the current Veneto, including Venice. The Roman/Byzantine territory was organized as the Exarchate of Ravenna, administered from that ancient port and overseen by a viceroy (the Exarch) appointed by the Emperor in Constantinople. Ravenna and Venice were connected by just sea routes, and with the Venetians&#x27; isolation came increasing autonomy. New ports were built, including those at Malamocco and Torcello in the Venetian lagoon. The &quot;tribuni maiores&quot; formed the earliest central standing governing committee of the islands in the lagoon, dating from .

The traditional first doge of Venice, Paolo Lucio Anafesto (Anafestus Paulicius), was elected in 697, as written in the oldest chronicle by John, deacon of Venice . Some modern historians claim Paolo Lucio Anafesto was actually the Exarch Paul, and Paul&#x27;s successor, Marcello Tegalliano, was Paul&#x27;s &quot;magister militum&quot; (or &quot;general&quot;), literally &quot;master of soldiers&quot;. In 726 the soldiers and citizens of the exarchate rose in a rebellion over the iconoclastic controversy, at the urging of Pope Gregory II. The exarch, held responsible for the acts of his master, Byzantine Emperor Leo III, was murdered, and many officials were put to flight in the chaos. At about this time, the people of the lagoon elected their own independent leader for the first time, although the relationship of this to the uprisings is not clear. Ursus was the first of 117 &quot;doges&quot; (&quot;doge&quot; is the Venetian dialectal equivalent of the Latin &quot;dux&quot; (&quot;leader&quot;); the corresponding word in English is duke, in standard Italian &quot;duca&quot; (see also &quot;duce&quot;.) Whatever his original views, Ursus supported Emperor Leo III&#x27;s successful military expedition to recover Ravenna, sending both men and ships. In recognition of this, Venice was &quot;granted numerous privileges and concessions&quot; and Ursus, who had personally taken the field, was confirmed by Leo as &quot;dux&quot; and given the added title of &quot;hypatus&quot; (from the Greek for &quot;consul&quot;).

In 751, the Lombard King Aistulf conquered most of the Exarchate of Ravenna, leaving Venice a lonely and increasingly autonomous Byzantine outpost. During this period, the seat of the local Byzantine governor (the &quot;duke/dux&quot;, later &quot;doge&quot;), was at Malamocco. Settlement on the islands in the lagoon probably increased with the Lombard conquest of other Byzantine territories, as refugees sought asylum in the area. In 775/6, the episcopal seat of Olivolo (San Pietro di Castello) was created. During the reign of duke Agnello Particiaco (811–827) the ducal seat moved from Malamocco to the more protected Rialto, within present-day Venice. The monastery of St Zachary and the first ducal palace and basilica of St. Mark, as well as a walled defense (&quot;civitatis murus&quot;) between Olivolo and Rialto, were subsequently built here.

Charlemagne sought to subdue the city to his rule. He ordered the pope to expel the Venetians from the Pentapolis along the Adriatic coast; Charlemagne&#x27;s own son Pepin of Italy, king of the Lombards, under the authority of his father, embarked on a siege of Venice itself. This, however, proved a costly failure. The siege lasted six months, with Pepin&#x27;s army ravaged by the diseases of the local swamps and eventually forced to withdraw in 810. A few months later, Pepin himself died, apparently as a result of a disease contracted there. In the aftermath, an agreement between Charlemagne and the Byzantine Emperor Nicephorus in 814 recognized Venice as Byzantine territory, and granted the city trading rights along the Adriatic coast.

In 828 the new city&#x27;s prestige increased with the acquisition, from Alexandria, of relics claimed to be of St Mark the Evangelist; these were placed in the new basilica. Winged lions – visible throughout Venice – are the emblem of St Mark. The patriarchal seat was also moved to Rialto. As the community continued to develop, and as Byzantine power waned, its own autonomy grew, leading to eventual independence.

=== Expansion ===
From the 9th to the 12th centuries, Venice developed into a powerful maritime empire (an Italian thalassocracy known also as &quot;repubblica marinara&quot;). In addition to Venice there were seven others: the most important ones were Genoa, Pisa, and Amalfi; and the lesser known were Ragusa, Ancona, Gaeta and Noli. Its own strategic position at the head of the Adriatic made Venetian naval and commercial power almost invulnerable. With the elimination of pirates along the Dalmatian coast, the city became a flourishing trade centre between Western Europe and the rest of the world, especially with the Byzantine Empire and Asia, where its navy protected sea routes against piracy.

The Republic of Venice seized a number of places on the eastern shores of the Adriatic before 1200, mostly for commercial reasons, because pirates based there were a menace to trade. The doge already possessed the titles of Duke of Dalmatia and Duke of Istria. Later mainland possessions, which extended across Lake Garda as far west as the Adda River, were known as the &quot;Terraferma&quot;; they were acquired partly as a buffer against belligerent neighbours, partly to guarantee Alpine trade routes, and partly to ensure the supply of mainland wheat (on which the city depended). In building its maritime commercial empire, Venice dominated the trade in salt, acquired control of most of the islands in the Aegean, including Crete, and Cyprus in the Mediterranean, and became a major power-broker in the Near East. By the standards of the time, Venice&#x27;s stewardship of its mainland territories was relatively enlightened and the citizens of such towns as Bergamo, Brescia, and Verona rallied to the defence of Venetian sovereignty when it was threatened by invaders.
Venice remained closely associated with Constantinople, being twice granted trading privileges in the Eastern Roman Empire, through the so-called golden bulls or &quot;chrysobulls&quot;, in return for aiding the Eastern Empire to resist Norman and Turkish incursions. In the first chrysobull, Venice acknowledged its homage to the empire; but not in the second, reflecting the decline of Byzantium and the rise of Venice&#x27;s power.

Venice became an imperial power following the Fourth Crusade, which, having veered off course, culminated in 1204 by capturing and sacking Constantinople and establishing the Latin Empire. As a result of this conquest, considerable Byzantine plunder was brought back to Venice. This plunder included the gilt bronze horses from the Hippodrome of Constantinople, which were originally placed above the entrance to the cathedral of Venice, St Mark&#x27;s Basilica (The originals have been replaced with replicas, and are now stored within the basilica.) After the fall of Constantinople, the former Eastern Roman Empire was partitioned among the Latin crusaders and the Venetians. Venice subsequently carved out a sphere of influence in the Mediterranean known as the Duchy of the Archipelago, and captured Crete.

The seizure of Constantinople proved as decisive a factor in ending the Byzantine Empire as the loss of the Anatolian themes, after Manzikert. Although the Byzantines recovered control of the ravaged city a half-century later, the Byzantine Empire was terminally weakened, and existed as a ghost of its old self, until Sultan Mehmet The Conqueror took the city in 1453.

Situated on the Adriatic Sea, Venice had always traded extensively with the Byzantine Empire and the Middle East. By the late 13th century, Venice was the most prosperous city in all of Europe. At the peak of its power and wealth, it had 36,000 sailors operating 3,300 ships, dominating Mediterranean commerce. Venice&#x27;s leading families vied with each other to build the grandest palaces and to support the work of the greatest and most talented artists. The city was governed by the Great Council, which was made up of members of the noble families of Venice. The Great Council appointed all public officials, and elected a Senate of 200 to 300 individuals. Since this group was too large for efficient administration, a Council of Ten (also called the Ducal Council, or the Signoria), controlled much of the administration of the city. One member of the great council was elected &quot;doge&quot;, or duke, to be the chief executive; he would usually hold the title until his death, although several Doges were forced, by pressure from their oligarchical peers, to resign and retire into monastic seclusion, when they were felt to have been discredited by political failure.

The Venetian governmental structure was similar in some ways to the republican system of ancient Rome, with an elected chief executive (the doge), a senator-like assembly of nobles, and the general citizenry with limited political power, who originally had the power to grant or withhold their approval of each newly elected doge. Church and various private property was tied to military service, although there was no knight tenure within the city itself. The &quot;Cavalieri di San Marco&quot; was the only order of chivalry ever instituted in Venice, and no citizen could accept or join a foreign order without the government&#x27;s consent. Venice remained a republic throughout its independent period, and politics and the military were kept separate, except when on occasion the Doge personally headed the military. War was regarded as a continuation of commerce by other means. Therefore, the city&#x27;s early employment of large numbers of mercenaries for service elsewhere, and later its reliance on foreign mercenaries when the ruling class was preoccupied with commerce.

Although the people of Venice generally remained orthodox Roman Catholics, the state of Venice was notable for its freedom from religious fanaticism, and executed nobody for religious heresy during the Counter-Reformation. This apparent lack of zeal contributed to Venice&#x27;s frequent conflicts with the papacy. In this context, the writings of the Anglican divine William Bedell are particularly illuminating. Venice was threatened with the interdict on a number of occasions and twice suffered its imposition. The second, most noted, occasion was in 1606, by order of Pope Paul V.

The newly invented German printing press spread rapidly throughout Europe in the 15th century, and Venice was quick to adopt it. By 1482, Venice was the printing capital of the world; the leading printer was Aldus Manutius, who invented paperback books that could be carried in a saddlebag. His &quot;Aldine Editions&quot; included translations of nearly all the known Greek manuscripts of the era.

=== Decline ===
Venice&#x27;s long decline started in the 15th century. Venice confronted the Ottoman Empire in the Siege of Thessalonica (1422–1430) and sent ships to help defend Constantinople against the besieging Turks in 1453. After the Fall of Constantinople, Sultan Mehmed II declared the first of a series of Ottoman-Venetian wars that cost Venice much of its eastern Mediterranean possessions. Vasco da Gama&#x27;s 1497–1499 voyage opened a sea route to India around the Cape of Good Hope and destroyed Venice&#x27;s monopoly. Venice&#x27;s oared vessels were at a disadvantage when it came to traversing oceans, therefore Venice was left behind in the race for colonies.

The Black Death devastated Venice in 1348 and struck again between 1575 and 1577. In three years, the plague killed some 50,000 people. In 1630, the Italian plague of 1629–31 killed a third of Venice&#x27;s 150,000 citizens.

Venice began to lose the position as a centre of international trade during the later part of the Renaissance as Portugal became Europe&#x27;s principal intermediary in the trade with the East, striking at the very foundation of Venice&#x27;s great wealth. France and Spain fought for hegemony over Italy in the Italian Wars, marginalising its political influence. However, Venice remained a major exporter of agricultural products and until the mid-18th century, a significant manufacturing centre.

=== Modern age ===
The Republic of Venice lost its independence when Napoleon Bonaparte conquered Venice on 12 May 1797 during the War of the First Coalition. Napoleon was seen as something of a liberator by the city&#x27;s Jewish population. He removed the gates of the Ghetto and ended the restrictions on when and where Jews could live and travel in the city.

Venice became Austrian territory when Napoleon signed the Treaty of Campo Formio on 12 October 1797. The Austrians took control of the city on 18 January 1798. Venice was taken from Austria by the Treaty of Pressburg in 1805 and became part of Napoleon&#x27;s Kingdom of Italy. It was returned to Austria following Napoleon&#x27;s defeat in 1814, when it became part of the Austrian-held Kingdom of Lombardy–Venetia. In 1848 a revolt briefly re-established the Venetian republic under Daniele Manin, but this was crushed in 1849. In 1866, after the Third Italian War of Independence, Venice, along with the rest of the Veneto, became part of the newly created Kingdom of Italy.

From the middle of the 18th century, Trieste and papal Ancona, both of which became free ports, competed with Venice more and more economically. Habsburg Trieste in particular boomed and increasingly served trade via the Suez Canal, which opened in 1869, between Asia and Central Europe, while Venice very quickly lost its competitive edge and commercial strength.

During World War II, the historic city was largely free from attack, the only aggressive effort of note being Operation Bowler, a successful Royal Air Force precision strike on the German naval operations in the city in March 1945. The targets were destroyed with virtually no architectural damage inflicted on the city itself. However, the industrial areas in Mestre and Marghera and the railway lines to Padua, Trieste, and Trento were repeatedly bombed. On 29 April 1945, a force of British and New Zealand troops of the British Eighth Army, under Lieutenant General Freyberg, liberated Venice, which had been a hotbed of anti-Mussolini Italian partisan activity.

Venice was listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1987, inscribing it as &quot;Venice and its Lagoon&quot;.

== Geography ==
Venice is located in northeastern Italy, in the Veneto region. The city is situated on a group of 118 small islands that are separated by canals and linked by 438 bridges. The historic center of Venice is divided into six districts, or sestieri, which are named Cannaregio, Castello, Dorsoduro, San Marco, San Polo, and Santa Croce.

Venice sits atop alluvial silt washed into the sea by the rivers flowing eastward from the Alps across the Veneto plain, with the silt being stretched into long banks, or &quot;lidi&quot;, by the action of the current flowing around the head of the Adriatic Sea from east to west.

=== Subsidence ===
Subsidence, the gradual lowering of the surface of Venice, has contributed – along with other factors – to the seasonal &quot;Acqua alta&quot; (&quot;high water&quot;) when the city&#x27;s lowest lying surfaces may be covered at high tide.

==== Building foundations ====
Those fleeing barbarian invasions who found refuge on the sandy islands of Torcello, Iesolo, and Malamocco, in this coastal lagoon, learned to build by driving closely spaced piles consisting of the trunks of alder trees, a wood noted for its water resistance, into the mud and sand, until they reached a much harder layer of compressed clay. Building foundations rested on plates of Istrian limestone placed on top of the piles.

==== Flooding ====


Between autumn and early spring, the city is often threatened by flood tides pushing in from the Adriatic. Six hundred years ago, Venetians protected themselves from land-based attacks by diverting all the major rivers flowing into the lagoon and thus preventing sediment from filling the area around the city. This created an ever-deeper lagoon environment. Additionally, the lowest part of Venice, St Mark&#x27;s Basilica, is only above sea level, and one of the most flood-prone parts of the city.

In 1604, to defray the cost of flood relief, Venice introduced what could be considered the first example of a stamp tax. When the revenue fell short of expectations in 1608, Venice introduced paper, with the superscription &quot;AQ&quot; and imprinted instructions, which was to be used for &quot;letters to officials&quot;. At first, this was to be a temporary tax, but it remained in effect until the fall of the Republic in 1797. Shortly after the introduction of the tax, Spain produced similar paper for general taxation purposes, and the practice spread to other countries.

During the 20th century, when many artesian wells were sunk into the periphery of the lagoon to draw water for local industry, Venice began to subside. It was realized that extraction of water from the aquifer was the cause. The sinking has slowed markedly since artesian wells were banned in the 1960s. However, the city is still threatened by more frequent low-level floods – the &quot;Acqua alta&quot;, that rise to a height of several centimetres over its quays – regularly following certain tides. In many old houses, staircases once used to unload goods are now flooded, rendering the former ground floor uninhabitable.

Studies indicate that the city continues sinking at a relatively slow rate of 1–2mm per year; therefore, the state of alert has not been revoked.

In May 2003, Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi inaugurated the MOSE Project (), an experimental model for evaluating the performance of hollow floatable gates, expected to be completed by the end of 2025; the idea is to fix a series of 78 hollow pontoons to the sea bed across the three entrances to the lagoon. When tides are predicted to rise above , the pontoons will be filled with air, causing them to float on lagoon side while hinged at sea floor on seaside, thus blocking the incoming water from the Adriatic Sea. This engineering work was due to be completed by 2018. A Reuters report stated that the MOSE Project attributed the delay to &quot;corruption scandals&quot;. The project is not guaranteed to be successful and the cost has been very high, with as much as approximately €2 billion of the cost lost to corruption.

According to a spokesman for the National Trust of Italy (Fondo Ambiente Italiano):
Mose is a pharaonic project that should have cost €800m [£675m] but will cost at least €7bn [£6bn]. If the barriers are closed at only 90 cm of high water, most of St Mark&#x27;s will be flooded anyway; but if closed at very high levels only, then people will wonder at the logic of spending such sums on something that didn&#x27;t solve the problem. And pressure will come from the cruise ships to keep the gates open.
On 13 November 2019, Venice was flooded when waters peaked at , the highest tide since 1966 (1.94 m). More than 80% of the city was covered by water, which damaged cultural heritage sites, including more than 50 churches, leading to tourists cancelling their visits. The planned flood barrier would have prevented this incident according to various sources, including Marco Piana, the head of conservation at St Mark&#x27;s Basilica. The mayor promised that work on the flood barrier would continue, and the Prime Minister announced that the government would be accelerating the project.

The city&#x27;s mayor, Luigi Brugnaro, blamed the floods on climate change. The chambers of the Regional Council of Veneto began to be flooded around 10 pm, two minutes after the council rejected a plan to combat global warming. One of the effects of climate change is sea level rise which causes an increase in frequency and magnitude of floodings in the city. A &quot;Washington Post&quot; report provided a more thorough analysis:&quot;The sea level has been rising even more rapidly in Venice than in other parts of the world. At the same time, the city is sinking, the result of tectonic plates shifting below the Italian coast. Those factors together, along with the more frequent extreme weather events associated with climate change, contribute to floods.&quot;

Henk Ovink, an expert on flooding, told CNN that, while environmental factors are part of the problem, &quot;historic floods in Venice are not only a result of the climate crisis but poor infrastructure and mismanagement&quot;.

The government of Italy committed to providing 20 million euros in funding to help the city repair the most urgent aspects although Brugnaro&#x27;s estimate of the total damage was &quot;hundreds of millions&quot; to at least 1 billion euros.

On 3 October 2020, the MOSE was activated for the first time in response to a predicted high tide event, preventing some of the low-lying parts of the city (in particular the Piazza San Marco) from being flooded.

=== Climate ===
According to the Köppen climate classification, Venice has a mid-latitude, four season humid subtropical climate (&quot;Cfa&quot;), with cool, damp winters and warm, humid summers. The 24-hour average temperature in January is , and for July this figure is . Precipitation is spread relatively evenly throughout the year, and averages ; snow is not uncommon between late November and early March. During the most severe winters, the canals and parts of the lagoon can freeze, but with the warming trend of the past 30–40 years, the occurrence has become rarer.

== Demographics ==
The city was one of the largest in Europe in the High Middle Ages, with a population of 60,000 in AD 1000; 80,000 in 1200; and rising up to 110,000–180,000 in 1300. In the mid-1500s the city&#x27;s population was 170,000, and by 1600 it approached 200,000.

In 2021, there were 254,850 people residing in the Comune of Venice (the population figure includes 50,434 in the historic city of Venice (Centro storico), 177,621 in Terraferma (the mainland); and 26,795 on other islands in the lagoon). 47.8% of the population in 2021 were male and 52.2% were female; minors (ages 18 and younger) were 14.7% of the population compared to elderly people (ages 65 and older) who numbered 27.9%. This compared with the Italian average of 16.7% and 23.5%, respectively. The average age of Venice residents was 48.6 compared to the Italian average of 45.9. In the five years between 2016 and 2021, the population of Venice declined by 2.7%, while Italy as a whole declined by 2.2%. The population in the historic old city declined much faster: from about 120,000 in 1980 to about 60,000 in 2009, and to 50,000 in 2021. , 84.2% of the population was Italian. The largest immigrant groups include: 7,814 (3.1%) Bangladeshis, 6,258 (2.5%) Romanians, 4,054 (1.6%) Moldovans, 4,014 (1.6%) Chinese, and 2,514 (1%) Ukrainians.

Venice is predominantly Roman Catholic (85.0% of the resident population in the area of the Patriarchate of Venice in 2022), but because of the long-standing relationship with Constantinople, there is also a noticeable Orthodox presence; and as a result of immigration, there is now a large Muslim community (about 25,000 or 9.5% of city population in 2018) and some Hindu, and Buddhist inhabitants.

Since 1991, the Church of San Giorgio dei Greci in Venice has become the see of the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of Italy and Malta and Exarchate of Southern Europe, a Byzantine-rite diocese under the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople.

There is also a historic Jewish community in Venice. The Venetian Ghetto was the area in which Jews were compelled to live under the Venetian Republic. The word &quot;ghetto&quot; (&quot;ghèto&quot;), originally Venetian, is now found in many languages. Shakespeare&#x27;s play &quot;The Merchant of Venice&quot;, written in the late 16th century, features Shylock, a Venetian Jew. The first complete and uncensored printed edition of the Talmud was printed in Venice by Daniel Bomberg in 1523. During World War II, Jews were rounded up in Venice and deported to extermination camps. Since the end of the war, the Jewish population of Venice has declined from 1500 to about 500. Only around 30 Jews live in the former ghetto, which houses the city&#x27;s major Jewish institutions. In modern times, Venice has an eruv, used by the Jewish community.

== Government ==
=== Local and regional government ===
The legislative body of the Comune is the City Council (&quot;Consiglio Comunale&quot;), which is composed of 36 councillors elected every five years with a proportional system, contextually to the mayoral elections. The executive body is the City Administration (&quot;Giunta Comunale&quot;), composed of 12 assessors nominated and presided over by a directly elected Mayor.

Venice was governed by centre-left parties from the early 1990s until the 2010s, when the Mayor started to be elected directly. Its region, Veneto, has long been a conservative stronghold, with the coalition between the regionalist Lega Nord and the centre-right Forza Italia winning absolute majorities of the electorate in many elections at local, national, and regional levels.

The current mayor of Venice is Luigi Brugnaro, a centre-right independent businessman who is currently serving his second term in office.

The municipality of Venice is also subdivided into six administrative boroughs (&quot;municipalità&quot;). Each borough is governed by a council (&quot;Consiglio&quot;) and a president, elected every five years. The urban organization is dictated by Article 114 of the Italian Constitution. The boroughs have the power to advise the Mayor with nonbinding opinions on a large spectrum of topics (environment, construction, public health, local markets) and exercise the functions delegated to them by the City Council; in addition, they are supplied with autonomous funding to finance local activities.

;Notes
=== &quot;Sestieri&quot; ===
The historic city of Venice has historically been divided into six &quot;sestieri&quot;, and is made up of a total of 127 individual islands, most of which are separated from their neighbors by narrow channels only.

Each &quot;sestiere&quot; is now a statistical and historical area without any degree of autonomy.

The six fingers or phalanges of the &quot;ferro&quot; on the bow of a gondola represent the six &quot;sestieri&quot;.

The &quot;sestieri&quot; are divided into parishes—initially 70 in 1033, but reduced under Napoleon, and now numbering just 38. These parishes predate the &quot;sestieri&quot;, which were created in about 1170. Each parish exhibited unique characteristics but also belonged to an integrated network. Each community chose its own patron saint, staged its own festivals, congregated around its own market centre, constructed its own bell towers, and developed its own customs.

Other islands of the Venetian Lagoon do not form part of any of the &quot;sestieri&quot;, having historically enjoyed a considerable degree of autonomy.

Each &quot;sestiere&quot; has its own house numbering system. Each house has a unique number in the district, from one to several thousand, generally numbered from one corner of the area to another, but not usually in a readily understandable manner.

== Economy ==

Venice&#x27;s economy has changed throughout history. Although there is little specific information about the earliest years, it is likely that an important source of the city&#x27;s prosperity was the trade in slaves, captured in central Europe and sold to North Africa and the Levant. Venice&#x27;s location at the head of the Adriatic, and directly south of the terminus of the Brenner Pass over the Alps, would have given it a distinct advantage as a middleman in this important trade. In the Middle Ages and the Renaissance, Venice was a major centre for commerce and trade, as it controlled a vast sea-empire, and became an extremely wealthy European city and a leader in political and economic affairs. From the 11th century until the 15th century, pilgrimages to the Holy Land were offered in Venice. Other ports such as Genoa, Pisa, Marseille, Ancona, and Dubrovnik were hardly able to compete with the well organized transportation of pilgrims from Venice.

Armenian merchants from Julfa were the leading traders in Venice, especially the Sceriman family in the 17th century. They were specialized in the gems and diamonds business. The trade volume reached millions of tons, which was exceptional for 17th century. This all changed by the 17th century, when Venice&#x27;s trade empire was taken over by countries such as Portugal, and its importance as a naval power was reduced. In the 18th century, it became a major agricultural and industrial exporter. The 18th century&#x27;s biggest industrial complex was the Venice Arsenal, and the Italian Army still uses it today (even though some space has been used for major theatrical and cultural productions, and as spaces for art). Since World War II, many Venetians have moved to the neighboring cities of Mestre and Porto Marghera, seeking employment as well as affordable housing.

Today, Venice&#x27;s economy is mainly based on tourism, shipbuilding (mainly in Mestre and Porto Marghera), services, trade, and industrial exports. Murano glass production in Murano and lace production in Burano are also highly important to the economy.

The city is facing financial challenges. In late 2016, it had a major deficit in its budget and debts in excess of €400 million. &quot;In effect, the place is bankrupt&quot;, according to a report by &quot;The Guardian&quot;. Many locals are leaving the historic centre due to rapidly increasing rents. The declining native population affects the character of the city, as an October 2016 &quot;National Geographic&quot; article pointed out in its subtitle: &quot;Residents are abandoning the city, which is in danger of becoming an overpriced theme park&quot;. The city is also facing other challenges, including erosion, pollution, subsidence, an excessive number of tourists in peak periods, and problems caused by oversized cruise ships sailing close to the banks of the historical city.

In June 2017, Italy was required to bail out two Venetian banks – the Banca Popolare di Vicenza and Veneto Banca – to prevent their bankruptcies. Both banks would be wound down and their assets that have value taken over by another Italian bank, Intesa Sanpaolo, which would receive €5.2 billion as compensation. The Italian government would be responsible for losses from any uncollectible loans from the closed banks. The cost would be €5.2 billion, with further guarantees to cover bad loans totaling €12 billion.

=== Tourism ===


Venice is an important destination for tourists who want to see its celebrated art and architecture. The city hosts up to 60,000 tourists per day (2017 estimate). Estimates of the annual number of tourists vary from 22 million to 30 million. This &quot;overtourism&quot; creates overcrowding and environmental problems for Venice&#x27;s ecosystem. By 2017, UNESCO was considering the addition of Venice to its &quot;In-Danger&quot; list, which includes historical ruins in war-torn countries. To reduce the number of visitors, who are causing irreversible changes in Venice, the agency supports limiting the number of cruise ships as well as implementing a strategy for more sustainable tourism.

Tourism has been a major part of the Venetian economy since the 18th century, when Venice – with its beautiful cityscape, uniqueness, and rich musical and artistic cultural heritage – was a stop on the Grand Tour. In the 19th century, Venice became a fashionable centre for the &quot;rich and famous&quot;, who often stayed and dined at luxury establishments such as the Danieli Hotel and the Caffè Florian, and continued to be a fashionable city into the early 20th century. In the 1980s, the Carnival of Venice was revived; and the city has become a major centre of international conferences and festivals, such as the prestigious Venice Biennale and the Venice Film Festival, which attract visitors from all over the world for their theatrical, cultural, cinematic, artistic, and musical productions.

Today, there are numerous attractions in Venice, such as St Mark&#x27;s Basilica, the Doge&#x27;s Palace, the Grand Canal, and the Piazza San Marco. The Lido di Venezia is also a popular international luxury destination, attracting thousands of actors, critics, celebrities, and others in the cinematic industry. The city also relies heavily on the cruise business. The Cruise Venice Committee has estimated that cruise ship passengers spend more than 150 million euros (US$193 million) annually in the city, according to a 2015 report. Other reports, however, point out that such day-trippers spend relatively little in the few hours of their visits to the city.

Venice is regarded by some as a tourist trap, and by others as a &quot;living museum&quot;.

==== Diverting cruise ships ====
The need to protect the city&#x27;s historic environment and fragile canals, in the face of a possible loss of jobs produced by cruise tourism, has seen the Italian Transport Ministry attempt to introduce a ban on large cruise ships visiting the city. A 2013 ban would have allowed only cruise ships smaller than 40,000-gross tons to enter the Giudecca Canal and St Mark&#x27;s basin. In January 2015, a regional court scrapped the ban, but some global cruise lines indicated that they would continue to respect it until a long-term solution for the protection of Venice is found.

P&amp;O Cruises removed Venice from its summer schedule; Holland America moved one of its ships from this area to Alaska; and Cunard reduced (in 2017 and further in 2018) the number of visits by its ships. As a result, the Venice Port Authority estimated an 11.4 per cent drop in cruise ships arriving in 2017 versus 2016, leading to a similar reduction in income for Venice.

Having failed in its 2013 bid to ban oversized cruise ships from the Giudecca Canal, the Italian inter-ministerial &quot;Comitatone&quot; overseeing Venice&#x27;s lagoon released an official directive in November 2017 to keep the largest cruise ships away from the Piazza San Marco and the entrance to the Grand Canal. Ships over 55,000 tons will be required to follow a specific route through the Vittorio Emmanuele III Canal to reach Marghera, an industrial area of the mainland, where a passenger terminal would be built.

In 2014, the United Nations warned the city that it may be placed on UNESCO&#x27;s List of World Heritage in Danger sites unless cruise ships are banned from the canals near the historic centre.

According to the officials, the plan to create an alternative route for ships would require extensive dredging of the canal and the building of a new port, which would take four years, in total, to complete. However, the activist group &quot;No Grandi Navi&quot; (No big Ships), argued that the effects of pollution caused by the ships would not be diminished by the re-routing plan.

Some locals continued to aggressively lobby for new methods that would reduce the number of cruise ship passengers; their estimate indicated that there are up to 30,000 such sightseers per day at peak periods, while others concentrate their effort on promoting a more responsible way of visiting the city. An unofficial referendum to ban large cruise ships was held in June 2017. More than 18,000 people voted at 60 polling booths set up by activists, and 17,874 favored banning large ships from the lagoon. The population of Venice at the time was about 50,000. The organizers of the referendum backed a plan to build a new cruise ship terminal at one of the three entrances to the Venetian Lagoon. Passengers would be transferred to the historic area in smaller boats.

On 2 June 2019, the cruise ship &quot;MSC Opera&quot; rammed a tourist riverboat, the &quot;River Countess&quot;, which was docked on the Giudecca Canal, injuring five people, in addition to causing property damage. The incident immediately led to renewed demands to ban large cruise ships from the Giudecca Canal, including a Twitter message to that effect posted by the environment minister. The city&#x27;s mayor urged authorities to accelerate the steps required for cruise ships to begin using the alternate Vittorio Emanuele canal. Italy&#x27;s transport minister spoke of a &quot;solution to protect both the lagoon and tourism ... after many years of inertia&quot; but specifics were not reported. , the 2017 plan to establish an alternative route for large ships, preventing them from coming near the historic area of the city, has not yet been approved.

Nonetheless, the Italian government released an announcement on 7 August 2019 that it would begin rerouting cruise ships larger than 1000 tonnes away from the historic city&#x27;s Giudecca Canal. For the last four months of 2019, all heavy vessels would dock at the Fusina and Lombardia terminals which are still on the lagoon but away from the central islands. By 2020, one-third of all cruise ships would be rerouted, according to Danilo Toninelli, the minister for Venice. Preparation work for the Vittorio Emanuele Canal needed to begin soon for a long-term solution, according to the Cruise Lines International Association. In the long-term, space for ships would be provided at new terminals, perhaps at Chioggia or Lido San Nicolo. That plan was not imminent however, since public consultations had not yet begun. Over 1.5 million people per year arrive in Venice on cruise ships. The Italian government decided to divert large cruise ships beginning August 2021.

==== Other tourism mitigation efforts ====
Having failed in its 2013 bid to ban oversized cruise ships from the Giudecca Canal, the city switched to a new strategy in mid-2017, banning the creation of any additional hotels. Currently, there are over 24,000 hotel rooms. The ban does not affect short-term rentals in the historic centre which are causing an increase in the cost of living for the native residents of Venice. The city had already banned any additional fast food &quot;take-away&quot; outlets, to retain the historic character of the city, which was another reason for freezing the number of hotel rooms. Fewer than half of the millions of annual visitors stay overnight, however.

The city also considered a ban on wheeled suitcases, but settled for banning hard plastic wheels for transporting cargo from May 2015.
In addition to accelerating erosion of the ancient city&#x27;s foundations and creating some pollution in the lagoon, cruise ships dropping an excessive number of day trippers can make St. Marks Square and other popular attractions too crowded to walk through during the peak season. Government officials see little value to the economy from the &quot;eat and flee&quot; tourists who stay for less than a day, which is typical of those from cruise ships.

On 28 February 2019, the Venice City Council voted in favour of a new municipal regulation requiring day-trippers visiting the historic centre, and the islands in the lagoon, to pay a new access fee. The extra revenue from the fee would be used for cleaning, maintaining security, reducing the financial burden on residents of Venice, and to &quot;allow Venetians to live with more decorum&quot;. The new tax would be between €3 and €10 per person, depending on the expected tourist flow into the old city. The fee could be waived for certain types of travelers: including students, children under the age of 6, voluntary workers, residents of the Veneto region, and participants in sporting events. Overnight visitors, who already pay a &quot;stay&quot; tax and account for around 40% of Venice&#x27;s yearly total of 28 million visitors, would also be exempted. The access fee was expected to come into effect in September 2019; but it was postponed, firstly, until 1 January 2020, and then, again, due to the coronavirus pandemic. The new charge of €5 started to be imposed on those tourists who are not staying overnight and came into force on 25 April 2024. It is only charged on peak visitor days, and several classes of people are exempt, including Veneto residents, hotel guests (including mainland boroughs of Venice), local workers, and students. Cell phone data showed more tourists came on fee-charged days in 2024, generating more money than expected, and leaving the city to decide whether to raise the fee for the next tourist season or try other approaches.

A regulation taking effect on June 1, 2024, limits tour groups to 25 people and bans loudspeakers.

== Transport ==
=== In the historic centre ===

Venice is built on an archipelago of 118 islands in a shallow, lagoon, connected by 400 bridges over 177 canals. In the 19th century, a causeway to the mainland brought the railroad to Venice. The adjoining Ponte della Libertà road causeway and terminal parking facilities in Tronchetto island and Piazzale Roma were built during the 20th century. Beyond these rail and road terminals on the northern edge of the city, transportation within the city&#x27;s historic centre remains, as it was in centuries past, entirely on water or on foot. Venice is Europe&#x27;s largest urban car-free area and is unique in Europe in having remained a sizable functioning city in the 21st century entirely without motorcars or trucks.

The classic Venetian boat is the &quot;gondola&quot;, (plural: &quot;gondole&quot;) although it is now mostly used for tourists, or for weddings, funerals, or other ceremonies, or as &quot;traghetti&quot; (sing.: traghetto) to cross the Grand Canal in lieu of a nearby bridge. The traghetti are operated by two oarsmen.

There are approximately 400 licensed gondoliers in Venice, in their distinctive livery, and a similar number of boats, down from 10,000 two centuries ago. Many gondolas are lushly appointed with crushed velvet seats and Persian rugs. At the front of each gondola that works in the city, there is a large piece of metal called the &quot;fèro&quot; (iron). Its shape has evolved through the centuries, as documented in many well-known paintings. Its form, topped by a likeness of the Doge&#x27;s hat, became gradually standardized, and was then fixed by local law. It consists of six bars pointing forward representing the sestieri of the city, and one that points backwards representing the Giudecca. A lesser-known boat is the smaller, simpler, but similar, sandolo.

==== Waterways ====
Venice&#x27;s small islands were enhanced during the Middle Ages by the dredging of soil to raise the marshy ground above the tides. The resulting canals encouraged the flourishing of a nautical culture which proved central to the economy of the city. Today those canals still provide the means for transport of goods and people within the city.

The maze of canals threading through the city requires more than 400 bridges to permit the flow of foot traffic. In 2011, the city opened the Ponte della Costituzione, the fourth bridge across the Grand Canal, which connects the Piazzale Roma bus-terminal area with the Venezia Santa Lucia railway station. The other bridges are the original Ponte di Rialto, the Ponte dell&#x27;Accademia, and the Ponte degli Scalzi.

=== Public transport ===
Azienda del Consorzio Trasporti Veneziano (ACTV) is a public company responsible for public transportation in Venice.

==== Lagoon area ====
The main means of public transportation consists of motorised waterbuses (&quot;vaporetti&quot;) which ply regular routes along the Grand Canal and between the city&#x27;s islands. Private motorised water taxis are also active. The only gondole still in common use by Venetians are the &quot;traghetti&quot;, foot passenger ferries crossing the Grand Canal at certain points where there are no convenient bridges. Other gondole are rented by tourists on an hourly basis.

The Venice People Mover is an elevated shuttle train public transit system connecting Tronchetto island with its car parking facility with Piazzale Roma where visitors arrive in the city by bus, taxi, or automobile. The train makes a stop at the Marittima cruise terminal at the Port of Venice.

==== Lido and Pellestrina islands ====
Lido and Pellestrina are two islands forming a barrier between the southern Venetian Lagoon and the Adriatic Sea. On those islands, road traffic, including bus service, is allowed. Vaporetti link them with other islands (Venice, Murano, Burano) and with the peninsula of Cavallino-Treporti.

==== Mainland ====
The mainland of Venice is composed of 4 boroughs: Mestre-Carpenedo, Marghera, Chirignago-Zelarino, and Favaro Veneto. Mestre is the centre and the most populous urban area of the mainland. There are several bus routes and two Translohr tramway lines. Several bus routes and one of the tramway lines link the mainland with &quot;Piazzale Roma&quot;, the main bus station in Venice, via Ponte della Libertà, the road bridge connecting the mainland with the group of islands that comprise the historic centre of Venice.

The average amount of time people spend commuting with public transit in Venice, for example to and from work, on a weekday is 52 min. Only 12.2% of public transit riders ride for more than 2 hours every day. The average amount of time people wait at a stop or station for public transit is 10 min, while 17.6% of riders wait for over 20 minutes on average every day. The average distance people usually ride in a single trip with public transit is , while 12% travel for over in a single direction.

=== Rail ===
Venice is served by regional and national trains, including trains to Florence (1h53), Milan (2h13), Turin (3h10), Rome (3h33), and Naples (4h50). 

There are international day trains to Zurich, Innsbruck, Munich, and Vienna, plus overnight sleeper services, to Paris and Dijon on Thello trains, and to Munich and Vienna via Austrian Federal Railways.

European Sleeper operates a sleeper train between Brussels and Venice, stopping in Utrecht.

* The Venezia Santa Lucia railway station is a few steps away from a vaporetti stop, Ferovia, in the historic city next to the &quot;Piazzale Roma&quot;. This station is the terminus of local trains and of the luxury Venice Simplon Orient Express from London via Paris and other cities.
* The Venezia Mestre railway station is on the mainland, on the border between the boroughs of Mestre and Marghera.

Both stations are managed by Grandi Stazioni; they are linked by the &quot;Ponte della Libertà&quot; (Liberty Bridge) between the mainland and the city centre.

Other stations in the municipality are Venezia Porto Marghera, Venezia Carpenedo, Venezia Mestre Ospedale, and Venezia Mestre Porta Ovest.

=== Ports ===

The Port of Venice () is the eighth-busiest commercial port in Italy and was a major hub for the cruise sector in the Mediterranean, as since August 2021 ships of more 25,000 tons are forbidden to pass the Giudecca Canal. It is one of the major Italian ports and is included in the list of the leading European ports which are located on the strategic nodes of trans-European networks. In 2002, the port handled 262,337 containers. In 2006, 30,936,931 tonnes passed through the port, of which 14,541,961 was commercial traffic, and saw 1,453,513 passengers.

=== Aviation ===
The Marco Polo International Airport (&quot;Aeroporto di Venezia Marco Polo&quot;) is named in honor of Marco Polo. The airport is on the mainland and was rebuilt away from the coast. Public transport from the airport takes one to:
* Venice Piazzale Roma by ATVO (provincial company) buses and by ACTV (city company) buses (route 5 &quot;aerobus&quot;);
* Venice, Lido, and Murano by Allilaguna (private company) motor boats;
* Mestre, the mainland, where Venice Mestre railway station is convenient for connections to Milan, Padua, Trieste, Verona and the rest of Italy, and for ACTV (routes 15 and 45) and ATVO buses and other transport;
* Regional destinations, such as Treviso and Padua, by ATVO and Busitalia Sita Nord buses.

Venice-Treviso Airport, about from Venice, is used mainly by low-cost airlines. There are public buses from this airport to Venice.
Venezia-Lido &quot;Giovanni Nicelli&quot;, a public airport suitable for smaller aircraft, is at the northeast end of Lido di Venezia. It has a grass runway.

== Sport ==
The most famous Venetian sport is probably &quot;&quot; (&quot;Venetian-style rowing&quot;), also commonly called &quot;voga veneta&quot;. A technique invented in the Venetian Lagoon, Venetian rowing is unusual in that the rower(s), one or more, row standing, looking forward. Today, &quot;Voga alla Veneta&quot; is not only the way the gondoliers row tourists around Venice but also the way Venetians row for pleasure and sport. Many races called &quot;regata(e)&quot; happen throughout the year. The culminating event of the rowing season is the day of the &quot;Regata Storica&quot;, which occurs on the first Sunday of September each year.

The main football club in the city is Venezia F.C., founded in 1907, which currently plays in the Serie A. Their ground, the Stadio Pier Luigi Penzo, situated in Sant&#x27;Elena, is the second-oldest continually used stadium in Italy.

The local basketball club is Reyer Venezia, founded in 1872 as the gymnastics club &quot;Società Sportiva Costantino Reyer&quot;, and in 1907 as the basketball club. Reyer currently plays in the Lega Basket Serie A. The men&#x27;s team were the Italian champions in 1942, 1943, and 2017. Their arena is the Palasport Giuseppe Taliercio, situated in Mestre. Luigi Brugnaro is both the president of the club and the mayor of the city.

== Education ==
Venice is a major international centre for higher education. The city hosts the Ca&#x27; Foscari University of Venice, founded in 1868; the , founded in 1926; the Venice International University, founded in 1995 and located on the island of San Servolo and the EIUC-European Inter-University Centre for Human Rights and Democratisation, located on the island of Lido di Venezia.

Other Venetian institutions of higher education are: the &quot;Accademia di Belle Arti&quot; (Academy of Fine Arts), established in 1750, whose first chairman was Giovanni Battista Piazzetta, and the Benedetto Marcello Conservatory of Music, which was first established in 1876 as a high school and musical society, later (1915) became &quot;Liceo Musicale&quot;, and then, when its director was Gian Francesco Malipiero, the State Conservatory of Music (1940).

== Culture ==

=== Literature ===


Venice has long been a source of inspiration for authors, playwrights, and poets, and at the forefront of the technological development of printing and publishing.

Two of the most noted Venetian writers were Marco Polo in the Middle Ages and, later, Giacomo Casanova. Polo (1254–1324) was a merchant who voyaged to the Orient. His series of books, co-written with Rustichello da Pisa and titled &quot;Il Milione&quot; provided important knowledge of the lands east of Europe, from the Middle East to China, Japan, and Russia. Giacomo Casanova (1725–1798) was a prolific writer and adventurer best remembered for his autobiography, &quot;Histoire De Ma Vie&quot; (&quot;Story of My Life&quot;), which links his colourful lifestyle to the city of Venice.

Venetian playwrights followed the old Italian theatre tradition of &quot;commedia dell&#x27;arte&quot;. Ruzante (1502–1542), Carlo Goldoni (1707–1793), and Carlo Gozzi (1720–1806) used the Venetian dialect extensively in their comedies.

Venice has also inspired writers from abroad. Shakespeare set &quot;Othello&quot; and &quot;The Merchant of Venice&quot; in the city, as did Thomas Mann his novel, &quot;Death in Venice&quot; (1912). The French writer Philippe Sollers spent most of his life in Venice and published &quot;A Dictionary For Lovers of Venice&quot; in 2004.

The city features prominently in Henry James&#x27;s &quot;The Aspern Papers&quot; and &quot;The Wings of the Dove&quot;. It is also visited in Evelyn Waugh&#x27;s &quot;Brideshead Revisited&quot; and Marcel Proust&#x27;s &quot;In Search of Lost Time&quot;. Perhaps the best-known children&#x27;s book set in Venice is &quot;The Thief Lord&quot;, written by the German author Cornelia Funke.

Venice is described in Goethe&#x27;s Italian Journey, 1786–1788. He describes the architecture, including a church by Palladio and also attends the opera. He visits the shipbuilding yards at the Arsenal. He is fascinated by the street life of Venice, which he describes as a kind of performance.

The poet Ugo Foscolo (1778–1827), born in Zante, an island that at the time belonged to the Republic of Venice, was also a revolutionary who wanted to see a free republic established in Venice following its fall to Napoleon.

Venice also inspired the poetry of Ezra Pound, who wrote his first literary work in the city. Pound died in 1972, and his remains are buried in Venice&#x27;s cemetery island of San Michele.

Venice is also linked to the technological aspects of writing. The city was the location of one of Italy&#x27;s earliest printing presses called Aldine Press, established by Aldus Manutius in 1494. From this beginning Venice developed as an important typographic centre. Around fifteen percent of all printing of the fifteenth century came from Venice, and even as late as the 18th century was responsible for printing half of Italy&#x27;s published books.

==== In literature and adapted works ====
The city is a particularly popular setting for essays, novels, and other works of fictional or non-fictional literature. Examples of these include:
* Aretino&#x27;s works (1492–1556)
* Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;Merchant of Venice&quot; () and &quot;Othello&quot; (1603).
* Ben Jonson&#x27;s &quot;Volpone&quot; (1605–6).
* Casanova&#x27;s autobiographical &quot;History of My Life&quot; .
* Voltaire&#x27;s &quot;Candide&quot; (1759).
* Letitia Elizabeth Landon wrote poetry for two pictures of Venice; one for &quot;The Embarkation&quot;, drawn by Clarkson Stanfield for The Amulet, 1833, the other for &quot;Santa Salute&quot;, drawn by Charles Bentley for the Literary Souvenir, 1835.
* Ernest Hemingway&#x27;s &quot;Across the River and into the Trees&quot; (1950).
* Italo Calvino&#x27;s &quot;Invisible Cities&quot; (1972).
* Anne Rice&#x27;s &quot;Cry to Heaven&quot; (1982).
* Donna Leon&#x27;s Commissario Guido Brunetti crime fiction series and cookbook, and the German television series based on the novels (1992–2019).
* Philippe Sollers&#x27; &quot;Watteau in Venice&quot; (1994).
* Michael Dibdin&#x27;s &quot;Dead Lagoon&quot; (1994), one in a series of novels featuring Venice-born policeman Aurelio Zen.
* Jacqueline Carey&#x27;s &quot;Kushiel&#x27;s Chosen&quot; (2002), an historical fantasy or alternate history of Venice – complete with masquerades, canals, and a doge – taking place in a city known as La Serenissima.
* John Berendt&#x27;s &quot;The City of Falling Angels&quot; (2005)
* Gilbert and Sullivan&#x27;s comic opera &quot;The Gondoliers&quot; (1889)
* Thomas Mann&#x27;s novella, &quot;Death in Venice&quot; (1912), was the basis for Benjamin Britten&#x27;s eponymous opera (1973).

==== Foreign words of Venetian origin ====
Some English words with a Venetian etymology include arsenal, ciao, ghetto, gondola, imbroglio, lagoon, lazaret, lido, Montenegro, and regatta.

=== Printing ===
By the end of the 15th century, Venice had become the European capital of printing, having 417 printers by 1500, and being one of the first cities in Italy (after Subiaco and Rome) to have a printing press, after those established in Germany. The most important printing office was the Aldine Press of Aldus Manutius; which in 1497 issued the first printed work of Aristotle; in 1499 printed the &quot;Hypnerotomachia Poliphili&quot;, considered the most beautiful book of the Renaissance; and established modern punctuation, page format, and italic type.

=== Painting ===


Venice, especially during the Renaissance, and Baroque periods, was a major centre of art and developed a unique style known as the Venetian painting. In the Middle Ages and the Renaissance, Venice, along with Florence and Rome, became one of the most important centres of art in Europe, and numerous wealthy Venetians became patrons of the arts. Venice at the time was a rich and prosperous Maritime Republic, which controlled a vast sea and trade empire.

In the 16th century, Venetian painting was developed through influences from the Paduan School and Antonello da Messina, who introduced the oil painting technique of the Van Eyck brothers. It is signified by a warm colour scale and a picturesque use of colour. Early masters were the Bellini and Vivarini families, followed by Giorgione and Titian, then Tintoretto and Veronese. In the early 16th century, there was rivalry in Venetian painting between the &quot;disegno&quot; and &quot;colorito&quot; techniques.

Canvases (the common painting surface) originated in Venice during the early Renaissance. In the 18th century, Venetian painting had a revival with Tiepolo&#x27;s decorative painting and Canaletto&#x27;s and Guardi&#x27;s panoramic views.

=== Venetian architecture ===

Venice is built on unstable mud-banks, and had a very crowded city centre by the Middle Ages. On the other hand, the city was largely safe from riot, civil feuds, and invasion much earlier than most European cities. These factors, with the canals and the great wealth of the city, made for unique building styles.

Venice has a rich and diverse architectural style, the most prominent of which is the Gothic style. Venetian Gothic architecture is a term given to a Venetian building style combining the use of the Gothic lancet arch with the curved ogee arch, due to Byzantine and Ottoman influences. The style originated in 14th-century Venice, with a confluence of Byzantine style from Constantinople, Islamic influences from Spain and Venice&#x27;s eastern trading partners, and early Gothic forms from mainland Italy. Chief examples of the style are the Doge&#x27;s Palace and the Ca&#x27; d&#x27;Oro in the city. The city also has several Renaissance and Baroque buildings, including the Ca&#x27; Pesaro and the Ca&#x27; Rezzonico.

Venetian taste was conservative and Renaissance architecture only really became popular in buildings from about the 1470s. More than in the rest of Italy, it kept much of the typical form of the Gothic &quot;palazzi&quot;, which had evolved to suit Venetian conditions. In turn the transition to Baroque architecture was also fairly gentle. This gives the crowded buildings on the Grand Canal and elsewhere an essential harmony, even where buildings from very different periods sit together. For example, round-topped arches are far more common in Renaissance buildings than elsewhere.

=== Rococo style ===
It can be argued that Venice produced the best and most refined Rococo designs. At the time, the Venetian economy was in decline. It had lost most of its maritime power, was lagging behind its rivals in political importance, and its society had become decadent, with tourism increasingly the mainstay of the economy. But Venice remained a centre of fashion. Venetian rococo was well known as rich and luxurious, with usually very extravagant designs. Unique Venetian furniture types included the &quot;divani da portego&quot;, and long rococo couches and &quot;pozzetti&quot;, objects meant to be placed against the wall. Bedrooms of rich Venetians were usually sumptuous and grand, with rich damask, velvet, and silk drapery and curtains, and beautifully carved rococo beds with statues of putti, flowers, and angels. Venice was especially known for its girandole mirrors, which remained among, if not the, finest in Europe. Chandeliers were usually very colourful, using Murano glass to make them look more vibrant and stand out from others; and precious stones and materials from abroad were used, since Venice still held a vast trade empire. Lacquer was very common, and many items of furniture were covered with it, the most noted being &quot;lacca povera&quot; (poor lacquer), in which allegories and images of social life were painted. Lacquerwork and Chinoiserie were particularly common in bureau cabinets.

=== Glass ===


Venice is known for its ornate glass-work, known as Venetian glass, which is world-renowned for being colourful, elaborate, and skilfully made. Many of the important characteristics of these objects had been developed by the 13th century. Toward the end of that century, the centre of the Venetian glass industry moved to Murano, an offshore island in Venice. The glass made there is known as Murano glass.

Byzantine craftsmen played an important role in the development of Venetian glass. When Constantinople was sacked in the Fourth Crusade in 1204, some fleeing artisans came to Venice; when the Ottomans took Constantinople in 1453, still more glassworkers arrived. By the 16th century, Venetian artisans had gained even greater control over the colour and transparency of their glass, and had mastered a variety of decorative techniques. Despite efforts to keep Venetian glassmaking techniques within Venice, they became known elsewhere, and Venetian-style glassware was produced in other Italian cities and other countries of Europe.

Some of the most important brands of glass in the world today are still produced in the historical glass factories on Murano. They are: Venini, Barovier &amp; Toso, Pauly, Millevetri, and Seguso. Barovier &amp; Toso is considered one of the 100 oldest companies in the world, formed in 1295.

In February 2021, the world learned that Venetian glass trade beads had been found at three prehistoric Inuit sites in Alaska, including Punyik Point. Uninhabited today, and located from the Continental Divide in the Brooks Range, the area was on ancient trade routes from the Bering Sea to the Arctic Ocean. From their creation in Venice, researchers believe the likely route these artifacts traveled was across Europe, then Eurasia and finally over the Bering Strait, making this discovery &quot;the first documented instance of the presence of indubitable European materials in prehistoric sites in the western hemisphere as the result of overland transport across the Eurasian continent.&quot; After radiocarbon dating materials found near the beads, archaeologists estimated their arrival on the continent to sometime between 1440 and 1480, predating Christopher Columbus. The dating and provenance has been challenged by other researchers who point out that such beads were not made in Venice until the mid-16th century and that an early 17th century French origin is possible.

=== Festivals ===

The Carnival of Venice is held annually in the city, It lasts for around two weeks and ends on Shrove Tuesday. Venetian masks are worn.

The Venice Biennale is one of the most important events in the arts calendar. In 1895 an &quot;Esposizione biennale artistica nazionale&quot; (biennial exhibition of Italian art) was inaugurated. In September 1942, the activities of the Biennale were interrupted by the war, but resumed in 1948.

The Festa del Redentore is held in mid-July. It began as a feast to give thanks for the end of the plague of 1576. A bridge of barges is built connecting Giudecca to the rest of Venice, and fireworks play an important role.

The Venice Film Festival () is the oldest film festival in the world. Founded by Count Giuseppe Volpi di Misurata in 1932 as the &quot;Esposizione Internazionale d&#x27;Arte Cinematografica&quot;, the festival has since taken place every year in late August or early September on the island of the Lido. Screenings take place in the historic Palazzo del Cinema on the Lungomare Marconi. It is one of the world&#x27;s most prestigious film festivals and is part of the Venice Biennale.

=== Music ===

The city of Venice in Italy has played an important role in the development of the music of Italy. The Venetian state (the medieval Republic of Venice) was often popularly called the &quot;Republic of Music&quot;, and an anonymous Frenchman of the 17th century is said to have remarked that &quot;In every home, someone is playing a musical instrument or singing. There is music everywhere.&quot;

During the 16th century, Venice became one of the most important musical centres of Europe, marked by a characteristic style of composition (the Venetian school) and the development of the Venetian polychoral style under composers such as Adrian Willaert, who worked at St Mark&#x27;s Basilica. Venice was the early centre of music printing; Ottaviano Petrucci began publishing music almost as soon as this technology was available, and his publishing enterprise helped to attract composers from all over Europe, especially from France and Flanders. By the end of the century, Venice was known for the splendor of its music, as exemplified in the &quot;colossal style&quot; of Andrea and Giovanni Gabrieli, which used multiple choruses and instrumental groups. Venice was also the home of many noted composers during the baroque period, such as Antonio Vivaldi, Tomaso Albinoni, Ippolito Ciera, Giovanni Picchi, and Girolamo Dalla Casa, to name but a few.

==== Orchestras ====
Venice is the home of numerous orchestras such as, the Orchestra della Fenice, Rondò Veneziano, Interpreti Veneziani, and Venice Baroque Orchestra.

=== Cinema, media, and popular culture ===
 The city has been the setting or chosen location of numerous films, games, works of fine art and literature (including essays, fiction, non-fiction, and poems), music videos, television shows, and other cultural references. Notable examples of this are the films &quot;Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade&quot; and &quot;Casino Royale&quot;, the second part of the Japanese manga series &quot;JoJo&#x27;s Bizarre Adventure&quot; and the video game &quot;Sly 3: Honor Among Thieves&quot;.

=== Photography ===
Fulvio Roiter was the pioneer in artistic photography in Venice, followed by a number of photographers whose works are often reproduced on postcards, thus reaching a widest international popular exposure. Luca Zordan, a New York City based photographer was born in Venice.

=== Cuisine ===

Venetian cuisine is characterized by seafood, but also includes garden products from Sant&#x27;Erasmo island, rice from the mainland, game, and polenta. Venice is not known for a particular cuisine of its own: it combines local traditions with influences stemming from age-old contacts with distant countries. These include &quot;sarde in saór&quot; (sardines marinated to preserve them for long voyages); &quot;bacalà mantecato&quot; (a recipe based on Norwegian stockfish and extra-virgin olive oil); &quot;bisàto&quot; (marinated eel); &quot;risi e bisi&quot; – rice, peas and (unsmoked) bacon; &quot;fegato alla veneziana&quot;, Venetian-style veal liver; &quot;risòto col néro de sépe&quot; (risotto with cuttlefish, blackened by their own ink); &quot;cichéti&quot;, refined and delicious tidbits (akin to &quot;tapas&quot;); &quot;antipasti&quot; (appetizers); and &quot;prosecco&quot;, sparkling light -body white wine.

In addition, Venice is known for the golden, oval-shaped cookies called &quot;baìcoli&quot;, and for other types of sweets, such as: &quot;pan del pescaór&quot; (bread of the fisherman); cookies with almonds and pistachio nuts; cookies with fried Venetian cream, or the &quot;bussolài&quot; (butter biscuits and shortbread made in the shape of a ring or an &quot;S&quot;) from the island of Burano; the &quot;galàni&quot; or &quot;cróstoli&quot; (angel wings); the &quot;frìtole&quot; (fried spherical doughnuts); the &quot;fregolòtta&quot; (a crumbly cake with almonds); a milk pudding called &quot;rosàda&quot;; and cookies called &quot;zaléti&quot;, whose ingredients include yellow maize flour.

The dessert tiramisù is generally thought to have been invented in Treviso in the 1970s, and is popular in the Veneto area.

=== Fashion and shopping ===
In the 14th century, many young Venetian men began wearing tight-fitting multicoloured hose, the designs on which indicated the &quot;Compagnie della Calza&quot; (&quot;Trouser Club&quot;) to which they belonged. The Venetian Senate passed sumptuary laws, but these merely resulted in changes in fashion in order to circumvent the law. Dull garments were worn over colourful ones, which then were cut to show the hidden colours resulting in the spread of men&#x27;s &quot;slashed&quot; fashions in the 15th century.

Today, Venice is a major fashion and shopping centre; not as important as Milan, Florence, and Rome, but on a par with Verona, Turin, Vicenza, Naples, and Genoa. Roberta di Camerino is the only major Italian fashion brand to be based in Venice. Founded in 1945, it is renowned for its innovative handbags made by Venetian artisans and often covered in locally woven velvet.

==International relations==

===Twin towns – sister cities===

Venice is twinned with:

* Dubrovnik, Croatia
* Istanbul, Turkey
* Palembang, Indonesia
* Saint Petersburg, Russia
* Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina
* Suzhou, China
* Tallinn, Estonia
* Yerevan, Armenia
* Odesa, Ukraine
* Aksaray, Turkey
In 2013, Venice announced that it wants to end the sister city relationship with St. Petersburg in opposition to laws Russia had passed against homosexuals and those who support gay rights.

===Cooperation agreements===
In January 2000, the City of Venice and the Central Association of Cities and Communities of Greece (KEDKE) established, in pursuance to EC Regulation No. 2137/85, the Marco Polo System European Economic Interest Grouping (E.E.I.G.), to promote and realise European projects within transnational cultural and tourist fields, particularly in reference to the preservation and safeguarding of artistic and architectural heritage.

In April 2001, the city signed an agreement with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs&#x27;s office of cultural promotion and cooperation, to coordinate efforts at promoting Italian culture abroad.

Venice also has cooperation agreements with:
* Lübeck, Germany (1979)
* Nuremberg, Germany (1999)
* Qingdao, China (2001, Science and Technology Partnership)
* Thessaloniki, Greece (2003)
* Miami, United States (2020)

===Places named after Venice===
The name &quot;Venezuela&quot; is a Spanish diminutive of Venice (&quot;Veneziola&quot;).Many additional places around the world are named after Venice, such as:
* Venice, Los Angeles, home of Venice Beach
* Venice, Alberta, in Canada
* Venice, Florida, city in Sarasota County
* Venice, New York
* Venice, Louisiana
* Little Venice, London
* Venise-en-Québec, Québec

== People ==
Others closely associated with the city include:


=== Music ===
* Andrea Gabrieli (–1586), Italian composer and organist at St Mark&#x27;s Basilica
* Giovanni Gabrieli (1554/1557–1612), composer and organist at St Mark&#x27;s Basilica
* Claudio Monteverdi (1567–1643), composer, string player, choirmaster and Catholic priest
* Francesco Cavalli (1602–1676), a baroque composer
* Tomaso Albinoni (1671–1751), a baroque composer
* Antonio Vivaldi (1678–1741), composer and violinist of the Baroque Era
* Domenico Montagnana (1686–1750), an Italian master luthier. He made the violin and cello.
* Pietro Guarneri (1695–1762), luthier, settled in Venice 1717, &quot;Peter of Venice&quot;
* Lorenzo Da Ponte (1749–1838), opera librettist and poet. He wrote the librettos for 28 operas by 11 composers, including Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart.
* Domenico Dragonetti (1763–1846), a double bass virtuoso and composer
* Ermanno Wolf-Ferrari (1876–1948), Italian composer, mostly of comic opera
* Virgilio Ranzato (1883–1937), Italian composer and violinist
* Bruno Maderna (1920–1973), Italian-German orchestra director and music composer
* Luigi Nono (1924–1990), a leading composer of instrumental and electronic music
* Giuseppe Sinopoli (1946–2001), conductor and composer
* Claudio Ambrosini (born 1948), composer and conductor
* Giovanni Gallo (), Italian choreographer of ballets within operas

=== Painting ===
* Giovanni Bellini ( – 1516), Renaissance painter from the Bellini family of painters
* Vittore Carpaccio ( – 1525/1526), Italian painter of the Venetian school
* Lorenzo Lotto ( – 1556), painter, draughtsman and illustrator, in the Venetian school
* Sebastiano del Piombo ( – 1547), High Renaissance painter and early Mannerist
* Titian ( – 1576), leader of the Venetian school of the Italian Renaissance
* Tintoretto (1518–1594), the last great painter of Italian Renaissance
* Baldassare d&#x27;Anna ( – after 1639), painter of the late-Renaissance period
* Niccolò Cassana (1659–1714), late-Baroque painter
* Rosalba Carriera (1675–1757), Rococo painter, known for her pastel works
* Giovanni Battista Tiepolo (1696–1770), painter and printmaker. He painted in the Rococo style, Venetian school.
* Canaletto (1697–1768), painter, known for his landscapes or &quot;vedute&quot; of Venice
* Pietro Longhi ( – 1785), painter of contemporary genre scenes of life
* Giuseppe Santomaso (1907–1990), Italian painter
* Emilio Vedova (1919–2006), an important modern painter of Italy
* Ludovico de Luigi (born 1933), Venetian Surrealistic artist

=== Writing ===
* Christine de Pizan (1364 – ), poet and court writer for King Charles VI of France
* Aldus Manutius (1449–1515), an important printer. He founded the Aldine Press.
* Jean-Antoine de Baïf (1532–1589), French poet and member of La Pléiade
* Veronica Franco (1546–1591), poet and courtesan during the Renaissance
* Paolo Sarpi (1552–1623), historian, scientist, canon lawyer, statesman, defender of the liberties of Republican Venice. His writings inspired Thomas Hobbes, Edward Gibbon, and the founding fathers of the United States.
* Leon Modena (1571–1648), author, poet and preacher, active in the Venetian Ghetto
* Carlo Goldoni (1707–1793), playwright and librettist, notable name in Italian theatre
* Carlo Gozzi (1720–1806), playwright and champion of &quot;commedia dell&#x27;arte&quot;
* Elisabetta Caminèr Turra (1751–1796), writer and translator of foreign plays
* Frederick Rolfe (1860–1913), English author of the Venetian novel &quot;The Desire and Pursuit of the Whole&quot;

=== Doges &amp; public servants ===
* Enrico Dandolo ( – 1205), Doge of Venice from 1192 to his death. He played a direct role in the Sack of Constantinople during the Fourth Crusade.
* Pope Eugene IV (1383–1447), pope, 1431–1447, nephew of Pope Gregory XII
* Pope Paul II (1417–1471), pope, 1464–1471. He succeeded Pope Pius II.
* Andrea Gritti (1455–1538), Doge of the Venetian Republic from 1523 to 1538
* Pietro Bembo (1470–1547), scholar, poet, literary theorist and cardinal
* Sebastiano Venier ( – 1578), Doge of Venice from 11 June 1577 to 1578
* Marco Antonio Bragadin (died 1571), general, flayed alive by the Turks after a fierce resistance during the siege of Famagusta
* Elena Lucrezia Cornaro Piscopia (1646–1684), the first woman in the world to receive a doctorate degree
* Jacopo Riccati (1676–1754), a Venetian mathematician. He wrote the Riccati equation.
* Pope Clement XIII (1693–1769), pope, 1758 to his death in 1769
* Count Vincenzo Dandolo (1758–1819), chemist, agronomist and politician of the Enlightenment Era
* Daniele Manin (1804–1857), Italian patriot, statesman and leader of the &quot;Risorgimento&quot; in Venice
* Nurbanu Sultan (1525–1583), Haseki sultan and the Valide sultan of the Ottoman Empire and the daughter of the first cousin of Sebastiano Venier, Doge of Venice.

=== Explorers ===
* Marco Polo ( – 1324), trader and explorer, one of the first Westerners to travel the Silk Road to China
* Sebastian Cabot ( – 1557), explorer
* Pietro Cesare Alberti (1608–1655), the first Italian-American in New Amsterdam in 1635
* Giacomo Casanova (1725–1798 in Dux, Bohemia), a Venetian adventurer, writer and womanizer

=== Architects ===
* Leon Battista Alberti (1404–1472), architect, humanist author, artist, poet, priest, linguist, philosopher and cryptographer
* Baldassare Longhena (1598–1682), exponent of Baroque architecture
* Andrea Tirali ( – 1737), architect. He designed the pavement in the Piazza San Marco
* Giovanni Battista Meduna (1800–1886), architect, led reconstruction and restoration works of the St Mark&#x27;s Basilica and the Gran Teatro La Fenice, among others
* Carlo Scarpa (1906–1978), an architect with a profound understanding of materials

=== Entertainers ===
* Marietta Zanfretta (1837–1898), high-wire dancer who found success in Europe and the USA
* Romano Scarpa (1927–2005), a noted Italian creator of Disney comics
* Francesco Borgato (born 1990), Italian recording artist and dancer

===Sport ===
* Ercole Olgeni (1883–1947), rower, team gold and silver medallist at the 1920 &amp; 1924 Summer Olympics
* Erminio Dones (1887–1945), rower, team silver medallist at the 1920 Summer Olympics
* Dominic DeNucci (1932–2021), Italian-American professional wrestler
* Angelo Spanio (1939–1999), Italian footballer with over 280 club caps
* Ivano Bordon (born 1951), former football goalkeeper with 449 club caps and 21 for Italy
* Roberto Ravaglia (born 1957), racing driver and founder of ROAL Motorsport
* Alessandro Santin (born 1958), racing driver
* Mauro Numa (born 1961), fencer and gold medallist at the 1984 Summer Olympics
* Andrea Borella (born 1961), fencer, team gold medallist at the 1984 Summer Olympics
* Andrea Cipressa (born 1963), fencer, team gold medallist at the 1984 Summer Olympics
* Dorina Vaccaroni (born 1963), former foil fencer, three time medallist at the 1984, 1988 &amp; 1992 Summer Olympics
* Daniele Scarpa (born 1964), sprint canoer, gold and silver medallist at the 1996 Summer Olympics
* Carolina Morace (born 1964), former footballer with over 220 club caps and 150 for Italy women
* Giuseppe Cipriani (born 1965), racing driver
* Tommaso Rocchi (born 1977), former footballer with 664 club caps
* Giovanni Paramithiotti. He was the founding chairmen and owner of Inter Milan football club.

== See also ==
* List of islands of Italy
* List of buildings and structures in Venice
* List of bridges in Venice
* List of churches in Venice
* List of car-free places
* List of painters and architects of Venice
* Outline of Italy
* Su e zo per i ponti
* Venetian blinds
* Venetic language – the ancient spoken language of the region
* Venezia Mestre Rugby FC – a rugby team
* Venice of the East
* Venice of the North
* Venice of the South
== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Bibliography ===
====Academic====
* Brown, Horatio, &quot;Venice&quot;, chapter 8 of &quot;Cambridge Modern History&quot; vol. I &quot;The Renaissance&quot; (1902)
* Brown, Horatio, &quot;Calendar of State Papers (Venetian): 1581–1591&quot;, 1895; &quot;1592–1603&quot;, 1897; &quot;1603–1607&quot;, 1900; &quot;1607–1610&quot;, 1904; &quot;1610–1613&quot;, 1905
* Brown, Horatio, &quot;Studies in the history of Venice&quot; (London, 1907)
* Chambers, D.S. (1970). &quot;The Imperial Age of Venice, 1380–1580.&quot; London: Thames &amp; Hudson.
* Contarini, Gasparo (1599). &quot;The Commonwealth and Gouernment of Venice.&quot; Lewes Lewkenor, trsl. London: &quot;Imprinted by I. Windet for E. Mattes.&quot;
* Da Canal, Martin, &quot;Les estoires de Venise&quot; (13th-century chronicle), translated by Laura Morreale. Padua, Unipress 2009.
* Drechsler, Wolfgang (2002). &quot;Venice Misappropriated.&quot; &quot;Trames&quot; 6(2), pp. 192–201.
* Garrett, Martin, &quot;Venice: a Cultural History&quot; (2006). Revised edition of &quot;Venice: a Cultural and Literary Companion&quot; (2001).
* Grubb, James S. (1986). &quot;When Myths Lose Power: Four Decades of Venetian Historiography.&quot; &quot;Journal of Modern History&quot; 58, pp. 43–94.
* Lane, Frederic Chapin. &quot;Venice: Maritime Republic&quot; (1973) ()
* Laven, Mary, &quot;Virgins of Venice: Enclosed Lives and Broken Vows in the Renaissance Convent (2002).
* Madden, Thomas F. &quot;Enrico Dandolo and the Rise of Venice&quot; Johns Hopkins University Press.
* Martin, John Jeffries and Dennis Romano (eds). &quot;Venice Reconsidered. The History and Civilization of an Italian City-State, 1297–1797.&quot; (2002) Johns Hopkins University Press.
* Muir, Edward (1981). &quot;Civic Ritual in Renaissance Venice.&quot; Princeton UP.
* Rösch, Gerhard (2000). &quot;Venedig. Geschichte einer Seerepublik.&quot; Stuttgart: Kohlhammer Verlag.


====Popular====

* Ackroyd, Peter, &quot;Venice: Pure City&quot;. London, Chatto &amp; Windus, 2009. 
* Brown, Horatio, &quot;Life on the Lagoons&quot;, 1884; revised ed. 1894; further eds. 1900, 1904, 1909.
* Cole, Toby. &quot;Venice: A Portable Reader&quot;, Lawrence Hill, 1979. (hardcover); (softcover).
* Keates, Jonathan, &quot;The Siege of Venice&quot;. London: Chatto &amp; Windus, 2005. 
* Madden, Thomas, &quot;Venice: A New History&quot;. New York: Viking, 2012. .
* McCarthy, Mary, &quot;Venice Observed&quot; (1956), Harvest/HBJ, 1963 edition: 
* Morris, Jan (1993), &quot;Venice&quot;. 3rd revised edition. Faber &amp; Faber, .
* Ruskin, John (1853), &quot;The Stones of Venice&quot;. Abridged edition Links, JG (Ed), Penguin Books, 2001. .
* di Robilant, Andrea (2004). &quot;A Venetian Affair&quot;. HarperCollins. 
* Sethre, Janet, &quot;The Souls of Venice&quot; McFarland &amp; Company, Inc., 2003. (softcover).
== External links ==

* Official Site of the City of Venice
* Fondazione Musei Civici di Venezia (Italian/English)
* Venezia Autentica, a website about Life and travel in Venice (English)
* How Venice was built</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="0" end="6" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="52" end="57" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243" start="81" end="87" title="Veneto" label="Veneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q16110" start="88" end="94" title="Regions of Italy" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q76925" start="273" end="288" title="Venetian Lagoon" label="Venetian Lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q643" start="338" end="340" title="Po River" label="Po"/>
<link wikidata="Q213462" start="349" end="354" title="Piave River" label="Piave"/>
<link wikidata="Q214551" start="388" end="394" title="Brenta (river)" label="Brenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566" start="403" end="407" title="Sile (river)" label="Sile"/>
<link wikidata="Q747074" start="480" end="486" title="Comune" label="Comune"/>
<link wikidata="Q617" start="684" end="689" title="Padua, Italy" label="Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q5475" start="694" end="701" title="Treviso, Italy" label="Treviso"/>
<link wikidata="Q17047807" start="729" end="767" title="Padua-Treviso-Venice Metropolitan Area" label="Padua-Treviso-Venice Metropolitan Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q220379" start="910" end="916" title="Adriatic Veneti" label="Veneti"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="1018" end="1036" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="1135" end="1146" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="1151" end="1162" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q818978" start="1170" end="1182" title="staging area" label="staging area"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="1191" end="1199" title="Crusades" label="Crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q165425" start="1208" end="1225" title="Battle of Lepanto (1571)" label="Battle of Lepanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778604" start="1298" end="1303" title="spice trade" label="spice"/>
<link wikidata="Q133442" start="1371" end="1381" title="city-state" label="city-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q34763" start="1704" end="1713" title="peninsula" label="peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262248" start="1810" end="1826" title="Venetian Arsenal" label="Venetian Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="2011" end="2019" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="2072" end="2088" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="2189" end="2197" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="2413" end="2439" title="UNESCO World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404472" start="2552" end="2571" title="Italian Renaissance" label="Italian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q8361" start="2682" end="2695" title="Baroque music" label="Baroque music"/>
<link wikidata="Q174606" start="2706" end="2721" title="Tomaso Albinoni" label="Tomaso Albinoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340" start="2726" end="2741" title="Antonio Vivaldi" label="Antonio Vivaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="2945" end="2954" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="3019" end="3037" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="3676" end="3688" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q617" start="3707" end="3712" title="Padua" label="Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q53216" start="3715" end="3723" title="Aquileia" label="Aquileia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5475" start="3736" end="3743" title="Treviso" label="Treviso"/>
<link wikidata="Q441542" start="3746" end="3753" title="Altinum" label="Altinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q47143" start="3777" end="3788" title="Portogruaro" label="Portogruaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="3873" end="3881" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q45813" start="3886" end="3889" title="Huns" label="Hun"/>
<link wikidata="Q202691" start="4058" end="4062" title="Doge (title)" label="doge"/>
<link wikidata="Q922677" start="4403" end="4414" title="San Giacomo di Rialto" label="San Giacomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190585" start="4431" end="4437" title="Rialto" label="Rialto"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087807" start="4553" end="4578" title="Feast of the Annunciation" label="Feast of the Annunciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q308885" start="4620" end="4625" title="Quadi" label="Quadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q209851" start="4630" end="4640" title="Marcomanni" label="Marcomanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q48087" start="4696" end="4702" title="Oderzo" label="Oderzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q913582" start="4717" end="4728" title="Roman Italy" label="Roman Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="4779" end="4788" title="Visigoths" label="Visigoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q36724" start="4834" end="4840" title="Attila" label="Attila"/>
<link wikidata="Q130900" start="4934" end="4942" title="Lombards" label="Lombards"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="4960" end="4980" title="Eastern Roman Empire" label="Eastern Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q694740" start="5105" end="5125" title="Exarchate of Ravenna" label="Exarchate of Ravenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4144428" start="5194" end="5200" title="Exarch" label="Exarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="5230" end="5244" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886727" start="5406" end="5415" title="Malamocco" label="Malamocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q52441" start="5420" end="5428" title="Torcello" label="Torcello"/>
<link wikidata="Q858316" start="5609" end="5623" title="doge of Venice" label="doge of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q336023" start="5625" end="5645" title="Paolo Lucio Anafesto" label="Paolo Lucio Anafesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q24885526" start="5707" end="5723" title="Chronicon Venetum et Gradense" label="oldest chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3768443" start="5727" end="5749" title="John, deacon of Venice" label="John, deacon of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516582" start="5819" end="5830" title="Paul (exarch)" label="Exarch Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q44343" start="5859" end="5878" title="Marcello Tegalliano" label="Marcello Tegalliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q209122" start="5902" end="5918" title="magister militum" label="magister militum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018769" start="6072" end="6096" title="iconoclastic controversy" label="iconoclastic controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q103321" start="6115" end="6130" title="Pope Gregory II" label="Pope Gregory II"/>
<link wikidata="Q31755" start="6207" end="6214" title="Leo III the Isaurian" label="Leo III"/>
<link wikidata="Q374599" start="6449" end="6454" title="Orso Ipato" label="Ursus"/>
<link wikidata="Q32724" start="6519" end="6537" title="Venetian language" label="Venetian dialectal"/>
<link wikidata="Q829120" start="6568" end="6571" title="dux" label="dux"/>
<link wikidata="Q166886" start="6637" end="6641" title="duke" label="duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q714189" start="6696" end="6700" title="duce" label="duce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255956" start="7069" end="7076" title="hypatus" label="hypatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489757" start="7109" end="7115" title="consul" label="consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q130900" start="7137" end="7144" title="Lombards" label="Lombard"/>
<link wikidata="Q312504" start="7150" end="7157" title="Aistulf" label="Aistulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q694740" start="7180" end="7200" title="Exarchate of Ravenna" label="Exarchate of Ravenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="7574" end="7583" title="bishop" label="episcopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121385" start="7601" end="7623" title="San Pietro di Castello" label="San Pietro di Castello"/>
<link wikidata="Q126424" start="7663" end="7681" title="Agnello Particiaco" label="Agnello Particiaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q139467" start="7802" end="7812" title="Pope Zachary" label="St Zachary"/>
<link wikidata="Q189883" start="7827" end="7839" title="Doge&amp;#x27;s Palace, Venice" label="ducal palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q172988" start="7844" end="7864" title="basilica of St. Mark" label="basilica of St. Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="7983" end="7994" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q22675614" start="8086" end="8096" title="Pentapolis" label="Pentapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q299645" start="8150" end="8164" title="Pepin of Italy" label="Pepin of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q208754" start="8610" end="8620" title="Nikephoros I Logothetes" label="Nicephorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="8806" end="8816" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q31966" start="8845" end="8867" title="St Mark the Evangelist" label="St Mark the Evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q472773" start="8959" end="8976" title="Symbols of the Evangelists" label="emblem of St Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q288587" start="9267" end="9280" title="thalassocracy" label="thalassocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q62825" start="9301" end="9320" title="Maritime republics" label="repubblica marinara"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="9405" end="9410" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365493" start="9412" end="9416" title="Republic of Pisa" label="Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q686312" start="9422" end="9428" title="Duchy of Amalfi" label="Amalfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q208169" start="9456" end="9462" title="Republic of Ragusa" label="Ragusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627613" start="9464" end="9470" title="Republic of Ancona" label="Ancona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457072" start="9472" end="9477" title="Duchy of Gaeta" label="Gaeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3933247" start="9482" end="9486" title="Republic of Noli" label="Noli"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="9647" end="9662" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatian coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="9777" end="9793" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="9798" end="9802" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="9861" end="9879" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="9996" end="10002" title="pirate" label="pirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q639912" start="10110" end="10116" title="Istria" label="Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414" start="10168" end="10178" title="Lake Garda" label="Lake Garda"/>
<link wikidata="Q63109" start="10198" end="10208" title="Adda River" label="Adda River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="10342" end="10348" title="Alps" label="Alpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="10570" end="10576" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="10588" end="10593" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="10599" end="10605" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q48214" start="10667" end="10676" title="Near East" label="Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q628" start="10823" end="10830" title="Bergamo" label="Bergamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221" start="10832" end="10839" title="Brescia" label="Brescia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028" start="10845" end="10851" title="Verona, Italy" label="Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q198721" start="11081" end="11092" title="golden bull" label="golden bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q23725" start="11323" end="11332" title="Byzantium" label="Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q51656" start="11417" end="11431" title="Fourth Crusade" label="Fourth Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="11510" end="11524" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q178897" start="11546" end="11558" title="Latin Empire" label="Latin Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994701" start="11675" end="11693" title="Horses of Saint Mark" label="gilt bronze horses"/>
<link wikidata="Q387548" start="11703" end="11731" title="Hippodrome of Constantinople" label="Hippodrome of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q172988" start="11809" end="11832" title="St Mark&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St Mark&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q777981" start="12137" end="12161" title="Duchy of the Archipelago" label="Duchy of the Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="12292" end="12300" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q379817" start="12302" end="12308" title="Theme (Byzantine administrative unit)" label="themes"/>
<link wikidata="Q200032" start="12316" end="12325" title="Battle of Manzikert" label="Manzikert"/>
<link wikidata="Q34503" start="12503" end="12530" title="Sultan Mehmet The Conqueror" label="Sultan Mehmet The Conqueror"/>
<link wikidata="Q160077" start="12545" end="12552" title="Fall of Constantinople" label="in 1453"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="12571" end="12583" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="12656" end="12667" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q583190" start="13044" end="13057" title="Great Council of Venice" label="Great Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q547077" start="13282" end="13296" title="Council of Ten" label="Council of Ten"/>
<link wikidata="Q858316" start="13448" end="13452" title="doges of Venice" label="doge"/>
<link wikidata="Q79751" start="13604" end="13616" title="oligarchy" label="oligarchical"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="13650" end="13658" title="monastery" label="monastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056721" start="14256" end="14264" title="chivalry" label="chivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q26643" start="14598" end="14606" title="commerce" label="commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="15024" end="15043" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="15129" end="15135" title="papacy" label="papacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8005308" start="15190" end="15204" title="William Bedell" label="William Bedell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6291244" start="15267" end="15276" title="Interdict (Catholic canon law)" label="interdict"/>
<link wikidata="Q132711" start="15395" end="15406" title="Pope Paul V" label="Pope Paul V"/>
<link wikidata="Q144334" start="15435" end="15449" title="printing press" label="printing press"/>
<link wikidata="Q213220" start="15617" end="15631" title="Aldus Manutius" label="Aldus Manutius"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="15903" end="15917" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426040" start="15925" end="15958" title="Siege of Thessalonica (1422–1430)" label="Siege of Thessalonica (1422–1430)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="15989" end="16003" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q160077" start="16051" end="16073" title="Fall of Constantinople" label="Fall of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q34503" start="16075" end="16091" title="Sultan Mehmed II" label="Sultan Mehmed II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420791" start="16126" end="16147" title="Ottoman-Venetian wars" label="Ottoman-Venetian wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328" start="16212" end="16225" title="Vasco da Gama" label="Vasco da Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="16272" end="16277" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q4092" start="16289" end="16306" title="Cape of Good Hope" label="Cape of Good Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003749" start="16359" end="16372" title="oared vessels" label="oared vessels"/>
<link wikidata="Q133156" start="16480" end="16488" title="colonies" label="colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="16495" end="16506" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q133780" start="16593" end="16599" title="plague (disease)" label="plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307987" start="16640" end="16665" title="Italian plague of 1629–31" label="Italian plague of 1629–31"/>
<link wikidata="Q178803" start="16766" end="16785" title="international trade" label="international trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="16815" end="16826" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q182034" start="17002" end="17010" title="hegemony" label="hegemony"/>
<link wikidata="Q273348" start="17029" end="17041" title="Italian Wars" label="Italian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="17287" end="17305" title="Napoleon Bonaparte" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q18817" start="17349" end="17375" title="War of the First Coalition" label="War of the First Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q649030" start="17489" end="17495" title="Venetian Ghetto" label="Ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q206752" start="17640" end="17662" title="Treaty of Campo Formio" label="Treaty of Campo Formio"/>
<link wikidata="Q154102" start="17779" end="17798" title="Treaty of Pressburg (1805)" label="Treaty of Pressburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q223936" start="17826" end="17858" title="Kingdom of Italy (Napoleonic)" label="Napoleon&amp;#x27;s Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q209857" start="17970" end="17997" title="Kingdom of Lombardy–Venetia" label="Kingdom of Lombardy–Venetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037576" start="18043" end="18060" title="Repubblica di San Marco" label="Venetian republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163753" start="18067" end="18080" title="Daniele Manin" label="Daniele Manin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248722" start="18131" end="18164" title="Third Italian War of Independence" label="Third Italian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="18242" end="18258" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="18298" end="18305" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q3415" start="18316" end="18322" title="Ancona" label="Ancona"/>
<link wikidata="Q899" start="18482" end="18492" title="Suez Canal" label="Suez Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="18634" end="18646" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3883939" start="18737" end="18753" title="Operation Bowler" label="Operation Bowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="18768" end="18783" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081291" start="19065" end="19082" title="Oil Campaign chronology of World War II" label="repeatedly bombed"/>
<link wikidata="Q275482" start="19113" end="19120" title="British military" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797825" start="19125" end="19136" title="2nd New Zealand Division" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q270202" start="19151" end="19170" title="Eighth Army (United Kingdom)" label="British Eighth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q334990" start="19197" end="19205" title="Bernard Freyberg" label="Freyberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="19318" end="19344" title="UNESCO World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q52423" start="19685" end="19695" title="Cannaregio" label="Cannaregio"/>
<link wikidata="Q52422" start="19707" end="19716" title="Dorsoduro" label="Dorsoduro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243" start="19864" end="19870" title="Veneto" label="Veneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="20006" end="20018" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q849953" start="20058" end="20068" title="Subsidence" label="Subsidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1873" start="20184" end="20194" title="Acqua alta" label="Acqua alta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374167" start="20505" end="20510" title="Deep foundation" label="piles"/>
<link wikidata="Q25239" start="20539" end="20544" title="alder" label="alder"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="20667" end="20671" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401767" start="20714" end="20731" title="Istrian stone" label="Istrian limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="20853" end="20857" title="tide" label="tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="20879" end="20887" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q172988" start="21182" end="21205" title="St Mark&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St Mark&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493772" start="21477" end="21482" title="Postal stationery" label="paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q177734" start="21901" end="21914" title="artesian well" label="artesian well"/>
<link wikidata="Q849953" start="22009" end="22016" title="subsidence" label="subside"/>
<link wikidata="Q208791" start="22068" end="22075" title="aquifer" label="aquifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1873" start="22254" end="22264" title="Acqua alta" label="Acqua alta"/>
<link wikidata="Q828909" start="22326" end="22330" title="quay" label="quay"/>
<link wikidata="Q11860" start="22676" end="22693" title="Silvio Berlusconi" label="Silvio Berlusconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q770350" start="22710" end="22722" title="MOSE Project" label="MOSE Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q2103880" start="22893" end="22901" title="pontoon (boat)" label="pontoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="23226" end="23233" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q838266" start="23539" end="23562" title="Fondo Ambiente Italiano" label="Fondo Ambiente Italiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q24853940" start="24264" end="24277" title="flood barrier" label="flood barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q17490240" start="24597" end="24611" title="Luigi Brugnaro" label="Luigi Brugnaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="24634" end="24648" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q3890096" start="24654" end="24662" title="Palazzo Ferro Fini" label="chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3687390" start="24670" end="24696" title="Regional Council of Veneto" label="Regional Council of Veneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q841083" start="24843" end="24857" title="sea level rise" label="sea level rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="24944" end="24959" title="Washington Post" label="Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q56707544" start="25345" end="25355" title="Henk Ovink" label="Henk Ovink"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="25385" end="25388" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="26065" end="26094" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="26135" end="26160" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q212685" start="26678" end="26694" title="High Middle Ages" label="High Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855428" start="27826" end="27838" title="Bangladeshis" label="Bangladeshis"/>
<link wikidata="Q485150" start="27853" end="27862" title="Romanians" label="Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q487796" start="27877" end="27886" title="Moldovans" label="Moldovans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501380" start="27901" end="27908" title="Chinese people" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="27925" end="27935" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="27962" end="27976" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q740783" start="28030" end="28052" title="Patriarchate of Venice" label="Patriarchate of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="28114" end="28128" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="28157" end="28165" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="28229" end="28235" title="Islam" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="28305" end="28310" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="28316" end="28324" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784082" start="28365" end="28386" title="San Giorgio dei Greci" label="San Giorgio dei Greci"/>
<link wikidata="Q866196" start="28412" end="28415" title="Episcopal see" label="see"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130654" start="28423" end="28501" title="Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of Italy and Malta" label="Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of Italy and Malta and Exarchate of Southern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q617075" start="28505" end="28519" title="Byzantine Rite" label="Byzantine-rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q211004" start="28538" end="28579" title="Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople" label="Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q3685619" start="28607" end="28623" title="History of the Jews in Venice" label="Jewish community"/>
<link wikidata="Q649030" start="28639" end="28654" title="Venetian Ghetto" label="Venetian Ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q32724" start="28794" end="28802" title="Venetian language" label="Venetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="28836" end="28847" title="William Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q206400" start="28866" end="28888" title="The Merchant of Venice" label="The Merchant of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362952" start="28939" end="28946" title="Shylock" label="Shylock"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="29021" end="29027" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q946277" start="29053" end="29067" title="Daniel Bomberg" label="Daniel Bomberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="29084" end="29096" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q153813" start="29145" end="29163" title="extermination camp" label="extermination camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362588" start="29395" end="29399" title="eruv" label="eruv"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625593" start="29796" end="29805" title="Assessor (Italy)" label="assessors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722222" start="29856" end="29861" title="Mayor of Venice" label="Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q25048178" start="29887" end="29898" title="Centre-left coalition (Italy)" label="centre-left"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243" start="30004" end="30010" title="Veneto" label="Veneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q47750" start="30096" end="30105" title="Lega Nord" label="Lega Nord"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059248" start="30114" end="30126" title="Centre-right coalition (Italy)" label="centre-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q14924303" start="30127" end="30139" title="Forza Italia (2013)" label="Forza Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17490240" start="30277" end="30291" title="Luigi Brugnaro" label="Luigi Brugnaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q719967" start="30654" end="30674" title="Constitution of Italy" label="Italian Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q747074" start="31097" end="31105" title="sestiere" label="sestieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q182916" start="31411" end="31418" title="gondola" label="gondola"/>
<link wikidata="Q102496" start="31502" end="31508" title="parish" label="parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="31551" end="31559" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q76925" start="31957" end="31972" title="Venetian Lagoon" label="Venetian Lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q125246381" start="32128" end="32143" title="house numbering" label="house numbering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574677" start="32357" end="32378" title="Economic history of Venice" label="Venice&amp;#x27;s economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="32636" end="32642" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q212946" start="32738" end="32750" title="Brenner Pass" label="Brenner Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="32854" end="32865" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="32874" end="32885" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644573" start="33113" end="33123" title="pilgrimage" label="pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q48175" start="33132" end="33141" title="Holy Land" label="Holy Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="33186" end="33191" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q13375" start="33193" end="33197" title="Pisa" label="Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="33199" end="33208" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q3415" start="33210" end="33216" title="Ancona" label="Ancona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722" start="33222" end="33231" title="Dubrovnik" label="Dubrovnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="33325" end="33332" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711781" start="33349" end="33354" title="New Julfa" label="Julfa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3951829" start="33406" end="33421" title="Sceriman family" label="Sceriman family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262248" start="33884" end="33898" title="Venice Arsenal" label="Venice Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q541405" start="34125" end="34131" title="Mestre" label="Mestre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024724" start="34136" end="34150" title="Porto Marghera" label="Porto Marghera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116707" start="34353" end="34365" title="Murano glass" label="Murano glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q52437" start="34380" end="34386" title="Murano" label="Murano"/>
<link wikidata="Q52439" start="34410" end="34416" title="Burano" label="Burano"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="34666" end="34678" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973845" start="34855" end="34874" title="National Geographic (magazine)" label="National Geographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127200" start="35323" end="35348" title="Banca Popolare di Vicenza" label="Banca Popolare di Vicenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127221" start="35353" end="35365" title="Veneto Banca" label="Veneto Banca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343118" start="35499" end="35514" title="Intesa Sanpaolo" label="Intesa Sanpaolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q24899931" start="36042" end="36053" title="overtourism" label="overtourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456416" start="36085" end="36107" title="environmental impact of tourism" label="environmental problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="36146" end="36152" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344240" start="36464" end="36483" title="sustainable tourism" label="sustainable tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682302" start="36688" end="36698" title="Grand Tour" label="Grand Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q960610" start="36879" end="36892" title="Caffè Florian" label="Caffè Florian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35191" start="36980" end="36998" title="Carnival of Venice" label="Carnival of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q205751" start="37119" end="37134" title="Venice Biennale" label="Venice Biennale"/>
<link wikidata="Q49024" start="37143" end="37163" title="Venice Film Festival" label="Venice Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q172988" start="37348" end="37371" title="St Mark&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St Mark&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q189883" start="37377" end="37395" title="Doge&amp;#x27;s Palace" label="Doge&amp;#x27;s Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q309243" start="37401" end="37412" title="Grand Canal (Venice)" label="Grand Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q217527" start="37422" end="37438" title="Piazza San Marco" label="Piazza San Marco"/>
<link wikidata="Q226221" start="37444" end="37459" title="Lido di Venezia" label="Lido di Venezia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936058" start="38426" end="38440" title="Giudecca Canal" label="Giudecca Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024724" start="39477" end="39485" title="Marghera" label="Marghera"/>
<link wikidata="Q222384" start="39650" end="39682" title="List of World Heritage in Danger" label="List of World Heritage in Danger"/>
<link wikidata="Q76925" start="40831" end="40846" title="Venetian Lagoon" label="Venetian Lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881877" start="40958" end="40967" title="MSC Opera" label="MSC Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896849" start="41012" end="41026" title="Uniworld" label="River Countess"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="41247" end="41254" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243" start="45300" end="45306" title="Veneto" label="Veneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="45789" end="45800" title="archipelago" label="archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q76925" start="45830" end="45836" title="Venetian lagoon" label="lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q801567" start="45952" end="45958" title="Venezia Santa Lucia railway station" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134699" start="45974" end="45993" title="Ponte della Libertà" label="Ponte della Libertà"/>
<link wikidata="Q369730" start="46346" end="46359" title="Auto-free zones" label="car-free area"/>
<link wikidata="Q182916" start="46528" end="46535" title="gondola" label="gondola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298339" start="46890" end="46896" title="livery" label="livery"/>
<link wikidata="Q243519" start="47005" end="47019" title="crushed velvet" label="crushed velvet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332219" start="47030" end="47041" title="Persian rug" label="Persian rug"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47431" end="47439" title="#Sestieri" label="sestieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q52435" start="47500" end="47508" title="Giudecca" label="Giudecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137651" start="47568" end="47575" title="sandolo" label="sandolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q852170" start="47670" end="47678" title="dredging" label="dredging"/>
<link wikidata="Q52501" start="48087" end="48111" title="Ponte della Costituzione" label="Ponte della Costituzione"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717404" start="48174" end="48187" title="Piazzale Roma" label="Piazzale Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q52505" start="48287" end="48302" title="Ponte di Rialto" label="Ponte di Rialto"/>
<link wikidata="Q52509" start="48308" end="48333" title="Ponte dell&amp;#x27;Accademia" label="Ponte dell&amp;#x27;Accademia"/>
<link wikidata="Q52508" start="48343" end="48361" title="Ponte degli Scalzi" label="Ponte degli Scalzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q548005" start="48389" end="48430" title="Azienda del Consorzio Trasporti Veneziano" label="Azienda del Consorzio Trasporti Veneziano"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643" start="48592" end="48600" title="waterbus" label="waterbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8406" start="48610" end="48619" title="vaporetto" label="vaporetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q25653" start="48854" end="48861" title="ferry" label="ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q246171" start="49006" end="49025" title="Venice People Mover" label="Venice People Mover"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="49055" end="49069" title="public transit" label="public transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758658" start="49088" end="49105" title="Tronchetto island" label="Tronchetto island"/>
<link wikidata="Q610148" start="49281" end="49295" title="Port of Venice" label="Port of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q226221" start="49337" end="49341" title="Lido di Venezia" label="Lido"/>
<link wikidata="Q686709" start="49346" end="49357" title="Pellestrina" label="Pellestrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q52437" start="49566" end="49572" title="Murano" label="Murano"/>
<link wikidata="Q52439" start="49574" end="49580" title="Burano" label="Burano"/>
<link wikidata="Q47995" start="49608" end="49626" title="Cavallino-Treporti" label="Cavallino-Treporti"/>
<link wikidata="Q541405" start="49698" end="49704" title="Mestre" label="Mestre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024724" start="49716" end="49724" title="Marghera" label="Marghera"/>
<link wikidata="Q961538" start="49874" end="49883" title="Translohr" label="Translohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277269" start="49884" end="49897" title="Trams in Mestre" label="tramway lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717404" start="49976" end="49989" title="Piazzale Roma" label="Piazzale Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134699" start="50033" end="50052" title="Ponte della Libertà" label="Ponte della Libertà"/>
<link wikidata="Q847141" start="50961" end="50967" title="Thello" label="Thello"/>
<link wikidata="Q83822" start="51005" end="51030" title="ÖBB" label="Austrian Federal Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q112134716" start="51033" end="51049" title="European Sleeper" label="European Sleeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="51083" end="51091" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q803" start="51116" end="51123" title="Utrecht" label="Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q801567" start="51132" end="51167" title="Venezia Santa Lucia railway station" label="Venezia Santa Lucia railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107740" start="51343" end="51372" title="Venice Simplon Orient Express" label="Venice Simplon Orient Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q520844" start="51419" end="51449" title="Venezia Mestre railway station" label="Venezia Mestre railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q908916" start="51559" end="51574" title="Grandi Stazioni" label="Grandi Stazioni"/>
<link wikidata="Q610148" start="51850" end="51864" title="Port of Venice" label="Port of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="51964" end="51977" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936058" start="52052" end="52066" title="Giudecca Canal" label="Giudecca Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q849347" start="52426" end="52458" title="Marco Polo International Airport" label="Marco Polo International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6101" start="52526" end="52536" title="Marco Polo" label="Marco Polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717404" start="52663" end="52676" title="Piazzale Roma" label="Piazzale Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="52941" end="52946" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q617" start="52948" end="52953" title="Padua" label="Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="52955" end="52962" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028" start="52964" end="52970" title="Verona" label="Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q548005" start="53002" end="53006" title="Actv" label="ACTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5475" start="53095" end="53102" title="Treviso" label="Treviso"/>
<link wikidata="Q617" start="53107" end="53112" title="Padua" label="Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q83823" start="53126" end="53145" title="Busitalia Sita Nord" label="Busitalia Sita Nord"/>
<link wikidata="Q513474" start="53154" end="53176" title="Treviso Airport" label="Venice-Treviso Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q226221" start="53404" end="53419" title="Lido di Venezia" label="Lido di Venezia"/>
<link wikidata="Q501245" start="54140" end="54152" title="Venezia F.C." label="Venezia F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q15804" start="54200" end="54207" title="Serie A" label="Serie A"/>
<link wikidata="Q588926" start="54227" end="54250" title="Stadio Pier Luigi Penzo" label="Stadio Pier Luigi Penzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118904" start="54264" end="54279" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Elena (island)" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Elena"/>
<link wikidata="Q36572" start="54367" end="54380" title="Reyer Venezia" label="Reyer Venezia"/>
<link wikidata="Q929124" start="54533" end="54552" title="Lega Basket Serie A" label="Lega Basket Serie A"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889381" start="54645" end="54673" title="Palasport Giuseppe Taliercio" label="Palasport Giuseppe Taliercio"/>
<link wikidata="Q541405" start="54687" end="54693" title="Mestre" label="Mestre"/>
<link wikidata="Q17490240" start="54695" end="54709" title="Luigi Brugnaro" label="Luigi Brugnaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546906" start="54868" end="54905" title="Ca&amp;#x27; Foscari University of Venice" label="Ca&amp;#x27; Foscari University of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905216" start="54951" end="54982" title="Venice International University" label="Venice International University"/>
<link wikidata="Q618075" start="55029" end="55040" title="San Servolo" label="San Servolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376705" start="55049" end="55123" title="European Inter-University Centre for Human Rights and Democratisation" label="EIUC-European Inter-University Centre for Human Rights and Democratisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q226221" start="55150" end="55165" title="Lido di Venezia" label="Lido di Venezia"/>
<link wikidata="Q338505" start="55225" end="55260" title="Accademia di Belle Arti di Venezia" label="&amp;quot;Accademia di Belle Arti&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q282670" start="55331" end="55358" title="Giovanni Battista Piazzetta" label="Giovanni Battista Piazzetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q945776" start="55368" end="55408" title="Conservatorio di Musica Benedetto Marcello di Venezia" label="Benedetto Marcello Conservatory of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q318968" start="55564" end="55588" title="Gian Francesco Malipiero" label="Gian Francesco Malipiero"/>
<link wikidata="Q6101" start="55876" end="55886" title="Marco Polo" label="Marco Polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q83321" start="55918" end="55934" title="Giacomo Casanova" label="Giacomo Casanova"/>
<link wikidata="Q205653" start="55983" end="55993" title="the Orient" label="the Orient"/>
<link wikidata="Q366741" start="56032" end="56051" title="Rustichello da Pisa" label="Rustichello da Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q654562" start="56069" end="56079" title="The Travels of Marco Polo" label="Il Milione"/>
<link wikidata="Q83321" start="56194" end="56210" title="Giacomo Casanova" label="Giacomo Casanova"/>
<link wikidata="Q191890" start="56495" end="56518" title="commedia dell&amp;#x27;arte" label="commedia dell&amp;#x27;arte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055609" start="56526" end="56533" title="Angelo Beolco" label="Ruzante"/>
<link wikidata="Q165534" start="56547" end="56560" title="Carlo Goldoni" label="Carlo Goldoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q263270" start="56578" end="56589" title="Carlo Gozzi" label="Carlo Gozzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q26833" start="56728" end="56735" title="Othello" label="Othello"/>
<link wikidata="Q206400" start="56752" end="56774" title="The Merchant of Venice" label="The Merchant of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q37030" start="56801" end="56812" title="Thomas Mann" label="Thomas Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q828296" start="56830" end="56845" title="Death in Venice" label="Death in Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q324944" start="56878" end="56894" title="Philippe Sollers" label="Philippe Sollers"/>
<link wikidata="Q170509" start="57031" end="57042" title="Henry James" label="Henry James"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362409" start="57056" end="57073" title="The Aspern Papers" label="The Aspern Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557588" start="57090" end="57111" title="The Wings of the Dove" label="The Wings of the Dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q107002" start="57141" end="57153" title="Evelyn Waugh" label="Evelyn Waugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6992413" start="57167" end="57187" title="Brideshead Revisited" label="Brideshead Revisited"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199" start="57198" end="57211" title="Marcel Proust" label="Marcel Proust"/>
<link wikidata="Q464928" start="57225" end="57247" title="In Search of Lost Time" label="In Search of Lost Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q57971" start="57373" end="57387" title="Cornelia Funke" label="Cornelia Funke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="57413" end="57419" title="Goethe" label="Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q455305" start="57427" end="57442" title="Italian Journey" label="Italian Journey"/>
<link wikidata="Q177692" start="57508" end="57516" title="Palladio" label="Palladio"/>
<link wikidata="Q81669" start="57585" end="57592" title="Arsenal" label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q166234" start="57696" end="57707" title="Ugo Foscolo" label="Ugo Foscolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q144880" start="57729" end="57734" title="Zakynthos" label="Zante"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242115" start="57810" end="57823" title="revolutionary" label="revolutionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="57902" end="57910" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q163366" start="57948" end="57958" title="Ezra Pound" label="Ezra Pound"/>
<link wikidata="" start="58071" end="58086" title=":commons:Category:Cimitero di San Michele (Venice)" label="cemetery island"/>
<link wikidata="Q844263" start="58090" end="58101" title="Isola di San Michele" label="San Michele"/>
<link wikidata="Q567488" start="58249" end="58261" title="Aldine Press" label="Aldine Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q213220" start="58278" end="58292" title="Aldus Manutius" label="Aldus Manutius"/>
<link wikidata="Q296272" start="58754" end="58761" title="Aretino" label="Aretino"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="58789" end="58800" title="Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q206400" start="58814" end="58832" title="Merchant of Venice" label="Merchant of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q26833" start="58852" end="58859" title="Othello" label="Othello"/>
<link wikidata="Q193857" start="58876" end="58886" title="Ben Jonson" label="Ben Jonson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189332" start="58900" end="58907" title="Volpone" label="Volpone"/>
<link wikidata="Q83321" start="58926" end="58934" title="Casanova" label="Casanova"/>
<link wikidata="Q649013" start="58959" end="58989" title="Histoire de ma vie" label="&amp;quot;History of My Life&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="58994" end="59002" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q215894" start="59016" end="59023" title="Candide" label="Candide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760518" start="59040" end="59064" title="Letitia Elizabeth Landon" label="Letitia Elizabeth Landon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095862" start="59152" end="59170" title="Clarkson Stanfield" label="Clarkson Stanfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075555" start="59242" end="59257" title="Charles Bentley (painter)" label="Charles Bentley"/>
<link wikidata="Q23434" start="59293" end="59309" title="Ernest Hemingway" label="Ernest Hemingway"/>
<link wikidata="Q330996" start="59323" end="59358" title="Across the River and into the Trees" label="Across the River and into the Trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q154756" start="59375" end="59388" title="Italo Calvino" label="Italo Calvino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219705" start="59402" end="59418" title="Invisible Cities" label="Invisible Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q184785" start="59435" end="59444" title="Anne Rice" label="Anne Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405329" start="59458" end="59471" title="Cry to Heaven" label="Cry to Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q237420" start="59488" end="59498" title="Donna Leon" label="Donna Leon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5937792" start="59533" end="59546" title="crime fiction" label="crime fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q324944" start="59636" end="59652" title="Philippe Sollers" label="Philippe Sollers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974934" start="59665" end="59682" title="Watteau in Venice" label="Watteau in Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q737442" start="59699" end="59713" title="Michael Dibdin" label="Michael Dibdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245241" start="59727" end="59738" title="Dead Lagoon" label="Dead Lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q180373" start="59826" end="59842" title="Jacqueline Carey" label="Jacqueline Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749516" start="59856" end="59877" title="Kushiel&amp;#x27;s Chosen" label="Kushiel&amp;#x27;s Chosen"/>
<link wikidata="Q603291" start="59895" end="59913" title="historical fantasy" label="historical fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q224989" start="59917" end="59934" title="alternate history" label="alternate history"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030493" start="60045" end="60057" title="John Berendt" label="John Berendt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146602" start="60113" end="60133" title="Gilbert and Sullivan" label="Gilbert and Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220650" start="60141" end="60152" title="comic opera" label="comic opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987314" start="60159" end="60173" title="The Gondoliers" label="The Gondoliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q37030" start="60189" end="60200" title="Thomas Mann" label="Thomas Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q828296" start="60223" end="60238" title="Death in Venice" label="Death in Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q630476" start="60295" end="60310" title="Death in Venice (opera)" label="eponymous opera"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60416" end="60423" title=":wikt:arsenal" label="arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60425" end="60429" title=":wikt:ciao" label="ciao"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60431" end="60437" title=":wikt:ghetto" label="ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60439" end="60446" title=":wikt:gondola" label="gondola"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60448" end="60457" title=":wikt:imbroglio" label="imbroglio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60459" end="60465" title=":wikt:lagoon" label="lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60467" end="60474" title=":wikt:lazaret" label="lazaret"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60476" end="60480" title=":wikt:lido" label="lido"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60482" end="60492" title=":wikt:Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60498" end="60505" title=":wikt:regatta" label="regatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q567488" start="60811" end="60823" title="Aldine Press" label="Aldine Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q213220" start="60827" end="60841" title="Aldus Manutius" label="Aldus Manutius"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="60890" end="60899" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q914235" start="60927" end="60952" title="Hypnerotomachia Poliphili" label="Hypnerotomachia Poliphili"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="61002" end="61013" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q82622" start="61038" end="61049" title="punctuation" label="punctuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q344098" start="61068" end="61079" title="italic type" label="italic type"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="61131" end="61142" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="61148" end="61155" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q610687" start="61233" end="61250" title="Venetian painting" label="Venetian painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="61311" end="61319" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q62825" start="61493" end="61510" title="Maritime Republics" label="Maritime Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594" start="61658" end="61678" title="Antonello da Messina" label="Antonello da Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q21491677" start="61729" end="61737" title="Van Eyck" label="Van Eyck"/>
<link wikidata="Q8459" start="61886" end="61895" title="Giorgione" label="Giorgione"/>
<link wikidata="Q47551" start="61900" end="61906" title="Titian" label="Titian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9319" start="61913" end="61923" title="Tintoretto" label="Tintoretto"/>
<link wikidata="Q9440" start="61928" end="61936" title="Paolo Veronese" label="Veronese"/>
<link wikidata="Q4259259" start="62074" end="62080" title="Canvas" label="Canvas"/>
<link wikidata="Q186202" start="62222" end="62229" title="Giovanni Battista Tiepolo" label="Tiepolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q182664" start="62261" end="62270" title="Canaletto" label="Canaletto"/>
<link wikidata="Q318769" start="62282" end="62288" title="Guardi" label="Guardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q32880" start="62690" end="62709" title="architectural style" label="architectural style"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="62746" end="62752" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7919731" start="62760" end="62788" title="Venetian Gothic architecture" label="Venetian Gothic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060585" start="62866" end="62877" title="lancet window" label="lancet arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q339340" start="62894" end="62903" title="ogee arch" label="ogee arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q47591" start="62912" end="62921" title="Byzantine architecture" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q527449" start="62926" end="62933" title="Ottoman architecture" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="63012" end="63021" title="Byzantine" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="63033" end="63047" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="63073" end="63078" title="Islamic Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q189883" start="63203" end="63221" title="Doge&amp;#x27;s Palace, Venice" label="Doge&amp;#x27;s Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q820872" start="63230" end="63249" title="Ca&amp;#x27; d&amp;#x27;Oro" label="Ca&amp;#x27; d&amp;#x27;Oro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="63289" end="63300" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="63305" end="63312" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q756807" start="63338" end="63353" title="Ca&amp;#x27; Pesaro" label="Ca&amp;#x27; Pesaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052171" start="63362" end="63380" title="Ca&amp;#x27; Rezzonico" label="Ca&amp;#x27; Rezzonico"/>
<link wikidata="Q236122" start="63419" end="63443" title="Renaissance architecture" label="Renaissance architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q840829" start="63679" end="63699" title="Baroque architecture" label="Baroque architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q122960" start="64055" end="64061" title="Rococo" label="Rococo"/>
<link wikidata="Q284865" start="64782" end="64787" title="putti" label="putti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326509" start="64846" end="64863" title="Girandole" label="girandole mirrors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116707" start="64964" end="64976" title="Murano glass" label="Murano glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q863679" start="65350" end="65361" title="Chinoiserie" label="Chinoiserie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116707" start="65476" end="65490" title="Venetian glass" label="Venetian glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q52437" start="65746" end="65752" title="Murano" label="Murano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116707" start="65817" end="65829" title="Murano glass" label="Murano glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="65920" end="65934" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q51656" start="65953" end="65967" title="Fourth Crusade" label="Fourth Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359535" start="66024" end="66032" title="Ottoman Turks" label="Ottomans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3898251" start="66631" end="66636" title="Pauly &amp;amp; C. - Compagnia Venezia Murano" label="Pauly"/>
<link wikidata="Q776496" start="66711" end="66727" title="List of oldest companies" label="oldest companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832030" start="66815" end="66826" title="trade beads" label="trade beads"/>
<link wikidata="Q189975" start="66863" end="66868" title="Inuit" label="Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="66878" end="66884" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q43743" start="66950" end="66968" title="Continental Divide" label="Continental Divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q929910" start="66976" end="66988" title="Brooks Range" label="Brooks Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q44725" start="67036" end="67046" title="Bering Sea" label="Bering Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q788" start="67054" end="67066" title="Arctic Ocean" label="Arctic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="67172" end="67178" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="67185" end="67192" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11769" start="67214" end="67227" title="Bering Strait" label="Bering Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q173412" start="67463" end="67481" title="radiocarbon dating" label="radiocarbon dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="67615" end="67635" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35191" start="67867" end="67885" title="Carnival of Venice" label="Carnival of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845365" start="67958" end="67972" title="Shrove Tuesday" label="Shrove Tuesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q35191" start="67974" end="67987" title="Venetian mask" label="Venetian mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q205751" start="68004" end="68019" title="Venice Biennale" label="Venice Biennale"/>
<link wikidata="Q928653" start="68301" end="68320" title="Festa del Redentore" label="Festa del Redentore"/>
<link wikidata="Q49024" start="68526" end="68546" title="Venice Film Festival" label="Venice Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362112" start="68609" end="68635" title="Giuseppe Volpi di Misurata" label="Giuseppe Volpi di Misurata"/>
<link wikidata="Q226221" start="68820" end="68824" title="Lido di Venezia" label="Lido"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361189" start="68864" end="68882" title="Palazzo del Cinema" label="Palazzo del Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q3679098" start="69106" end="69120" title="music of Italy" label="music of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="69155" end="69173" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q612039" start="69566" end="69581" title="Venetian School (music)" label="Venetian school"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140842" start="69610" end="69635" title="Venetian polychoral style" label="Venetian polychoral style"/>
<link wikidata="Q312615" start="69660" end="69675" title="Adrian Willaert" label="Adrian Willaert"/>
<link wikidata="Q172988" start="69691" end="69714" title="St Mark&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St Mark&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q458014" start="69763" end="69781" title="Ottaviano Petrucci" label="Ottaviano Petrucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="69961" end="69969" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q217317" start="70098" end="70104" title="Andrea Gabrieli" label="Andrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q34624" start="70109" end="70126" title="Giovanni Gabrieli" label="Giovanni Gabrieli"/>
<link wikidata="Q8361" start="70242" end="70256" title="baroque music" label="baroque period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340" start="70266" end="70281" title="Antonio Vivaldi" label="Antonio Vivaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q174606" start="70283" end="70298" title="Tomaso Albinoni" label="Tomaso Albinoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q6065392" start="70300" end="70314" title="Ippolito Ciera" label="Ippolito Ciera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388720" start="70316" end="70331" title="Giovanni Picchi" label="Giovanni Picchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q354023" start="70337" end="70356" title="Girolamo Dalla Casa" label="Girolamo Dalla Casa"/>
<link wikidata="Q223942" start="70454" end="70476" title="La Fenice" label="Orchestra della Fenice"/>
<link wikidata="Q650414" start="70478" end="70493" title="Rondò Veneziano" label="Rondò Veneziano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355266" start="70521" end="70545" title="Venice Baroque Orchestra" label="Venice Baroque Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q185658" start="70861" end="70895" title="Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade" label="Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q151904" start="70912" end="70925" title="Casino Royale (2006 film)" label="Casino Royale"/>
<link wikidata="Q763781" start="70937" end="70948" title="Battle Tendency" label="second part"/>
<link wikidata="Q696918" start="70984" end="71013" title="JoJo&amp;#x27;s Bizarre Adventure" label="JoJo&amp;#x27;s Bizarre Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="" start="71045" end="71071" title="Sly 3: Honor Among Thieves" label="Sly 3: Honor Among Thieves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090814" start="71100" end="71113" title="Fulvio Roiter" label="Fulvio Roiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6695989" start="71305" end="71316" title="Luca Zordan" label="Luca Zordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q131607" start="71535" end="71542" title="polenta" label="polenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117173" start="71721" end="71734" title="Sarde in saor" label="sarde in saór"/>
<link wikidata="Q63228690" start="71803" end="71819" title="Baccalà mantecato" label="bacalà mantecato"/>
<link wikidata="Q213725" start="71855" end="71864" title="stockfish" label="stockfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119343" start="72142" end="72161" title="Cicchetti" label="&amp;quot;cichéti&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069954" start="72268" end="72276" title="prosecco" label="prosecco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633075" start="72397" end="72404" title="baicoli" label="baìcoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038537" start="72611" end="72625" title="butter biscuit" label="butter biscuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q652695" start="72631" end="72641" title="shortbread" label="shortbread"/>
<link wikidata="Q35056" start="72766" end="72777" title="angel wings" label="angel wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q131582" start="73031" end="73039" title="tiramisu" label="tiramisù"/>
<link wikidata="Q5475" start="73086" end="73093" title="Treviso" label="Treviso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243" start="73130" end="73136" title="Veneto" label="Veneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q760113" start="73413" end="73426" title="sumptuary law" label="sumptuary law"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="73764" end="73769" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="73771" end="73779" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028" start="73809" end="73815" title="Verona" label="Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="73817" end="73822" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537" start="73824" end="73831" title="Vicenza" label="Vicenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="73833" end="73839" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="73845" end="73850" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3938548" start="73852" end="73871" title="Roberta di Camerino" label="Roberta di Camerino"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859789" start="73890" end="73905" title="Italian fashion" label="Italian fashion"/>
<link wikidata="Q243519" start="74056" end="74062" title="velvet" label="velvet"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="74138" end="74145" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722" start="74155" end="74164" title="Dubrovnik" label="Dubrovnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="74176" end="74184" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q8131" start="74195" end="74204" title="Palembang" label="Palembang"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="74218" end="74234" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="74245" end="74253" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q42622" start="74280" end="74286" title="Suzhou" label="Suzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770" start="74296" end="74303" title="Tallinn" label="Tallinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953" start="74315" end="74322" title="Yerevan" label="Yerevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874" start="74334" end="74339" title="Odesa" label="Odesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q182025" start="74351" end="74358" title="Aksaray" label="Aksaray"/>
<link wikidata="Q240141" start="74724" end="74737" title="Regulation (European Union)" label="EC Regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377654" start="74773" end="74808" title="European economic interest grouping" label="European Economic Interest Grouping"/>
<link wikidata="Q789842" start="75069" end="75096" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Italy)" label="Ministry of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843" start="75257" end="75263" title="Lübeck" label="Lübeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="75282" end="75291" title="Nuremberg" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q170322" start="75310" end="75317" title="Qingdao" label="Qingdao"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="75370" end="75382" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="75400" end="75405" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75476" end="75485" title=":wikt:Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q773853" start="75625" end="75644" title="Venice, Los Angeles" label="Venice, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7919961" start="75669" end="75684" title="Venice, Alberta" label="Venice, Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q57325" start="75698" end="75713" title="Venice, Florida" label="Venice, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q607094" start="75741" end="75757" title="Venice, New York" label="Venice, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q962040" start="75760" end="75777" title="Venice, Louisiana" label="Venice, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916164" start="75780" end="75801" title="Little Venice, London" label="Little Venice, London"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75804" end="75828" title="Venise-en-Québec, Québec" label="Venise-en-Québec, Québec"/>
<link wikidata="Q217317" start="75910" end="75925" title="Andrea Gabrieli" label="Andrea Gabrieli"/>
<link wikidata="Q172988" start="75968" end="75991" title="St Mark&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St Mark&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q34624" start="75994" end="76011" title="Giovanni Gabrieli" label="Giovanni Gabrieli"/>
<link wikidata="Q53068" start="76081" end="76099" title="Claudio Monteverdi" label="Claudio Monteverdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q108062" start="76172" end="76189" title="Francesco Cavalli" label="Francesco Cavalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q8361" start="76205" end="76212" title="baroque music" label="baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q174606" start="76224" end="76239" title="Tomaso Albinoni" label="Tomaso Albinoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340" start="76274" end="76289" title="Antonio Vivaldi" label="Antonio Vivaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q982080" start="76347" end="76366" title="Domenico Montagnana" label="Domenico Montagnana"/>
<link wikidata="Q762707" start="76398" end="76405" title="luthier" label="luthier"/>
<link wikidata="Q8355" start="76419" end="76425" title="violin" label="violin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8371" start="76430" end="76435" title="cello" label="cello"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401276" start="76439" end="76454" title="Pietro Guarneri" label="Pietro Guarneri"/>
<link wikidata="Q268166" start="76531" end="76547" title="Lorenzo Da Ponte" label="Lorenzo Da Ponte"/>
<link wikidata="Q254" start="76652" end="76675" title="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart" label="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q504490" start="76679" end="76698" title="Domenico Dragonetti" label="Domenico Dragonetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q57275" start="76750" end="76770" title="Ermanno Wolf-Ferrari" label="Ermanno Wolf-Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q323217" start="76826" end="76842" title="Virgilio Ranzato" label="Virgilio Ranzato"/>
<link wikidata="Q351383" start="76889" end="76902" title="Bruno Maderna" label="Bruno Maderna"/>
<link wikidata="Q160451" start="76971" end="76981" title="Luigi Nono (composer)" label="Luigi Nono"/>
<link wikidata="Q316903" start="77053" end="77070" title="Giuseppe Sinopoli" label="Giuseppe Sinopoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097977" start="77109" end="77126" title="Claudio Ambrosini" label="Claudio Ambrosini"/>
<link wikidata="Q130336369" start="77165" end="77179" title="Giovanni Gallo (choreographer)" label="Giovanni Gallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17169" start="77251" end="77267" title="Giovanni Bellini" label="Giovanni Bellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q5581" start="77337" end="77354" title="Vittore Carpaccio" label="Vittore Carpaccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q610687" start="77394" end="77409" title="Venetian painting" label="Venetian school"/>
<link wikidata="Q310973" start="77412" end="77425" title="Lorenzo Lotto" label="Lorenzo Lotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q285423" start="77500" end="77521" title="Sebastiano del Piombo" label="Sebastiano del Piombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474884" start="77533" end="77549" title="High Renaissance" label="High Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q131808" start="77568" end="77577" title="Mannerism" label="Mannerist"/>
<link wikidata="Q47551" start="77580" end="77586" title="Titian" label="Titian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404472" start="77635" end="77654" title="Italian Renaissance" label="Italian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q9319" start="77657" end="77667" title="Tintoretto" label="Tintoretto"/>
<link wikidata="Q4850376" start="77729" end="77751" title="Baldassare d&amp;#x27;Anna" label="Baldassare d&amp;#x27;Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="77789" end="77800" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3341172" start="77810" end="77825" title="Niccolò Cassana" label="Niccolò Cassana"/>
<link wikidata="Q237726" start="77862" end="77878" title="Rosalba Carriera" label="Rosalba Carriera"/>
<link wikidata="Q186202" start="77937" end="77962" title="Giovanni Battista Tiepolo" label="Giovanni Battista Tiepolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q122960" start="78018" end="78024" title="Rococo" label="Rococo"/>
<link wikidata="Q182664" start="78051" end="78060" title="Canaletto" label="Canaletto"/>
<link wikidata="Q166030" start="78117" end="78123" title="veduta" label="vedute"/>
<link wikidata="Q447058" start="78142" end="78155" title="Pietro Longhi" label="Pietro Longhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q214127" start="78191" end="78196" title="Genre painting" label="genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q470405" start="78214" end="78232" title="Giuseppe Santomaso" label="Giuseppe Santomaso"/>
<link wikidata="Q664257" start="78264" end="78277" title="Emilio Vedova" label="Emilio Vedova"/>
<link wikidata="Q6699003" start="78330" end="78347" title="Ludovico de Luigi" label="Ludovico de Luigi"/>
<link wikidata="Q234816" start="78409" end="78427" title="Christine de Pizan" label="Christine de Pizan"/>
<link wikidata="Q160349" start="78470" end="78490" title="Charles VI of France" label="Charles VI of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q213220" start="78493" end="78507" title="Aldus Manutius" label="Aldus Manutius"/>
<link wikidata="Q567488" start="78558" end="78570" title="Aldine Press" label="Aldine Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q379941" start="78574" end="78594" title="Jean-Antoine de Baïf" label="Jean-Antoine de Baïf"/>
<link wikidata="Q528648" start="78634" end="78644" title="La Pléiade" label="La Pléiade"/>
<link wikidata="Q257493" start="78647" end="78662" title="Veronica Franco" label="Veronica Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349158" start="78720" end="78731" title="Paolo Sarpi" label="Paolo Sarpi"/>
<link wikidata="Q37621" start="78862" end="78875" title="Thomas Hobbes" label="Thomas Hobbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q161841" start="78877" end="78890" title="Edward Gibbon" label="Edward Gibbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="78924" end="78937" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1652176" start="78941" end="78952" title="Leon Modena" label="Leon Modena"/>
<link wikidata="Q649030" start="79007" end="79022" title="Venetian Ghetto" label="Venetian Ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q165534" start="79025" end="79038" title="Carlo Goldoni" label="Carlo Goldoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q263270" start="79113" end="79124" title="Carlo Gozzi" label="Carlo Gozzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q191890" start="79171" end="79194" title="commedia dell&amp;#x27;arte" label="commedia dell&amp;#x27;arte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3723210" start="79203" end="79227" title="Elisabetta Caminèr Turra" label="Elisabetta Caminèr Turra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289140" start="79282" end="79297" title="Frederick Rolfe" label="Frederick Rolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q205688" start="79435" end="79449" title="Enrico Dandolo" label="Enrico Dandolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q858316" start="79461" end="79475" title="Doge of Venice" label="Doge of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750892" start="79531" end="79553" title="Sack of Constantinople" label="Sack of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q51656" start="79565" end="79579" title="Fourth Crusade" label="Fourth Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q167561" start="79583" end="79597" title="Pope Eugene IV" label="Pope Eugene IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q227694" start="79638" end="79654" title="Pope Gregory XII" label="Pope Gregory XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q102605" start="79657" end="79669" title="Pope Paul II" label="Pope Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q101437" start="79713" end="79725" title="Pope Pius II" label="Pope Pius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q345506" start="79729" end="79742" title="Andrea Gritti" label="Andrea Gritti"/>
<link wikidata="Q334188" start="79806" end="79818" title="Pietro Bembo" label="Pietro Bembo"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="79869" end="79877" title="Catholic Cardinal" label="cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q729088" start="79880" end="79897" title="Sebastiano Venier" label="Sebastiano Venier"/>
<link wikidata="Q941366" start="79952" end="79974" title="Marco Antonio Bragadin" label="Marco Antonio Bragadin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="80017" end="80022" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q193190" start="80069" end="80078" title="Famagusta" label="Famagusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q466851" start="80081" end="80112" title="Elena Lucrezia Cornaro Piscopia" label="Elena Lucrezia Cornaro Piscopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q318303" start="80187" end="80201" title="Jacopo Riccati" label="Jacopo Riccati"/>
<link wikidata="Q851503" start="80254" end="80270" title="Riccati equation" label="Riccati equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q133121" start="80274" end="80291" title="Pope Clement XIII" label="Pope Clement XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504610" start="80339" end="80361" title="Vincenzo Dandolo" label="Count Vincenzo Dandolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="80417" end="80434" title="Enlightenment Era" label="Enlightenment Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163753" start="80437" end="80450" title="Daniele Manin" label="Daniele Manin"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="80515" end="80527" title="Risorgimento" label="Risorgimento"/>
<link wikidata="Q238091" start="80546" end="80560" title="Nurbanu Sultan" label="Nurbanu Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q59057" start="80574" end="80587" title="Haseki sultan" label="Haseki sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q754089" start="80596" end="80609" title="Valide sultan" label="Valide sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="80617" end="80631" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q729088" start="80672" end="80689" title="Sebastiano Venier" label="Sebastiano Venier"/>
<link wikidata="Q858316" start="80691" end="80705" title="Doge of Venice" label="Doge of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6101" start="80728" end="80738" title="Marco Polo" label="Marco Polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q116967296" start="80761" end="80769" title="exploration" label="explorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="80813" end="80822" title="Silk Road" label="Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q348340" start="80834" end="80849" title="Sebastian Cabot (explorer)" label="Sebastian Cabot"/>
<link wikidata="Q176649" start="80861" end="80869" title="List of explorers" label="explorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3903778" start="80872" end="80893" title="Pietro Cesare Alberti" label="Pietro Cesare Alberti"/>
<link wikidata="Q83321" start="80961" end="80977" title="Giacomo Casanova" label="Giacomo Casanova"/>
<link wikidata="Q158584" start="80992" end="80995" title="Duchcov" label="Dux"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="80997" end="81004" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q261290" start="81041" end="81050" title="womanizing" label="womanizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q182046" start="81073" end="81094" title="Leon Battista Alberti" label="Leon Battista Alberti"/>
<link wikidata="Q316297" start="81200" end="81219" title="Baldassare Longhena" label="Baldassare Longhena"/>
<link wikidata="Q840829" start="81245" end="81265" title="Baroque architecture" label="Baroque architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q495190" start="81268" end="81281" title="Andrea Tirali" label="Andrea Tirali"/>
<link wikidata="Q217527" start="81336" end="81352" title="Piazza San Marco" label="Piazza San Marco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766707" start="81355" end="81379" title="Giovanni Battista Meduna" label="Giovanni Battista Meduna"/>
<link wikidata="Q172988" start="81452" end="81475" title="St Mark&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St Mark&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q223942" start="81484" end="81505" title="Teatro La Fenice" label="Gran Teatro La Fenice"/>
<link wikidata="Q51137" start="81522" end="81534" title="Carlo Scarpa" label="Carlo Scarpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q95409403" start="81628" end="81646" title="Marietta Zanfretta" label="Marietta Zanfretta"/>
<link wikidata="Q504704" start="81719" end="81732" title="Romano Scarpa" label="Romano Scarpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5479231" start="81789" end="81806" title="Francesco Borgato" label="Francesco Borgato"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630493" start="81872" end="81885" title="Ercole Olgeni" label="Ercole Olgeni"/>
<link wikidata="Q8128" start="81944" end="81948" title="1920 Summer Olympics" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q8132" start="81955" end="81975" title="1924 Summer Olympics" label="1924 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456419" start="81978" end="81991" title="Erminio Dones" label="Erminio Dones"/>
<link wikidata="Q284407" start="82064" end="82079" title="Dominic DeNucci" label="Dominic DeNucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q3617240" start="82134" end="82147" title="Angelo Spanio" label="Angelo Spanio"/>
<link wikidata="Q183564" start="82206" end="82218" title="Ivano Bordon" label="Ivano Bordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q676899" start="82285" end="82294" title="Italy national football team" label="for Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q938178" start="82297" end="82313" title="Roberto Ravaglia" label="Roberto Ravaglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110640" start="82356" end="82371" title="ROAL Motorsport" label="ROAL Motorsport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4716427" start="82374" end="82391" title="Alessandro Santin" label="Alessandro Santin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1911689" start="82421" end="82431" title="Mauro Numa" label="Mauro Numa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8456" start="82478" end="82498" title="1984 Summer Olympics" label="1984 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q493492" start="82501" end="82515" title="Andrea Borella" label="Andrea Borella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644740" start="82587" end="82602" title="Andrea Cipressa" label="Andrea Cipressa"/>
<link wikidata="Q454570" start="82674" end="82690" title="Dorina Vaccaroni" label="Dorina Vaccaroni"/>
<link wikidata="Q8470" start="82758" end="82762" title="1988 Summer Olympics" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q8488" start="82769" end="82789" title="1992 Summer Olympics" label="1992 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094292" start="82792" end="82806" title="Daniele Scarpa" label="Daniele Scarpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8531" start="82868" end="82888" title="1996 Summer Olympics" label="1996 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q460330" start="82891" end="82906" title="Carolina Morace" label="Carolina Morace"/>
<link wikidata="Q775805" start="82970" end="82985" title="Italy women&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="for Italy women"/>
<link wikidata="Q677614" start="82988" end="83005" title="Giuseppe Cipriani (racing driver)" label="Giuseppe Cipriani"/>
<link wikidata="Q75580" start="83035" end="83049" title="Tommaso Rocchi" label="Tommaso Rocchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3767888" start="83102" end="83124" title="Giovanni Paramithiotti" label="Giovanni Paramithiotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q631" start="83168" end="83179" title="Inter Milan" label="Inter Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422116" start="83213" end="83237" title="List of islands of Italy" label="List of islands of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11984373" start="83240" end="83282" title="List of buildings and structures in Venice" label="List of buildings and structures in Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431752" start="83285" end="83310" title="List of bridges in Venice" label="List of bridges in Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1841465" start="83313" end="83339" title="List of churches in Venice" label="List of churches in Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608810" start="83342" end="83365" title="List of car-free places" label="List of car-free places"/>
<link wikidata="Q3426422" start="83368" end="83409" title="List of painters and architects of Venice" label="List of painters and architects of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112307" start="83412" end="83428" title="Outline of Italy" label="Outline of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116326" start="83431" end="83450" title="Su e zo per i ponti" label="Su e zo per i ponti"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="83453" end="83468" title="Window blind#Venetian" label="Venetian blinds"/>
<link wikidata="Q36871" start="83471" end="83487" title="Venetic language" label="Venetic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274476" start="83534" end="83557" title="Venezia Mestre Rugby FC" label="Venezia Mestre Rugby FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633505" start="83575" end="83593" title="Venice of the East" label="Venice of the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471148" start="83596" end="83615" title="Venice of the North" label="Venice of the North"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493703" start="83618" end="83637" title="Venice of the South" label="Venice of the South"/>
<link wikidata="Q3786754" start="83707" end="83721" title="Horatio Brown" label="Brown, Horatio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721063" start="83762" end="83786" title="Cambridge Modern History" label="Cambridge Modern History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645059" start="85356" end="85386" title="Johns Hopkins University Press" label="Johns Hopkins University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778642" start="85560" end="85577" title="Kohlhammer Verlag" label="Kohlhammer Verlag"/>
<link wikidata="Q319169" start="85600" end="85614" title="Ackroyd, Peter" label="Ackroyd, Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3786754" start="85685" end="85699" title="Horatio Brown" label="Brown, Horatio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545285" start="85707" end="85726" title="Life on the Lagoons" label="Life on the Lagoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703210" start="85891" end="85907" title="Jonathan Keates" label="Keates, Jonathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q367506" start="85980" end="85994" title="Thomas F. Madden" label="Madden, Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q268147" start="86059" end="86073" title="Mary McCarthy (author)" label="McCarthy, Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395844" start="86141" end="86152" title="Jan Morris" label="Morris, Jan"/>
<link wikidata="Q124096766" start="86167" end="86173" title="Venice (Morris book)" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q179126" start="86225" end="86244" title="John Ruskin" label="Ruskin, John (1853)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766650" start="86252" end="86272" title="The Stones of Venice (book)" label="The Stones of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652504" start="86338" end="86357" title="Andrea di Robilant" label="di Robilant, Andrea"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="32617" wikidata="Q2538109" url="?curid=32617" title="Victoria Bitter">
<text>Victoria Bitter (VB) is a lager produced by Carlton &amp; United Breweries, a subsidiary of Asahi, in Melbourne, Victoria. It was first brewed by Thomas Aitken at Victoria Brewery in 1854 and is one of the best selling beers in Australia.

==History==
The origins of Victoria Bitter (VB) date back to the Victoria Brewery founder and head brewer Thomas Aitken, who developed the recipe in 1854. Like most Australian lagers, VB is made using a wortstream brewing process, and uses a portion of cane sugar to thin out the body of the beer.
It is available in 750 mL bottles (commonly referred to as a &quot;Longneck&quot;, &quot;Longie&quot;, &quot;Seven-Fifty&quot;, &quot;Bomber&quot;, &quot;King Brown&quot;, or a &quot;Tallie&quot;), 500 mL cans (&quot;Lunch greens&quot;, &quot;The Big Cold Can&quot;), 375 mL bottles (&quot;Stubbies&quot;, a &quot;Pint&quot; or &quot;Short-neck&quot;), 375 mL cans (&quot;Tinnies&quot;, &quot;Boonies&quot;, &quot;Green Cans&quot; or &quot;Gweens&quot;), and 250 mL bottles (&quot;Grenades&quot;, &quot;Twisties&quot; or &quot;Throwies&quot;). For a limited time only, VB was available in the Northern Territory in a 1-litre can nicknamed a &#x27;Killer can&#x27; (Kilo can). As with all packaged beer sold in Australia it was for many years only available in 750 mL or 26 2/3 fl oz (1/6 imperial gallon) bottles, until the introduction of &quot;stubbies&quot; and smaller cans. In a testament to its long history and popularity, VB has acquired a number of nicknames, ranging from the abbreviated &quot;Vic Bitter&quot;, &quot;Veebs&quot;, polite &quot;Very Best&quot;, &quot;Vitamin B&quot;, &quot;Very Bad&quot; and &quot;Victory Beer&quot;, for after a win in the footy. At Australian gatherings (for example, backyard barbeques) it is referred to as &quot;The Staple&quot; as being the default brand of beer consumed.
The beer began to gain wide popularity in the mid 1960s with an innovative television advertising campaign featuring a very similar recording to the theme from the film &quot;The Magnificent Seven&quot;, images of working-class Australians at work and play, and a voice-over by notable Australian actor John Meillon used the slogan; &quot;For A Hard Earned Thirst.&quot; The campaign was used until quite recently and was reinvented in 2018 with the launch of the &#x27;New Knock Off Times&#x27; Campaign. In 2004, VB commanded more than a 25 per cent market share, meaning that one in four beers sold in Australia was a VB.

In July 2007, Foster&#x27;s announced it would cut the alcohol content of VB from 4.9% to 4.8% in a bid to save millions of dollars in tax payments. The brewer cut the alcohol percentage of VB further in 2009, reducing it to 4.6% in an effort to make further savings. On 3 September 2012, CUB announced VB would be going back to its original 4.9% alcohol recipe and its original packaging. CUB had received many complaints since it was changed to 4.6% in 2009, and the beer had lost a large amount of market share. The updated VBs began rolling out in late October 2012. As of 2013, VB was the most popular beer in Australia with 12.2 per cent market share.

==Sales availability==
According to ACNielsen in 2009, Victoria Bitter was claimed to be Australia&#x27;s only billion dollar retail beer brand, selling the equivalent of one slab (24 x 375ml cans or bottles) every second. At one time, it sold twice as much as any other full strength beer and was the only Australian beer brand that was in the top 3 sellers in every state. Victoria Bitter held the highest market share of all beer sold in Australia for more than two decades, yet in 2012, it lost this position to XXXX Gold.

In April 2011, VB held 13.7% volume share and XXXX Gold had 11.7%. Just one year on in April 2012, VB had dropped to 12.3%, while XXXX Gold took the lead with 12.4%.

In addition to being sold in Australia, Victoria Bitter is also available in New Zealand, Bali, Indonesia, the UK, and, to a limited extent, other countries abroad. When the joint venture Angkor Brewing Co. was established in Cambodia in 1992, VB was briefly brewed in Sihanoukville, and later imported; it held a significant share of the premium beer market until 1994.

Despite its name, Victoria Bitter is a standard commercial lager rather than a bitter. Since late 2012, Victoria Bitter has been sold at a strength of 4.9% ABV after an interim period of producing the same product at an ABV of 4.6% (equal to virtually every other major Australian lager). The VB sold commercially in New Zealand is both 4.9% and 4.6% available in 375ml quantities in either bottles or cans.

===VB Gold===

In 2007, Foster&#x27;s launched a new, midstrength version of VB called VB Midstrength Lager with an alcohol volume of 3.5% in order to capitalize on the growing market for midstrength beers, currently dominated by XXXX Gold. In May 2007, the launch was Foster&#x27;s first ever mainstream variation of the VB brand. In 2009, Carlton &amp; United Breweries re-branded VB Midstrength to the new name VB Gold, and in 2017, it reduced the alcohol content to 3%.

TV builder Scott Cam, a self-confessed VB fan, is the appointed VB Mid Ambassador.

On 24 July 2007, &quot;The Australian&quot; reported that within three months of Fosters launching VB Midstrength, market share for the full strength VB and mid VB had increased. Foster&#x27;s regional marketing director Anthony Heraghty hinted at further VB brand extensions, saying Foster&#x27;s was &quot;trying to see past the big green giant&quot;.

During the 2008 Rugby League World Cup, VB Gold was advertised on TV by Australian Rugby League legends Wally Lewis and Gorden Tallis.

===VB RAW===

In September 2009, CUB released VB RAW to compete in the low carb market. The alcohol volume was 4.5%. VB Raw was discontinued in late 2010 due to poor sales.

===VB Low Carb===

==Marketing and promotion==
In 2009, Foster&#x27;s replaced the slogan from the &#x27;60s &quot;A hard earned thirst needs a big cold beer, and the best cold beer is Vic, Victoria Bitter&quot; with &quot;VB – The Drinking Beer&quot; as part of a marketing strategy to reposition VB to a broader range of drinkers. The new slogan, as part of a campaign called &quot;The Regulars&quot; included a brand website for the first time, including a production line live webcam. Advertising ran on TV and radio, in print, outdoor, online, and at point of sale. In 2015, Carlton and United Breweries revived the &quot;hard earned thirst&quot; campaign.
In 2018, Victoria Bitter revisited the idea of knock off with the launch of a new campaign called new knock off times expanding its brand positioning to celebrate Australia&#x27;s changing workforce.
Marking its 50th anniversary of TV advertising, the ad celebrates the change in Australia&#x27;s workforce that&#x27;s taken place over the half century. These days, there&#x27;s no one time that people knock off. 4.00pm might still be the end of the day for some, but for others, it might very well be the beginning of their day.

In 2005, VB had started a promotion where David Boon became the face of Victoria Bitter beer for its 2005/06 summer advertising campaign called &quot;Boonanza&quot;. Part of the promotion was the sale of a talking David Boon figurine with purchases of cartons of beer, which would make comments when prompted by Channel Nine commentary. In late 2006, the &quot;Boonanza&quot; promotion returned as &quot;Boonanza II&quot; for the 2006–07 Ashes series. The promotion included former England cricket captain Ian Botham as a talking figure, who would interact alongside an updated David Boon figure.

For the 2007–08 Australian cricket series, Shane Warne took over as VB spokesperson from David Boon. Warne also had a talking figurine as part of a &quot;Warnie&quot; promotion, taking over from the highly successful &quot;Talking Boony&quot; dolls from the two previous &quot;Boonanza&quot; promotions.

On 6 July 2011, Foster&#x27;s released VB packaged in limited edition 1958 heritage cans. The packaging had the original artwork of the 1958 VB product, but it also included a standard ring pull on each can, something which was lacking on the original.

VB has invested heavily in sponsorships of Australian rugby league. It is currently the official beer of the NRL, the naming rights sponsor for NRL Friday Night Football and the main sponsor of the Australian national rugby league team, the Kangaroos.

Victoria Bitter was also the main sponsor of the Australian Tri-Series for five years between 2001–02 and 2005–06. During this time the series was renamed &quot;The VB Series&quot;.

Victoria Bitter were sponsors of the away Test, ODI, and Twenty20 teams for the Australia national cricket team from 2008 to 2014. In 2013, Cricket Australia agreed to remove the logo of Muslim cricketer Fawad Ahmed&#x27;s uniform due to his faith&#x27;s ban on alcohol.

The previous advertising campaign was called the Stubby Symphony, where 100 members of the Melbourne and Victorian orchestras play the theme from &quot;The Magnificent Seven&quot; only using VB beer bottles. The campaign was created by George Patterson Y&amp;R in Melbourne.

VB launched a new advertising campaign in Australia in July 2009 to coincide with the SBS television broadcast of the 2009 The Ashes cricket series. They will drop the famous tag &quot;For a hard earned thirst..&quot; for &quot;VB – The Drinking Beer&quot;.

==See also==

*Australian pub
*Beer in Australia
*List of breweries in Australia

==References==
==Further reading==


==External links==

*Official VB Website
*Official product webpage</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2538109" start="0" end="15" title="Victoria Bitter" label="Victoria Bitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538109" start="17" end="19" title="Victoria Bitter" label="VB"/>
<link wikidata="Q253481" start="26" end="31" title="lager" label="lager"/>
<link wikidata="Q5042950" start="44" end="74" title="Carlton &amp;amp; United Breweries" label="Carlton &amp;amp; United Breweries"/>
<link wikidata="Q720479" start="92" end="97" title="Asahi Breweries" label="Asahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="102" end="111" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="113" end="121" title="Victoria (Australia)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="228" end="237" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q122055858" start="405" end="421" title="Australian lager" label="Australian lager"/>
<link wikidata="Q14404476" start="443" end="447" title="wort" label="wort"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235" start="1131" end="1149" title="Northern Territory" label="Northern Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="1936" end="1946" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q19069" start="2036" end="2057" title="The Magnificent Seven" label="The Magnificent Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q441661" start="2164" end="2176" title="John Meillon" label="John Meillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423785" start="2501" end="2514" title="Foster&amp;#x27;s Lager" label="Foster&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5042950" start="2776" end="2779" title="Carlton &amp;amp; United Breweries" label="CUB"/>
<link wikidata="Q288603" start="3182" end="3191" title="ACNielsen" label="ACNielsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="3235" end="3251" title="Australia" label="Australia&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="3574" end="3578" title="beer" label="beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8042633" start="3662" end="3671" title="XXXX Gold" label="XXXX Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="3918" end="3929" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125978" start="3931" end="3946" title="Bali, Indonesia" label="Bali, Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="3952" end="3954" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025238" start="4029" end="4047" title="Cambrew Brewery" label="Angkor Brewing Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="4067" end="4075" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207676" start="4110" end="4123" title="Sihanoukville (city)" label="Sihanoukville"/>
<link wikidata="Q253481" start="4272" end="4277" title="lager" label="lager"/>
<link wikidata="Q27201" start="4292" end="4298" title="bitter (beer)" label="bitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q721237" start="4369" end="4372" title="Alcohol by volume" label="ABV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423785" start="4646" end="4659" title="Foster&amp;#x27;s Lager" label="Foster&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q19880203" start="4709" end="4729" title="VB Gold" label="VB Midstrength Lager"/>
<link wikidata="Q8042633" start="4852" end="4861" title="XXXX Gold" label="XXXX Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q5042950" start="4963" end="4993" title="Carlton &amp;amp; United Breweries" label="Carlton &amp;amp; United Breweries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436089" start="5108" end="5117" title="Scott Cam" label="Scott Cam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478700" start="5204" end="5218" title="The Australian (newspaper)" label="The Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000722" start="5547" end="5574" title="2008 Rugby League World Cup" label="2008 Rugby League World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962" start="5619" end="5631" title="Rugby League" label="Rugby League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565555" start="5640" end="5651" title="Wally Lewis" label="Wally Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110864" start="5656" end="5669" title="Gorden Tallis" label="Gorden Tallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017555" start="7082" end="7092" title="David Boon" label="David Boon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432195" start="7352" end="7364" title="Nine Network" label="Channel Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3985717" start="7470" end="7490" title="2006–07 Ashes series" label="2006–07 Ashes series"/>
<link wikidata="Q982121" start="7546" end="7556" title="Ian Botham" label="Ian Botham"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7646" end="7679" title="International cricket in 2007-08#December 2007" label="2007–08 Australian cricket series"/>
<link wikidata="Q555240" start="7681" end="7692" title="Shane Warne" label="Shane Warne"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962" start="8251" end="8263" title="rugby league" label="rugby league"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140630" start="8306" end="8309" title="National Rugby League" label="NRL"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589757" start="8438" end="8447" title="Australia national rugby league team" label="Kangaroos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872181" start="8499" end="8520" title="Australian Tri-Series" label="Australian Tri-Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q142555" start="8713" end="8744" title="Australia national cricket team" label="Australia national cricket team"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="8820" end="8826" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438693" start="8837" end="8848" title="Fawad Ahmed" label="Fawad Ahmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q19069" start="9057" end="9078" title="The Magnificent Seven" label="The Magnificent Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543246" start="9141" end="9165" title="George Patterson Y&amp;amp;R" label="George Patterson Y&amp;amp;R"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075994" start="9267" end="9270" title="Special Broadcasting Service" label="SBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q725151" start="9304" end="9313" title="The Ashes" label="The Ashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825087" start="9455" end="9469" title="Australian pub" label="Australian pub"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879987" start="9471" end="9488" title="Beer in Australia" label="Beer in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608152" start="9490" end="9520" title="List of breweries in Australia" label="List of breweries in Australia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="32618" wikidata="Q322655" url="?curid=32618" title="Vern Clark">
<text>Vernon Eugene Clark (born September 7, 1944) is a retired admiral who served as the Chief of Naval Operations (CNO) of the United States Navy. He retired on July 22, 2005, making his tenure of five years the second-longest serving CNO behind Arleigh Burke. He currently sits on the board of directors of Raytheon and SRI International. In November 2009, he was selected along with former Secretary of Veterans Affairs Togo West by Defense Secretary Robert Gates to lead the military investigation into the Fort Hood massacre.

==Early life and education==
Clark was born in Sioux City, Iowa, and grew up in the states of Nebraska, Missouri and Illinois. Clark graduated from Evangel College and earned a Master of Business Administration degree from the University of Arkansas. He attended Officer Candidate School and received his commission in August 1968.

==Career==

Clark served aboard the destroyers and . As a lieutenant, he commanded . He subsequently commanded , , the Atlantic Fleet&#x27;s Anti-Submarine Warfare Training Center, Destroyer Squadron 17, and Destroyer Squadron 5. After being selected for flag rank, Clark commanded &quot;Carl Vinson&quot; Battle Group/Cruiser-Destroyer Group 3, Second Fleet, and United States Atlantic Fleet.

Ashore, Clark first served as special assistant to the director of the Systems Analysis Division in the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations. He later completed assignments as the administrative assistant to the Deputy Chief of Naval Operations (Surface Warfare) and as the administrative aide to the Vice Chief of Naval Operations. He served as head of the Cruiser-Destroyer Combat Systems Requirements Section and force anti-submarine warfare officer for the commander of Naval Surface Force, Atlantic Fleet, and he directed the Joint Staff&#x27;s Crisis Action Team for Operation Desert Shield and Operation Desert Storm.
Clark&#x27;s first flag assignment was at the United States Transportation Command (TRANSCOM), where he was director of plans and policy (J5) and financial management and analysis (J8). While commanding the &quot;Carl Vinson&quot; Battle Group, he deployed to the Persian Gulf and later served as the Deputy Commander, Joint Task Force Southwest Asia. Clark has also served as the Deputy and Chief of Staff, United States Atlantic Fleet; the Director of Operations (J3) and subsequently Director, of the Joint Staff. Clark became the 27th Chief of Naval Operations on July 21, 2000, relieving Jay L. Johnson. Since his retirement, Clark has been honored with the Eisenhower Award from the Business Executives for National Security and the Distinguished Sea Service Award from the Naval Order of the United States.

Clark was elected to the board of directors of Raytheon in December 2005 and the board of directors of SRI International in March 2007.

Clark now serves on the board of directors of Raytheon Company, Rolls-Royce North America, SRI International, Horizon Lines, the Armed Forces YMCA, and is on the world board of governors of the USO. He serves as a senior advisor with Booz Allen Hamilton, the Defense Policy Board, the advisory boards of Fleishman-Hillard, Computer Science Corporation, the Comptroller General&#x27;s advisory board of the GAO, and the executive committee of Military Ministry. In addition, he is currently a distinguished professor at Regent University in Virginia Beach, Virginia. Clark teaches in the Robertson School of Government and the School of Business &amp; Leadership and is a member of the Regent&#x27;s board of trustees. He was also a member of the Board of Visitors at Air University.

==Awards and decorations==
==References==
==External links==
:&quot;This article incorporates text in the public domain from the U.S. Department of Defense.&quot;
*

 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q322655" start="0" end="19" title="Vern Clark" label="Vernon Eugene Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q4057849" start="58" end="65" title="Admiral (United States)" label="admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072415" start="84" end="109" title="Chief of Naval Operations" label="Chief of Naval Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="123" end="141" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q127730" start="242" end="255" title="Arleigh Burke" label="Arleigh Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q156644" start="304" end="312" title="Raytheon" label="Raytheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q604924" start="317" end="334" title="SRI International" label="SRI International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406519" start="418" end="427" title="Togo West" label="Togo West"/>
<link wikidata="Q212979" start="449" end="461" title="Robert Gates" label="Robert Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q473862" start="506" end="524" title="2009 Fort Hood shooting" label="Fort Hood massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q489255" start="574" end="590" title="Sioux City, Iowa" label="Sioux City, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553" start="621" end="629" title="Nebraska" label="Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="631" end="639" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="644" end="652" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q4569311" start="675" end="690" title="Evangel College" label="Evangel College"/>
<link wikidata="Q191701" start="704" end="737" title="Master of Business Administration" label="Master of Business Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070333" start="754" end="776" title="University of Arkansas" label="University of Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q17153892" start="790" end="814" title="Officer Candidate School (U.S. Navy)" label="Officer Candidate School"/>
<link wikidata="Q748902" start="1148" end="1159" title="USS Carl Vinson (CVN-70)" label="Carl Vinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940264" start="1179" end="1204" title="Cruiser-Destroyer Group 3" label="Cruiser-Destroyer Group 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594828" start="1206" end="1218" title="United States Second Fleet" label="Second Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297940" start="1224" end="1252" title="United States Atlantic Fleet" label="United States Atlantic Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373217" start="1559" end="1589" title="Vice Chief of Naval Operations" label="Vice Chief of Naval Operations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1831" end="1854" title="Gulf War#Operation Desert Shield" label="Operation Desert Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="1859" end="1881" title="Operation Desert Storm" label="Operation Desert Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499989" start="1929" end="1965" title="United States Transportation Command" label="United States Transportation Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="2147" end="2159" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280572" start="2370" end="2378" title="Director of the Joint Staff" label="Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072415" start="2422" end="2447" title="Chief of Naval Operations" label="Chief of Naval Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q714337" start="2476" end="2490" title="Jay L. Johnson" label="Jay L. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282993" start="2622" end="2653" title="Distinguished Sea Service Award" label="Distinguished Sea Service Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981884" start="2663" end="2695" title="Naval Order of the United States" label="Naval Order of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q156644" start="2745" end="2753" title="Raytheon" label="Raytheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q604924" start="2801" end="2818" title="SRI International" label="SRI International"/>
<link wikidata="Q893221" start="3069" end="3088" title="Booz Allen Hamilton" label="Booz Allen Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q502352" start="3354" end="3371" title="Regent University" label="Regent University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49259" start="3375" end="3389" title="Virginia Beach, Virginia" label="Virginia Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="3391" end="3399" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q407875" start="3602" end="3616" title="Air University (United States Air Force)" label="Air University"/>
<link wikidata="Q19652" start="3725" end="3738" title="public domain" label="public domain"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="32622" wikidata="Q682010" url="?curid=32622" title="Video art">
<text>Video art is an art form which relies on using video technology as a visual and audio medium. Video art emerged during the late 1960s as new consumer video technology such as video tape recorders became available outside corporate broadcasting. Video art can take many forms: recordings that are broadcast; installations viewed in galleries or museums; works either streamed online, or distributed as video tapes, or on DVDs; and performances which may incorporate one or more television sets, video monitors, and projections, displaying live or recorded images and sounds.

Video art is named for the original analog video tape, which was the most commonly used recording technology in much of the form&#x27;s history into the 1990s. With the advent of digital recording equipment, many artists began to explore digital technology as a new way of expression. Video art does not necessarily rely on the conventions that define theatrical cinema. It may not use actors, may contain no dialogue, and may have no discernible narrative or plot. Video art also differs from cinema subcategories such as avant garde cinema, short films, and experimental film.

==Early history==

Nam June Paik, a Korean-American artist who studied in Germany, is widely regarded as a pioneer in video art. In March 1963 Paik showed at the Galerie Parnass in Wuppertal the &quot;Exposition of Music – Electronic Television&quot;. In May 1963 Wolf Vostell showed the installation &quot;6 TV Dé-coll/age&quot; at the Smolin Gallery in New York and created the video &quot;Sun in your head&quot; in Cologne. Originally &quot;Sun in your head&quot; was made on 16mm film and transferred 1967 to videotape.

Video art is often said to have begun when Paik used his new Sony Portapak to shoot footage of Pope Paul VI&#x27;s procession through New York City in the autumn of 1965 Later that same day, across town in a Greenwich Village cafe, Paik played the tapes and video art was born.

Prior to the introduction of consumer video equipment, moving image production was only available non-commercially via 8mm film and 16mm film. After the Portapak&#x27;s introduction and its subsequent update every few years, many artists began exploring the new technology.

Many of the early prominent video artists were those involved with concurrent movements in conceptual art, performance, and experimental film. These include Americans Vito Acconci, Valie Export, John Baldessari, Peter Campus, Doris Totten Chase, Maureen Connor, Norman Cowie, Dimitri Devyatkin, Frank Gillette, Dan Graham, Gary Hill, Joan Jonas, Bruce Nauman, Nam June Paik, Bill Viola, Shigeko Kubota, Martha Rosler, William Wegman, and many others. There were also those such as Steina and Woody Vasulka who were interested in the formal qualities of video and employed video synthesizers to create abstract works. Kate Craig, Vera Frenkel and Michael Snow were important to the development of video art in Canada.

==In the 1970s==
Much video art in the medium&#x27;s heyday experimented formally with the limitations of the video format. For example, American artist Peter Campus&#x27; &quot;Double Vision&quot; combined the video signals from two Sony Portapaks through an electronic mixer, resulting in a distorted and radically dissonant image. Another representative piece, Joan Jonas&#x27; &quot;Vertical Roll&quot;, involved recording previously-recorded material of Jonas dancing while playing the videos back on a television, resulting in a layered and complex representation of mediation.
Much video art in the United States was produced out of New York City, with The Kitchen, founded in 1972 by Steina and Woody Vasulka (and assisted by video director Dimitri Devyatkin and Shridhar Bapat), serving as a nexus for many young artists. An early multi-channel video art work (using several monitors or screens) was &quot;Wipe Cycle&quot; by Ira Schneider and Frank Gillette. &quot;Wipe Cycle&quot; was first exhibited at the Howard Wise Gallery in New York in 1969 as part of an exhibition titled &quot;TV as a Creative Medium&quot;. An installation of nine television screens, &quot;Wipe Cycle&quot; combined live images of gallery visitors, found footage from commercial television, and shots from pre-recorded tapes. The material was alternated from one monitor to the next in an elaborate choreography.

On the West coast, the San Jose State television studios in 1970, Willoughby Sharp began the &quot;Videoviews&quot; series of videotaped dialogues with artists. The &quot;Videoviews&quot; series consists of Sharps&#x27; dialogues with Bruce Nauman (1970), Joseph Beuys (1972), Vito Acconci (1973), Chris Burden (1973), Lowell Darling (1974), and Dennis Oppenheim (1974). Also in 1970, Sharp curated &quot;Body Works&quot;, an exhibition of video works by Vito Acconci, Terry Fox, Richard Serra, Keith Sonnier, Dennis Oppenheim and William Wegman which was presented at Tom Marioni&#x27;s Museum of Conceptual Art, San Francisco, California.

In Europe, Valie Export&#x27;s groundbreaking video piece, &quot;Facing a Family&quot; (1971) was one of the first instances of television intervention and broadcasting video art. The video, originally broadcast on the Austrian television program &quot;Kontakte&quot; February 2, 1971,[11] shows a bourgeois Austrian family watching TV while eating dinner, creating a mirroring effect for many members of the audience who were doing the same thing. Export believed the television could complicate the relationship between subject, spectator, and television. In the United Kingdom David Hall&#x27;s &quot;TV Interruptions&quot; (1971) were transmitted intentionally unannounced and uncredited on Scottish TV, the first artist interventions on British television.

==1980s–1990s==
As the prices of editing software decreased, the access the general public had to utilize these technologies increased. Video editing software became so readily available that it changed the way artists worked with the medium. Simulteanously, with the arrival of independent televisions in Europe and the emergence of video clips, artists also used the potential of special effects, high quality images and sophisticated editing (Gary Hill, Bill Viola). Festivals dedicated to video art such as the World Wide Video festival in The Hague, the Biennale de l&#x27;Image in Geneva or Ars Electronica in Linz developed and underlined the importance of creation in this field.

From the beginning of the 90&#x27;s, contemporary art exhibitions integrate artists&#x27; videos among other works and installations. This is the case of the Venice Biennale (Aperto 93) and of NowHere at the Louisiana Museum, but also of art galleries where a new generation of artists for whom the arrival of lighter equipment such as Handycams favored a more direct expression. Artists such as Pipilotti Rist, Tony Oursler, Carsten Höller, Cheryl Donegan, Nelson Sullivan were able, as others in the 1960s, to leave their studios easily to film by hand without sophistication, sometimes mixing found images with their own (Douglas Gordon, Pierre Bismuth, Sylvie Fleury, Johan Grimonprez, Claude Closky) and using a present but simple post-production. 
The presentation of the works was also simplified with the arrival of monitors in the exhibition rooms and distribution in VHS. The arrival of this younger generation announced the feminist and gender issues to come, but also the increasingly hybrid use of different media (transferred super 8 films, 16mm, digital editing, TV show excerpts, sounds from different sources, etc).
At the same time, museums and institutions more specialized in video art were integrating digital technology, such as the ZKM in Karlsruhe, directed by Peter Weibel, with numerous thematic exhibitions, or the Centre pour l&#x27;Image Contemporaine with its biennial Version (1994-2004) directed by Simon Lamunière.

With the arrival of digital technology and the Internet, some museums have federated their databases such as http://www.newmedia-art.org/ produced by the Centre Georges Pompidou in Paris, the Museum Ludwig in Cologne and the Centre pour l&#x27;Image Contemporaine (center for contemporary images) in Geneva.

By the end of the century, institutions and artists worked on the expanding spectrum of the media, 3d imagery, interactivity, cd-roms, Internet, digital post production etc. Different themes emerged such as interactivity and nonlinearity. Some artists combined physical and digital techniques, such as Jeffrey Shaw&#x27;s &quot;Legible City&quot; (1988–91). Others by using Low-Tech interactivity such as Claude Closky&#x27;s online &quot;+1&quot; or &quot;Do you want Love or Lust&quot; in 1996 coproduced by the Dia Art Foundation. But these steps start to move away from the so called video art towards the New media art and Internet art.

== After 2000 ==
As the available amount of footage and the editing techniques evolved, some artists have also produced complex narrative videos without using any of their own footage: Marco Brambilla&#x27;s &quot;Civilization&quot; (2008) is a collage, or a &quot;video mural&quot; that portrays heaven and hell. Johan Grimonprez&#x27;s Dial H-I-S-T-O-R-Y is a 68 minute long interpretation of the cold war and the role of terrorists, made almost exclusively with original television and film excerpts on hijacking.

More generally, during the first decade, one of the most significant steps in the video art domain, was achieved with its strong presence in contemporary art exhibitions at the international level. During this period, it was common to see artist videos in group shows, on monitors or as projections. More than a third of the works presented at Art Unlimited (the section of Art Basel dedicated to large-scale works) were video installations between 2000 and 2015. The same is true for most biennials. A new generation of artists such as Pipilotti Rist, Francis Alys, Kim Sooja, Apichatpong Weerasethakul, Omer Fast, David Claerbout, Sarah Morris, Matthew Barney, were presented alongside the previous generations (Roman Signer, Bruce Nauman, Bill Viola, Joan Jonas, John Baldessari).

Some artists have also widened their audience by making movies (Apichatpong Weerasethakul who won the 2010 Cannes Film Festival &quot;Palm d&#x27;or&quot;) or by curating large public events (Pipilotti Rist&#x27;s Swiss National Expo02

In 2003, Kalup Linzy created &quot;Conversations Wit De Churen II: All My Churen&quot;, a soap opera satire that has been credited as creating the video and performance sub-genre Although Linzy&#x27;s work is genre defying his work has been a major contribution to the medium. Ryan Trecartin, an experimental young video-artist, uses color, editing techniques and bizarre acting to portray what The New Yorker calls &quot;a cultural watershed&quot;.

== Performance art and video art ==
Video art as a medium can also be combined with other forms of artistic expression such as Performance art. This combination can also be referred to as &quot;media and performance art&quot; when artists &quot;break the mold of video and film and broaden the boundaries of art&quot;. With increased ability for artists to obtain video cameras, performance art started being documented and shared across large amounts of audiences. Artists such as Marina Abramovic and Ulay experimented with video taping their performances in the 1970s and the 1980s. In a piece titled “Rest energy” (1980) both Ulay and Marina suspended their weight so that they pulled back a bow and arrow aimed at her heart, Ulay held the arrow, and Marina the bow. The piece was 4:10 which Marina described as being “a performance about complete and total trust”.

Other artists who combined Video art with Performance art used the camera as the audience. Kate Gilmore experimented with the positioning of the camera. In her video “Anything” (2006) she films her performance piece as she is constantly trying the reach the camera which is staring down at her. As the 13-minute video goes on, she continues to tie together pieces of furniture while constantly attempting to reach the camera. Gilmore added an element of struggle to her art which is sometimes self-imposed, in her video “My love is an anchor” (2004) she lets her foot dry in cement before attempting to break free on camera. Gilmore has said to have mimicked expression styles from the 1960s and 1970s with inspirations like Marina Abramovic as she adds extremism and struggle to her work.

Some artists experimented with space when combining Video art and Performance art. Ragnar Kjartannson, an Icelandic artist, filmed an entire music video with 9 different artists, including himself, being filmed in different rooms. All the artists could hear each other through a pair of headphones so that they could play the song together, the piece was titled &quot;The visitors&quot; (2012).

Some artists, such as Jaki Irvine and Victoria Fu have experimented with combining 16 mm film, 8 mm film and video to make use of the potential discontinuity between moving image, musical score and narrator to undermine any sense of linear narrative.

== As an academic discipline ==

Since 2000, video arts programs have begun to emerge among colleges and universities as a standalone discipline typically situated in relation to film and older broadcast curricula. Current models found in universities like Northeastern and Syracuse show video arts offering baseline competencies in lighting, editing and camera operation. While these fundamentals can feed into and support existing film or TV production areas, recent growth of entertainment media through CGI and other special effects situate skills like animation, motion graphics and computer aided design as upper level courses in this emerging area.

As the industry continues to evolve, video arts programs are also incorporating elements of interactive media, virtual production, and immersive technologies such as augmented and virtual reality. Many institutions are expanding their curricula to include courses on real-time rendering, AI-assisted content creation, and multi-platform storytelling, reflecting the growing demand for versatile digital artists. Additionally, collaborations with game design, digital marketing, and media studies departments are fostering interdisciplinary approaches that prepare students for diverse career opportunities beyond traditional film and television.

==Notable video art organizations==
* Ars Electronica Center (AEC), Linz, Austria
* Edith-Russ-Haus for Media Art, Oldenburg, Germany
* Electronic Arts Intermix, New York, NY
* Experimental Television Center, New York
* Goetz Collection, Munich, Germany
* Imai – inter media art institute, Düsseldorf
* Impakt Festival, Utrecht
* Julia Stoschek Collection, Düsseldorf, Germany
* Kunstmuseum Bonn, large video art collection
* LA Freewaves is an experimental media art festival with video art, shorts and animation; exhibitions are in Los Angeles and online.
* Lumen Eclipse – Harvard Square, MA
* LUX, London, UK
* London Video Arts, London, UK
* Neuer Berliner Kunstverein with its &quot;Video-Forum&quot; established in 1971 – Berlin, Germany
* Raindance Foundation, New York
* Souvenirs from Earth, Art TV Station on European Cable Networks (Paris, Cologne)
* Vtape, Toronto, Canada
* Videoart at Midnight, an artists&#x27; cinema project, Berlin, Germany
* Video Data Bank, Chicago, IL.
* VIVO Media Arts Centre, Vancouver, Canada
* ZKM Center for Art and Media Karlsruhe, Germany
* Videobrasil, Associação Cultural Videobrasil, São Paulo, Brazil

==See also==
* Artmedia
* Experimental film
* INFERMENTAL
* Interactive film
* List of video artists
* Music video
* Music visualization
* New media art
* Optical feedback
* Real-time computer graphics
* Scratch video
* Single-channel video
* Sound art 
* Video jockey
* Video poetry
* Video sculpture
* Video installation
* Video synthesizer
* Visual music
* VJing

==References==
==Further reading==
* &quot;Making Video &#x27;In&#x27; - The Contested Ground of Alternative Video On The West Coast&quot; Edited by Jennifer Abbott (Satellite Video Exchange Society, 2000).
* &quot;Videography: Video Media as Art and Culture&quot; by Sean Cubitt (MacMillan, 1993).
* &quot;A History of Experimental Film and Video&quot; by A. L. Rees (British Film Institute, 1999).
* &quot;New Media in Late 20th-Century Art&quot; by Michael Rush (Thames &amp; Hudson, 1999).
* &quot;Mirror Machine: Video and Identity,&quot; edited by Janine Marchessault (Toronto: YYZ Books, 1995).
* &quot;Sounding the Gallery: Video and the Rise of Art Music&quot; by Holly Rogers (New York: Oxford University Press, 2013).
* &quot;Video Culture: A Critical Investigation,&quot; edited by John G. Hanhardt (Visual Studies Workshop Press, 1986).
* &quot;Moving Layers: Contextual Video in Art &amp; Architecture&quot;, edited by Alexandro Ladaga, Silvia Manteiga (Rome, Edilstampa Press, 2014). ISBN 9781291852295
* &quot;The Electronic Civilization&quot;&quot;, in Screencity Lab Accademic Journal, edited by Alexandro Ladaga, Silvia Manteiga n.1, 2012, pp. 4, 11, 37-42. ISBN 978-88-9637-010-0
* &quot;Video Art: A Guided Tour&quot; by Catherine Elwes (I.B. Tauris, 2004).
* &quot;A History of Video Art&quot; by Chris Meigh-Andrews (Berg, 2006)
* &quot;127kBdiarte, pensare l&#x27;arte in rete&quot; by Elastic Group of Artistic Research, (San Donato, Psiche e Aurora Ed., 2015). ISBN 9788889875421
* &quot;Diverse Practices: A Critical Reader on British Video Art&quot; edited by Julia Knight (University of Luton/Arts Council England, 1996)
* &quot;ARTFORUM FEB 1993 &quot;Travels In The New Flesh&quot; by Howard Hampton (Printed by ARTFORUM INTERNATIONAL 1993)
* &quot; Resolutions: Contemporary Video Practices&quot;&#x27;, (eds. Renov, Michael &amp; Erika Suderburg) (London, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,1996).
* &quot;Expanded Cinema&quot; by Gene Youngblood (New York: E.P. Dutton &amp; Company, 1970).
* &quot;The Problematic of Video Art in the Museum 1968-1990&quot; by Cyrus Manasseh (Cambria Press, 2009).
* &quot;First Electronic Art Show&quot; by (Niranjan Rajah &amp; Hasnul J Saidon) (National Art Gallery, Kuala Lumpur, 1997)
* &quot;Expanded Cinema&quot;, (David Curtis, A. L. Rees, Duncan White, and Steven Ball, eds), Tate Publishing, 2011
* &quot;Retrospektiv-Film-org videokunst| Norge 1960-90&quot;. Edited by Farhad Kalantary &amp; Linn Lervik. Atopia Stiftelse, Oslo, (April 2011).
* &quot;Experimental Film and Video&quot;, Jackie Hatfield, Editor. (John Libbey Publishing, 2006; distributed in North America by Indiana University Press)
* &quot;REWIND: British Artists&#x27; Video in the 1970s &amp; 1980s&quot;, (Sean Cubitt, and Stephen Partridge, eds), John Libbey Publishing, 2012.
* &quot;Reaching Audiences: Distribution and Promotion of Alternative Moving Image&quot; by Julia Knight and Peter Thomas (Intellect, 2011)
* Wulf Herzogenrath: &quot;Videokunst der 60er Jahre in Deutschland&quot;, Kunsthalle Bremen, 2006, (No ISBN).
* Rudolf Frieling &amp; Wulf Herzogenrath: &quot;40jahrevideokunst.de: Digitales Erbe: Videokunst in Deutschland von 1963 bis heute&quot;, Hatje Cantz Verlag, 2006, .
* &quot;NBK Band 4. Time Pieces. Videokunst seit 1963&quot;. Verlag der Buchhandlung Walther König, Köln, 2013, .
* &quot;Demolden Video Project: 2009-2014&quot;. Video Art Gallery, Santander, Spain, 2016, .
* Valentino Catricalà, Laura Leuzzi, &quot;Cronologia della videoarte italiana&quot;, in Marco Maria Gazzano, &quot;KINEMA. Il cinema sulle tracce del cinema. Dal film alle arti elettroniche andata e ritorno&quot;, Exorma, Roma 2013.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q682010" start="0" end="9" title="Video art" label="Video art"/>
<link wikidata="Q735" start="16" end="19" title="art" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q34508" start="47" end="52" title="video" label="video"/>
<link wikidata="Q732942" start="175" end="195" title="video tape recorders" label="video tape recorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q15078788" start="296" end="305" title="broadcast" label="broadcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q212431" start="307" end="320" title="installation art" label="installations"/>
<link wikidata="Q747779" start="401" end="411" title="video tape" label="video tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="420" end="423" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q35140" start="430" end="442" title="performances" label="performances"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075" start="477" end="491" title="television set" label="television set"/>
<link wikidata="Q327065" start="494" end="507" title="video monitor" label="video monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q747779" start="618" end="628" title="video tape" label="video tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473736" start="754" end="771" title="digital recording" label="digital recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q33999" start="961" end="966" title="actor" label="actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q131395" start="984" end="992" title="dialogue" label="dialogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318295" start="1022" end="1031" title="narrative" label="narrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758354" start="1035" end="1039" title="plot (narrative)" label="plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="1098" end="1109" title="avant garde" label="avant garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q24862" start="1118" end="1129" title="short films" label="short films"/>
<link wikidata="Q790192" start="1135" end="1152" title="experimental film" label="experimental film"/>
<link wikidata="Q158056" start="1174" end="1187" title="Nam June Paik" label="Nam June Paik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107" start="1336" end="1345" title="Wuppertal" label="Wuppertal"/>
<link wikidata="Q326226" start="1419" end="1431" title="Wolf Vostell" label="Wolf Vostell"/>
<link wikidata="Q212431" start="1443" end="1455" title="installation art" label="installation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984720" start="1492" end="1506" title="Smolin Gallery" label="Smolin Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="1741" end="1745" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q458254" start="1746" end="1754" title="Portapak" label="Portapak"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975" start="1775" end="1787" title="Pope Paul VI" label="Pope Paul VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1814" end="1827" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q205380" start="1888" end="1905" title="Greenwich Village" label="Greenwich Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q270183" start="2078" end="2086" title="8mm film" label="8mm film"/>
<link wikidata="Q194383" start="2091" end="2100" title="16mm film" label="16mm film"/>
<link wikidata="Q433471" start="2401" end="2413" title="Vito Acconci" label="Vito Acconci"/>
<link wikidata="Q459681" start="2415" end="2427" title="Valie Export" label="Valie Export"/>
<link wikidata="Q683378" start="2429" end="2444" title="John Baldessari" label="John Baldessari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274234" start="2446" end="2458" title="Peter Campus" label="Peter Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297999" start="2460" end="2478" title="Doris Totten Chase" label="Doris Totten Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q20641972" start="2480" end="2494" title="Maureen Connor" label="Maureen Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7052113" start="2496" end="2508" title="Norman Cowie" label="Norman Cowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q17859771" start="2510" end="2527" title="Dimitri Devyatkin" label="Dimitri Devyatkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19279749" start="2529" end="2543" title="Frank Gillette" label="Frank Gillette"/>
<link wikidata="Q698436" start="2545" end="2555" title="Dan Graham" label="Dan Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545780" start="2557" end="2566" title="Gary Hill" label="Gary Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q453808" start="2568" end="2578" title="Joan Jonas" label="Joan Jonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q168665" start="2580" end="2592" title="Bruce Nauman" label="Bruce Nauman"/>
<link wikidata="Q158056" start="2594" end="2607" title="Nam June Paik" label="Nam June Paik"/>
<link wikidata="Q437616" start="2609" end="2619" title="Bill Viola" label="Bill Viola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3816460" start="2621" end="2635" title="Shigeko Kubota" label="Shigeko Kubota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903090" start="2637" end="2650" title="Martha Rosler" label="Martha Rosler"/>
<link wikidata="Q567366" start="2652" end="2666" title="William Wegman (photographer)" label="William Wegman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482323" start="2715" end="2739" title="Steina and Woody Vasulka" label="Steina and Woody Vasulka"/>
<link wikidata="Q19877200" start="2851" end="2861" title="Kate Craig" label="Kate Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q16104865" start="2863" end="2875" title="Vera Frenkel" label="Vera Frenkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q558332" start="2880" end="2892" title="Michael Snow" label="Michael Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274234" start="3105" end="3117" title="Peter Campus" label="Peter Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q458254" start="3191" end="3199" title="Portapak" label="Portapak"/>
<link wikidata="Q453808" start="3316" end="3326" title="Joan Jonas" label="Joan Jonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141287" start="3339" end="3352" title="Vertical Roll" label="Vertical Roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796286" start="3612" end="3623" title="The Kitchen (art institution)" label="The Kitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482323" start="3644" end="3668" title="Steina and Woody Vasulka" label="Steina and Woody Vasulka"/>
<link wikidata="Q17859771" start="3701" end="3718" title="Dimitri Devyatkin" label="Dimitri Devyatkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q106434704" start="3723" end="3737" title="Shridhar Bapat" label="Shridhar Bapat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3867" end="3877" title="Frank Gillette#Wipe Cycle.2C 1969" label="Wipe Cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q788298" start="3887" end="3900" title="Ira Schneider" label="Ira Schneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q19279749" start="3905" end="3919" title="Frank Gillette" label="Frank Gillette"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022232" start="4420" end="4436" title="Willoughby Sharp" label="Willoughby Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q168665" start="4589" end="4601" title="Bruce Nauman" label="Bruce Nauman"/>
<link wikidata="Q153965" start="4610" end="4622" title="Joseph Beuys" label="Joseph Beuys"/>
<link wikidata="Q433471" start="4631" end="4643" title="Vito Acconci" label="Vito Acconci"/>
<link wikidata="Q720832" start="4652" end="4664" title="Chris Burden" label="Chris Burden"/>
<link wikidata="Q16241286" start="4673" end="4687" title="Lowell Darling" label="Lowell Darling"/>
<link wikidata="Q439856" start="4700" end="4716" title="Dennis Oppenheim" label="Dennis Oppenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q433471" start="4809" end="4821" title="Vito Acconci" label="Vito Acconci"/>
<link wikidata="Q644867" start="4823" end="4832" title="Terry Fox (artist)" label="Terry Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q321245" start="4834" end="4847" title="Richard Serra" label="Richard Serra"/>
<link wikidata="Q327520" start="4849" end="4862" title="Keith Sonnier" label="Keith Sonnier"/>
<link wikidata="Q439856" start="4864" end="4880" title="Dennis Oppenheim" label="Dennis Oppenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q567366" start="4885" end="4899" title="William Wegman (photographer)" label="William Wegman"/>
<link wikidata="Q17027172" start="4942" end="4966" title="Museum of Conceptual Art" label="Museum of Conceptual Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q459681" start="5007" end="5019" title="Valie Export" label="Valie Export"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234646" start="5576" end="5586" title="David Hall (video artist)" label="David Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545780" start="6205" end="6214" title="Gary Hill" label="Gary Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q437616" start="6216" end="6226" title="Bill Viola" label="Bill Viola"/>
<link wikidata="Q678361" start="6356" end="6371" title="Ars Electronica" label="Ars Electronica"/>
<link wikidata="Q186030" start="6485" end="6501" title="contemporary art" label="contemporary art"/>
<link wikidata="Q205751" start="6606" end="6621" title="Venice Biennale" label="Venice Biennale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410617" start="6656" end="6672" title="Louisiana Museum of Modern Art" label="Louisiana Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276754" start="6784" end="6792" title="Handycam" label="Handycam"/>
<link wikidata="Q116054" start="6844" end="6858" title="Pipilotti Rist" label="Pipilotti Rist"/>
<link wikidata="Q571399" start="6860" end="6872" title="Tony Oursler" label="Tony Oursler"/>
<link wikidata="Q542346" start="6874" end="6888" title="Carsten Höller" label="Carsten Höller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252327" start="7073" end="7087" title="Douglas Gordon" label="Douglas Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858445" start="7089" end="7103" title="Pierre Bismuth" label="Pierre Bismuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q528083" start="7105" end="7118" title="Sylvie Fleury" label="Sylvie Fleury"/>
<link wikidata="Q578232" start="7138" end="7151" title="Claude Closky" label="Claude Closky"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="7325" end="7328" title="VHS" label="VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q191228" start="7703" end="7706" title="ZKM" label="ZKM"/>
<link wikidata="Q313991" start="7733" end="7745" title="Peter Weibel" label="Peter Weibel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3664664" start="7790" end="7828" title="Centre pour l&amp;#x27;Image Contemporaine" label="Centre pour l&amp;#x27;Image Contemporaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3484341" start="7879" end="7894" title="Simon Lamunière" label="Simon Lamunière"/>
<link wikidata="Q178065" start="8051" end="8074" title="Centre Georges Pompidou" label="Centre Georges Pompidou"/>
<link wikidata="Q703640" start="8089" end="8102" title="Museum Ludwig" label="Museum Ludwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q3664664" start="8122" end="8160" title="Centre pour l&amp;#x27;Image Contemporaine" label="Centre pour l&amp;#x27;Image Contemporaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176729" start="8508" end="8520" title="Jeffrey Shaw" label="Jeffrey Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q578232" start="8611" end="8624" title="Claude Closky" label="Claude Closky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207930" start="8720" end="8738" title="Dia Art Foundation" label="Dia Art Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q378604" start="8816" end="8829" title="New media art" label="New media art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569950" start="8834" end="8846" title="Internet art" label="Internet art"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290067" start="9034" end="9049" title="Marco Brambilla" label="Marco Brambilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q5023364" start="9163" end="9179" title="Johan Grimonprez" label="Johan Grimonprez"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104796" start="9187" end="9205" title="Dial H-I-S-T-O-R-Y" label="Dial H-I-S-T-O-R-Y"/>
<link wikidata="Q684443" start="9741" end="9750" title="Art Basel" label="Art Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q116054" start="9904" end="9918" title="Pipilotti Rist" label="Pipilotti Rist"/>
<link wikidata="Q558288" start="9920" end="9932" title="Francis Alys" label="Francis Alys"/>
<link wikidata="Q4220699" start="9934" end="9943" title="Kim Sooja" label="Kim Sooja"/>
<link wikidata="Q445198" start="9945" end="9970" title="Apichatpong Weerasethakul" label="Apichatpong Weerasethakul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7090096" start="9972" end="9981" title="Omer Fast" label="Omer Fast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2403363" start="9983" end="9998" title="David Claerbout" label="David Claerbout"/>
<link wikidata="Q276113" start="10000" end="10012" title="Sarah Morris" label="Sarah Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q451185" start="10014" end="10028" title="Matthew Barney" label="Matthew Barney"/>
<link wikidata="Q463844" start="10081" end="10093" title="Roman Signer" label="Roman Signer"/>
<link wikidata="Q168665" start="10095" end="10107" title="Bruce Nauman" label="Bruce Nauman"/>
<link wikidata="Q437616" start="10109" end="10119" title="Bill Viola" label="Bill Viola"/>
<link wikidata="Q453808" start="10121" end="10131" title="Joan Jonas" label="Joan Jonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q683378" start="10133" end="10148" title="John Baldessari" label="John Baldessari"/>
<link wikidata="Q445198" start="10216" end="10241" title="Apichatpong Weerasethakul" label="Apichatpong Weerasethakul"/>
<link wikidata="Q553210" start="10254" end="10279" title="2010 Cannes Film Festival" label="2010 Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q116054" start="10344" end="10358" title="Pipilotti Rist" label="Pipilotti Rist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6354621" start="10398" end="10409" title="Kalup Linzy" label="Kalup Linzy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7384595" start="10666" end="10680" title="Ryan Trecartin" label="Ryan Trecartin"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="10784" end="10798" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q213156" start="10967" end="10982" title="Performance art" label="Performance art"/>
<link wikidata="Q47496" start="11322" end="11338" title="Marina Abramović" label="Marina Abramovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q69562" start="11343" end="11347" title="Ulay" label="Ulay"/>
<link wikidata="Q16215277" start="11802" end="11814" title="Kate Gilmore (artist)" label="Kate Gilmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565936" start="12585" end="12603" title="Ragnar Kjartansson (performance artist)" label="Ragnar Kjartannson"/>
<link wikidata="Q24034956" start="12920" end="12931" title="Jaki Irvine" label="Jaki Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q19626782" start="12936" end="12947" title="Victoria Fu" label="Victoria Fu"/>
<link wikidata="Q194383" start="12981" end="12991" title="16 mm film" label="16 mm film"/>
<link wikidata="Q270183" start="12993" end="13002" title="8 mm film" label="8 mm film"/>
<link wikidata="Q37548" start="13407" end="13419" title="Northeastern University" label="Northeastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q617433" start="13424" end="13432" title="Syracuse University" label="Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q678361" start="14492" end="14514" title="Ars Electronica Center" label="Ars Electronica Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908054" start="14538" end="14553" title="Edith-Russ-Haus" label="Edith-Russ-Haus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358214" start="14590" end="14614" title="Electronic Arts Intermix" label="Electronic Arts Intermix"/>
<link wikidata="Q20487016" start="14631" end="14661" title="Experimental Television Center" label="Experimental Television Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q319071" start="14674" end="14690" title="Goetz Collection" label="Goetz Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q15961651" start="14710" end="14742" title="Imai – inter media art institute" label="Imai – inter media art institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946156" start="14757" end="14772" title="Impakt Festival" label="Impakt Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363238" start="14784" end="14798" title="Julia Stoschek" label="Julia Stoschek"/>
<link wikidata="Q318859" start="14833" end="14849" title="Kunstmuseum Bonn" label="Kunstmuseum Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6457182" start="14880" end="14892" title="LA Freewaves" label="LA Freewaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q6703189" start="15014" end="15027" title="Lumen Eclipse" label="Lumen Eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6460285" start="15051" end="15054" title="LUX (UK film company)" label="LUX"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670995" start="15069" end="15086" title="London Video Arts" label="London Video Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980109" start="15101" end="15127" title="Neuer Berliner Kunstverein" label="Neuer Berliner Kunstverein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284782" start="15201" end="15221" title="Raindance Foundation" label="Raindance Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304820" start="15234" end="15254" title="Souvenirs from Earth" label="Souvenirs from Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q29024987" start="15317" end="15322" title="Vtape" label="Vtape"/>
<link wikidata="Q15852833" start="15342" end="15362" title="Videoart at Midnight" label="Videoart at Midnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927820" start="15415" end="15430" title="Video Data Bank" label="Video Data Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q29561297" start="15447" end="15469" title="VIVO Media Arts Centre" label="VIVO Media Arts Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q191228" start="15491" end="15529" title="ZKM Center for Art and Media Karlsruhe" label="ZKM Center for Art and Media Karlsruhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928000" start="15541" end="15552" title="Videobrasil" label="Videobrasil"/>
<link wikidata="Q968991" start="15621" end="15629" title="Artmedia" label="Artmedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q790192" start="15632" end="15649" title="Experimental film" label="Experimental film"/>
<link wikidata="Q132068" start="15652" end="15663" title="INFERMENTAL" label="INFERMENTAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635956" start="15666" end="15682" title="Interactive film" label="Interactive film"/>
<link wikidata="Q4432736" start="15685" end="15706" title="List of video artists" label="List of video artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q193977" start="15709" end="15720" title="Music video" label="Music video"/>
<link wikidata="Q758903" start="15723" end="15742" title="Music visualization" label="Music visualization"/>
<link wikidata="Q378604" start="15745" end="15758" title="New media art" label="New media art"/>
<link wikidata="Q130632547" start="15761" end="15777" title="Optical feedback" label="Optical feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816476" start="15780" end="15807" title="Real-time computer graphics" label="Real-time computer graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438843" start="15810" end="15823" title="Scratch video" label="Scratch video"/>
<link wikidata="Q48774253" start="15826" end="15846" title="Single-channel video" label="Single-channel video"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744327" start="15849" end="15858" title="Sound art" label="Sound art"/>
<link wikidata="Q6399436" start="15862" end="15874" title="Video jockey" label="Video jockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590782" start="15877" end="15889" title="Video poetry" label="Video poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927987" start="15892" end="15907" title="Video sculpture" label="Video sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q550484" start="15910" end="15928" title="Video installation" label="Video installation"/>
<link wikidata="Q21592150" start="15931" end="15948" title="Video synthesizer" label="Video synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936612" start="15951" end="15963" title="Visual music" label="Visual music"/>
<link wikidata="Q616077" start="15966" end="15971" title="VJing" label="VJing"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220867" start="16122" end="16137" title="Jennifer Abbott" label="Jennifer Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16241" end="16252" title="Sean Cubitt" label="Sean Cubitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q19842930" start="16330" end="16340" title="A. L. Rees" label="A. L. Rees"/>
<link wikidata="Q22279042" start="16527" end="16546" title="Janine Marchessault" label="Janine Marchessault"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715572" start="16767" end="16783" title="John G. Hanhardt" label="John G. Hanhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q18159081" start="16785" end="16808" title="Visual Studies Workshop" label="Visual Studies Workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q19560426" start="17215" end="17230" title="Catherine Elwes" label="Catherine Elwes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151856" start="17292" end="17311" title="Chris Meigh-Andrews" label="Chris Meigh-Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17383" end="17417" title="Elastic Group of Artistic Research" label="Elastic Group of Artistic Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q386599" start="17631" end="17639" title="Artforum" label="ARTFORUM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141563" start="17689" end="17703" title="Howard Hampton" label="Howard Hampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q386599" start="17716" end="17738" title="Artforum" label="ARTFORUM INTERNATIONAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q471920" start="17920" end="17935" title="Expanded Cinema" label="Expanded Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q747459" start="17945" end="17960" title="Gene Youngblood" label="Gene Youngblood"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18076" end="18090" title="Cyrus Manasseh" label="Cyrus Manasseh"/>
<link wikidata="Q19842930" start="18285" end="18295" title="A. L. Rees" label="A. L. Rees"/>
<link wikidata="Q16017786" start="18546" end="18561" title="Jackie Hatfield" label="Jackie Hatfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q11130954" start="18634" end="18658" title="Indiana University Press" label="Indiana University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q3973210" start="18754" end="18771" title="Stephen Partridge" label="Stephen Partridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594792" start="18951" end="18968" title="Wulf Herzogenrath" label="Wulf Herzogenrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594792" start="19084" end="19101" title="Wulf Herzogenrath" label="Wulf Herzogenrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q21055309" start="19524" end="19543" title="Marco Maria Gazzano" label="Marco Maria Gazzano"/>
</links>
</doc>
