<doc id="29376" wikidata="Q1462" url="?curid=29376" title="Sardinia">
<text>Sardinia ( ; ; ) is the second-largest island in the Mediterranean Sea, after Sicily, and one of the twenty regions of Italy. It is located west of the Italian Peninsula, north of Tunisia and 16.45 km south of the French island of Corsica.

It is one of the five Italian regions with some degree of domestic autonomy being granted by a special statute. Its official name, Autonomous Region of Sardinia, is bilingual in Italian and Sardinian: / . It is divided into four provinces and a metropolitan city. The capital of the region of Sardinia — and its largest city — is Cagliari.

Sardinia&#x27;s indigenous language and Algherese Catalan are referred to by both the regional and national law as two of Italy&#x27;s twelve officially recognized linguistic minorities, albeit gravely endangered, while the regional law provides some measures to recognize and protect the aforementioned as well as the island&#x27;s other minority languages (the Corsican-influenced Sassarese and Gallurese, and finally Tabarchino Ligurian).

Owing to the variety of Sardinia&#x27;s ecosystems, which include mountains, woods, plains, stretches of largely uninhabited territory, streams, rocky coasts, and long sandy beaches, Sardinia has been metaphorically described as a micro-continent. In the modern era, many travelers and writers have extolled the beauty of its long-untouched landscapes, which retain vestiges of the Nuragic civilization.

== Etymology ==
The name Sardinia has pre-Latin roots. It comes from the pre-Roman ethnonym *&quot;s(a)rd-&quot;, later romanised as (feminine ). It makes its first appearance on the Nora Stone, where the word &quot;ŠRDN&quot;, or *&quot;Šardana&quot;, testifies to the name&#x27;s existence when the Phoenician merchants first arrived.

According to &quot;Timaeus&quot;, one of Plato&#x27;s dialogues, Sardinia (referred to by most ancient Greek authors as , ) and its people as well might have been named after a legendary woman called Sardṓ (), born in Sardis (), capital of the ancient Kingdom of Lydia. There has also been speculation that identifies the ancient Nuragic Sards with the Sherden, one of the Sea Peoples. It is suggested that the name had a religious connotation from its use also as the adjective for the ancient Sardinian mythological hero-god Sardus Pater (&quot;Sardinian Father&quot;; a common explanation that the term means &quot;Father of the Sardinians&quot; is incorrect, as that would be &quot;Sardorum Pater&quot;), as well as being the stem of the adjective &quot;sardonic&quot;.

In classical antiquity, Sardinia was called a number of names besides &quot;Sardṓ&quot; () or &quot;Sardinia&quot;, like (the Latinised form of the Greek ), () and ().

== Geography ==


Sardinia is the second-largest island in the Mediterranean Sea (after Sicily and before Cyprus), with an area of . It is situated between 38° 51&#x27; and 41° 18&#x27; latitude north (respectively Isola del Toro and Isola La Presa) and 8° 8&#x27; and 9° 50&#x27; east longitude (respectively Capo dell&#x27;Argentiera and Capo Comino). To the west of Sardinia is the Sea of Sardinia, a unit of the Mediterranean Sea; to Sardinia&#x27;s east is the Tyrrhenian Sea, which is also an element of the Mediterranean Sea.

The nearest land masses are (clockwise from north) the island of Corsica, the Italian Peninsula, Sicily, Tunisia, the Balearic Islands, and Provence. The Tyrrhenian Sea portion of the Mediterranean Sea is directly to the east of Sardinia between the Sardinian east coast and the west coast of the Italian mainland peninsula. The Strait of Bonifacio is directly north of Sardinia and separates Sardinia from the French island of Corsica.

The coast of Sardinia is long. It is generally high and rocky, with long, relatively straight stretches, outstanding headlands, wide, deep bays, rias, and inlets with various smaller islands.

The island has an ancient geoformation and, unlike Sicily and mainland Italy, is not earthquake-prone. Its rocks date in fact from the Palaeozoic Era. The Cambrian-Lower Ordovician succession of Sardinia reaches 1500–3000 m in thickness. Due to long erosion processes, the island&#x27;s highlands, formed of granite, schist, trachyte, basalt (called &quot;jaras&quot; or &quot;gollei&quot;), sandstone and dolomite limestone (called &quot;tonneri&quot; or &#x27;heels&#x27;), average at between . The highest peak is Punta La Marmora ( in Sardinian language) (), part of the Gennargentu Ranges in the centre of the island. Other mountain chains are Monte Limbara () in the northeast, the Chain of Marghine and Goceano () running crosswise for towards the north, the Monte Albo (), the Sette Fratelli Range in the southeast, and the Sulcis Mountains and the Monte Linas (). The island&#x27;s ranges and plateaux are separated by wide alluvial valleys and flatlands, the main ones being the Campidano in the southwest between Oristano and Cagliari and the Nurra in the northwest.

Sardinia has few major rivers, the largest being the Tirso, long, which flows into the Sea of Sardinia, the Coghinas () and the Flumendosa (). There are 54 artificial lakes and dams that supply water and electricity. The main ones are Lake Omodeo and Lake Coghinas. The only natural freshwater lake is Lago di Baratz. A number of large, shallow, salt-water lagoons and pools are located along the coast.

=== Climate ===
The climate of the island is variable from area to area, due to several factors including the extension in latitude and the elevation. It can be classified in two different macrobioclimates (Mediterranean pluviseasonal oceanic and Temperate oceanic), one macrobioclimatic variant (Submediterranean), and four classes of continentality (from weak semihyperoceanic to weak semicontinental), eight thermotypic horizons (from lower thermomediterranean to upper supratemperate), and seven ombrotypic horizons (from lower dry to lower hyperhumid), resulting in a combination of 43 different isobioclimates.

During the year there is a major concentration of rainfall in the winter and autumn, some heavy showers in the spring and snowfalls in the highlands. The average temperature is between , with mild winters and warm summers on the coasts ( in January, in July), and cold winters and cool summers on the mountains ( in January, in July).

Rainfall has a Mediterranean distribution all over the island, with almost totally rainless summers and wet autumns, winters and springs. However, in summer, the rare rainfalls can be characterized by short but severe thunderstorms, which can cause flash floods. The climate is also heavily influenced by the vicinity of the Gulf of Genoa (barometric low) and the relative proximity of the Atlantic Ocean. Low pressures in autumn can generate the formation of the so-called &quot;Medicanes&quot;, extratropical cyclones which affect the Mediterranean basin. In 2013, the island was hit by several cyclones, included the Cyclone Cleopatra, which dumped of rainfall within an hour and a half.

Sardinia being relatively large and hilly, weather is not uniform; in particular the East is drier, but paradoxically it suffers the worst rainstorms: in autumn 2009, it rained more than in a single day in Siniscola, and 19 November 2013, locations in Sardinia were reported to have received more than within two hours. The western coast has a higher distribution of rainfalls even for modest elevations (for instance Iglesias, elevation , average annual precipitation ). The driest part of the island is the coast of Cagliari gulf, with less than per year, the minimum is at Capo Carbonara at the extreme south-east of the island , and the wettest is the top of the Gennargentu mountain with almost per year. The average for the entire island is about per year, which is more than enough for the needs of the population and vegetation. The Mistral from the northwest is the dominant wind on and off throughout the year, though it is most prevalent in winter and spring. It can blow quite strongly, but it is usually dry and cool.


== History ==

Sardinia has been inhabited by humans since the end of the Paleolithic era, around 20–10,000 years ago. The island&#x27;s most notable civilization is the indigenous Nuragic, which flourished from the 18th century BC to either 238 BC or the 2nd century AD in some parts of the island, and to the 6th century AD in that part of the island known as Barbagia.

After a period in which the island was ruled by a political and economic alliance between the Nuragic Sardinians and the Phoenicians, parts of it were conquered by Carthage in the late 6th century BC, and by Rome in 238 BC. The Roman occupation lasted for 700 years.

Beginning in the Early Middle Ages, the island was ruled by the Vandals and the Byzantines. In practice, the island was disconnected from Byzantium&#x27;s territorial influence, which allowed the Sardinians to provide themselves with a self-ruling political organization, the four kingdoms known as Judicates. The Italian maritime republics of Pisa and Genoa struggled to impose political control over these indigenous kingdoms, but it was the Iberian Crown of Aragon which, in 1324, succeeded in bringing the island under its control, consolidating it into the Kingdom of Sardinia.

This Iberian kingdom endured until 1718, when it was ceded to the Alpine House of Savoy; the Savoyards would politically merge their insular possession with their domains on the Italian Mainland which, during the period of Italian unification, they would go on to expand to include the whole Italian peninsula; their territory was so renamed into the Kingdom of Italy in 1861, and it was reconstituted as the present-day Italian Republic in 1946.

=== Prehistory ===


Sardinia is one of the most geologically ancient bodies of land in Europe. The island was populated in various waves of immigration from prehistory until recent times.

Remains from Corbeddu Cave in eastern Sardinia have been suggested by some authors to represent the earliest evidence of human presence on Sardinia, around 20,000 years ago, during the Last Glacial Maximum. However, other authors contend that there is no solid evidence for the occupation of the island until the early Mesolithic, around 10,000 years ago.

The Neolithic began on Sardinia during the 6th millennium BC resulting from the migration of Early European Farmers, replacing the Mesolithic hunter-gatherer populations, with a material culture including the widespread Cardium pottery style. In the mid-Neolithic period, the Ozieri culture, probably of Aegean origin, flourished on the island spreading the hypogeum tombs known as domus de Janas, while the Arzachena culture of Gallura built the first megaliths: circular tombs. In the early 3rd millennium BC, the metallurgy of copper and silver began to develop.

During the late Chalcolithic the so-called Beaker culture, coming from various parts of Continental Europe, appeared in Sardinia. These new people predominantly settled on the west coast, where the majority of the sites attributed to them had been found. The Beaker culture was followed in the early Bronze Age by the Bonnanaro culture which showed both reminiscences of the Beaker and influences by the Polada culture.

As time passed the different Sardinian populations appear to have become united in customs, yet remained politically divided into various small, tribal groupings, at times banding together against invading forces from the sea, and at others waging war against each other. Habitations consisted of round thatched stone huts.
==== Nuragic civilization ====

From about 1500 BC onwards, villages were built around a kind of round tower-fortress called &quot;nuraghe&quot; (usually pluralized as &quot;nuraghes&quot; in English and as in Italian). These towers were often reinforced and enlarged with battlements. Tribal boundaries were guarded by smaller lookout Nuraghes erected on strategic hills commanding a view of other territories.

Today, some 7,000 Nuraghes dot the Sardinian landscape. While initially these Nuraghes had a relatively simple structure, with time they became extremely complex and monumental (see for example the &quot;Nuraghe Santu Antine&quot;, &quot;Su Nuraxi&quot;, or &quot;Nuraghe Arrubiu&quot;). The scale, complexity and territorial spread of these buildings attest to the level of wealth accumulated by the Nuragic Sardinians, their advances in technology and the complexity of their society, which was able to coordinate large numbers of people with different roles for the purpose of building the monumental Nuraghes.

The Nuraghes are not the only Nuragic buildings that stand in place, as there are several sacred wells around Sardinia and other buildings with religious purposes such as the Giants&#x27; grave (monumental collective tombs) and collections of religious buildings that probably served as destinations for pilgrimage and mass religious rites (e.g. &quot;Su Romanzesu&quot; near Bitti).

At the time, Sardinia was at the centre of several commercial routes and it was an important provider of raw materials such as copper and lead, which were pivotal for the manufacture of the time. By controlling the extraction of these raw materials and by trading them with other countries, the ancient Sardinians were able to accumulate wealth and reach a level of sophistication that is not only reflected in the complexity of its surviving buildings, but also in its artworks (e.g. the votive bronze statuettes found across Sardinia or the statues of Mont&#x27;e Prama).

According to some scholars, the Nuragic people(s) are identifiable with the Sherden, a tribe of the Sea Peoples.

The Nuragic civilization was linked with other contemporaneous megalithic civilization of the western Mediterranean, such as the Talaiotic culture of the Balearic Islands and the Torrean civilization of Southern Corsica. Evidence of trade with the other civilizations of the time is attested by several artefacts (e.g. pots), coming from as far as Cyprus, Crete, Mainland Greece, Spain and Italy, that have been found in Nuragic sites, bearing witness to the scope of commercial relations between the Nuragic people and other peoples in Europe and beyond.

=== Ancient history ===

Around the 9th century BC the Phoenicians began visiting Sardinia with increasing frequency, presumably initially needing safe overnight and all-weather anchorages along their trade routes from the coast of modern-day Lebanon as far afield as the African and European Atlantic coasts and beyond. The most common ports of call were Caralis, Nora, Bithia, Sulci, and Tharros. Claudian, a 4th-century Latin poet, in his poem &quot;De bello Gildonico&quot;, stated that Caralis was founded by people from Tyre, probably in the same time of the foundation of Carthage, in the 9th or 8th century BC.
In the 6th century BC, after the conquest of western Sicily, the Carthaginians planned to annex Sardinia. A first invasion attempt led by Malchus was foiled by the victorious Nuraghic resistance. However, from 510 BC, the southern and west-central part of the island were invaded a second time and came under Carthaginian rule.
In 238 BC, taking advantage of Carthage having to face a rebellion of her mercenaries (the Mercenary War) after the First Punic War (264–241 BC), the Romans annexed Corsica and Sardinia from the Carthaginians. The two islands became the province of Corsica and Sardinia. They were not given a provincial governor until 227 BC. The Romans faced many rebellions, and it took them many years to pacify both islands. The existing coastal cities were enlarged and embellished, and Roman colonies such as Turris Lybissonis and Feronia were founded. These were populated by Roman immigrants. The Roman military occupation brought the Nuragic civilization to an end, except for the mountainous interior of the island, which the Romans called &quot;Barbaria&quot;, meaning &#x27;Barbarian land&#x27;. Roman rule in Sardinia lasted 694 years, during which time the province was an important source of grain for the capital. Latin came to be the dominant spoken language during this period, though Roman culture was slower to take hold, and Roman rule was often contested by the Sardinian tribes from the mountainous regions.

=== Vandal conquest ===

The east Germanic tribe of the Vandals conquered Sardinia in 456. Their rule lasted for 78 years up to 534, when 400 eastern Roman troops led by Cyril, one of the officers of the &quot;foederati&quot;, retook the island. It is known that the Vandal government continued the forms of the existing Roman Imperial structure. The governor of Sardinia continued to be called the &quot;praeses&quot; and apparently continued to manage military, judicial, and civil governmental functions via imperial procedures. The only Vandal governor of Sardinia about whom there is substantial record is the last, Godas, a Visigoth noble. In AD 530, a coup d&#x27;état in Carthage removed King Hilderic, a convert to Nicene Christianity, in favor of his cousin Gelimer, an Arian Christian like most of the elite in his kingdom. Godas was sent to take charge and ensure the loyalty of Sardinia. He did the exact opposite, declaring the island&#x27;s independence from Carthage and opening negotiations with Emperor Justinian I, who had declared war on Hilderic&#x27;s behalf. In AD 533, Gelimer sent the bulk of his army and navy (120 vessels and 5,000 men) to Sardinia to subdue Godas, with the catastrophic result that the Vandal Kingdom was overwhelmed when Justinian&#x27;s own army under Belisarius arrived at Carthage in their absence. The Vandal Kingdom ended and Sardinia was returned to Roman rule.

=== Byzantine era and the rise of the Judicates ===

In 533, Sardinia returned to the rule of the Byzantine Empire when the Vandals were defeated by the armies of Justinian I under the General Belisarius in the Battle of Tricamarum, in their African kingdom Belisarius sent his general Cyril to Sardinia to retake the island. Sardinia remained in Byzantine hands for the next 300 years aside from a short period in which it was invaded by the Ostrogoths in 551.

Under Byzantine rule, the island was divided into districts called &quot;mereíai&quot; (μερείαι) in Byzantine Greek, which were governed by a judge residing in Caralis and garrisoned by an army stationed in &quot;Forum Traiani&quot; (today Fordongianus) under the command of a &quot;dux&quot;. During this time, Christianity took deeper root on the island, supplanting the Paganism which had survived into the early Middle Ages in the culturally conservative hinterlands. Along with lay Christianity, the followers of monastic figures such as Basil of Caesarea became established in Sardinia. While Christianity penetrated the majority of the population, the region of Barbagia remained largely pagan and, probably, partially non-Latin speaking. They re-established a short-lived independent domain with Sardinian-heathen lay and religious traditions, one of its kings being Hospito. Pope Gregory I wrote a letter to Hospito defining him &quot;Dux Barbaricinorum&quot; and, being Christian, the leader and best of his people. In this unique letter about Hospito, the Pope prompts him to convert his people who &quot;living all like irrational animals, ignore the true God and worship wood and stone&quot; ().
The dates and circumstances of the end of Byzantine rule in Sardinia are not known. Direct central control was maintained at least through c. 650, after which local legates were empowered in the face of the rebellion of Gregory the Patrician, Exarch of Africa and the first invasion of the Muslim conquest of the Maghreb. There is some evidence that senior Byzantine administration in the Exarchate of Africa retreated to Caralis following the final fall of Carthage to the Arabs in 697. The loss of imperial control in Africa led to escalating raids by Arabs on the island, the first of which is documented in 703, forcing increased military self-reliance in the province.

Elsewhere in the central Mediterranean, the Aghlabids conquered the island of Malta in 870. They also attacked or raided Sardinia and Corsica. Some modern references state that Sardinia came under Aghlabid control around 810 or after the beginning of the conquest of Sicily in 827. Historian Corrado Zedda argues that the island hosted a Muslim presence during the Aghlabid period, possibly a limited foothold along the coasts that forcibly coexisted with the local Byzantine government. Historian Alex Metcalfe argues that the available evidence for any Muslim occupation or colonisation of the island during this period is limited and inconclusive, and that Muslim attacks were limited to raids.

Communication with the central government became daunting if not impossible during and after the Muslim conquest of Sicily between 827 and 902. A letter by Pope Nicholas I as early as 864 mentions the &quot;Sardinian judges&quot;, without reference to the empire and a letter by Pope John VIII (reigned 872–882) refers to them as &quot;principes&quot; (&quot;princes&quot;). By the time of &quot;De Administrando Imperio&quot;, completed in 952, the Byzantine authorities no longer listed Sardinia as an imperial province, suggesting they considered it lost.
In all likelihood a local noble family, the Lacon-Gunale, acceded to the power of Archon, still identifying themselves as vassals of the Byzantines, but &quot;de facto&quot; independent as communications with Constantinople were very difficult. Only two names of those rulers are known: Salousios () and the Tourkotourios () from two inscriptions), who probably reigned between the 10th and the 11th century. These rulers were still closely linked to the Byzantines, both for a pact of ancient vassalage, and from the ideological point of view, with the use of the Byzantine Greek language (in a Romance country), and the use of art of Byzantine inspiration.

In the early 11th century, an attempt to conquer the island was made by Mujahid al-Amiri al-Ṣaqlabī was the ruler of Dénia and the Balearic Islands based in the Iberian Peninsula. The only records of that war are from Pisan and Genoese chronicles. The Christians won but, after that, the previous Sardinian kingdom was undermined and subsequently divided into four smaller states: Cagliari (&quot;Calari&quot;), Arborea (&quot;Arbaree&quot;), Gallura, and Torres or Logudoro.

Whether this final transformation from imperial civil servant to independent sovereign bodies resulted from imperial abandonment or local assertion, by the 10th century, the so-called &quot;Judges&quot; ( / , a Byzantine administrative title) had emerged as the autonomous rulers of Sardinia. The title of changed with the language and local understanding of the position, becoming the Sardinian , essentially a king or sovereign, while &quot;Judicate&quot; () came to mean &#x27;state&#x27;.

Early medieval Sardinian political institutions evolved from the millennium-old Roman imperial structures with relatively little Germanic influence.

Although the Judicates were hereditary lordships, the old Byzantine imperial notion that personal title or honor was separate from the state still remained, so the Judicate was not regarded as the personal property of the monarch as was common in later European feudalism. Like the imperial systems, the new order also preserved &quot;semi-democratic&quot; forms, with national assemblies called the Crown of the Realm. Each Judicate saw to its own defense, maintained its own laws and administration, and looked after its own foreign and trading affairs.

The history of the four Judicates would be defined by the contest for influence between the two Italian maritime powers of Genoa and Pisa, and later the ambitions of the Kingdom of Aragon.

The Judicate of Cagliari or &quot;Pluminos&quot;, during the regency of Torchitorio V of Cagliari and his successor, William III, was allied with the Republic of Genoa. Because of this it was brought to an end in 1258, when its capital, Santa Igia, was stormed and destroyed by an alliance of Sardinian and Pisan forces. The territory then was divided between the Republic of Pisa, the Della Gherardesca family from Italy, and the Sardinian Judicates of Arborea and Gallura. Pisa maintained the control over the fortress of Castel di Cagliari founded by Pisan merchants in 1216–1217 east of Santa Igia; in the south-west the count Ugolino della Gherardesca promoted the birth of the town of &quot;Villa di Chiesa&quot; (today Iglesias) to exploit the nearby rich silver deposits.

The Judicate of Logudoro (also called &quot;Torres&quot;) was also allied to the Republic of Genoa and came to an end in 1259 after the death of the (queen) Adelasia. The territory was divided up between the Doria and Malaspina families of Genoa and the Bas-Serra family of Arborea, while the city of Sassari became a small republic, along the lines of the Italian city-states (&quot;comuni&quot;), confederated firstly with Pisa and then with Genoa.

The Judicate of Gallura ended in the year 1288, when the last giudice, Nino Visconti (a friend of Dante Alighieri), was driven out by the Pisans, who occupied the territory.

The Judicate of Arborea, having Oristano as its capital, had the longest life compared to the other kingdoms. Its later history is entwined with the attempt to unify the island into a single Sardinian state ( &#x27;Sardinian Republic&#x27; in Sardinian, or &#x27;Sardinian Nation&#x27; in Catalan) against their relatives and former Aragonese allies.

=== Aragonese period ===
In 1297, Pope Boniface VIII established on his own initiative (&quot;motu proprio&quot;) a hypothetical &quot;regnum Sardiniae et Corsicae&quot; (&quot;Kingdom of Sardinia and Corsica&quot;) in order to settle the War of the Sicilian Vespers diplomatically. This had broken out in 1282 between the Capetian House of Anjou and Aragon over the possession of Sicily. Despite the existence of the indigenous states, the Pope offered this newly created crown to James II of Aragon, promising him support should he wish to conquer Pisan Sardinia in exchange for Sicily.
In 1324, in alliance with the Kingdom of Arborea and following a military campaign that lasted a year or so, the Aragon Crown Prince Alfonso led an Aragonese army that occupied the Pisan territories of Cagliari and Gallura along with the allied city of Sassari, naming them &quot;The Kingdom of Sardinia and Corsica&quot;. The kingdom was to remain a dominion of the Crown of Aragon (under the 16th-century kings of Spain) until the Peace of Utrecht.

During this period, the Judicate of Arborea promulgated the legal code of the kingdom in the &quot;Carta de Logu&quot; (&#x27;Charter of the Land&#x27;). The Carta de Logu was originally compiled by Marianus IV of Arborea, and was amended and updated by Mariano&#x27;s daughter, Female Judge ( or ) Eleanor of Arborea. The legal code was written in Sardinian and established a whole range of citizens&#x27; rights. Among the revolutionary concepts in this Carta de Logu was the right of women to refuse marriage and to own property. In terms of civil liberties, the code made provincial 14th century Sardinia one of the most developed societies in all of Europe.

In 1353, Peter IV of Aragon, following Aragonese customs, granted a parliament to the kingdom of Sardinia and Corsica, which was followed by some degree of self-government under a viceroy and judicial independence. This parliament, however, had limited powers. It consisted of high-ranking military commanders, the clergy and the nobility. The kingdom of Aragon also introduced the feudal system into the areas of Sardinia that it ruled.

The Sardinian Judicates never adopted feudalism, and Arborea maintained its parliament, called the &quot;Corona de Logu&quot; &#x27;Crown of the Realm&#x27;. In this parliament, apart from the nobles and military commanders, also sat the representatives of each township and village. The Corona de Logu exercised some control over the king: under the rule of the &quot;bannus consensus&quot; the king could be deposed or even executed if he did not follow the rules of the kingdom.

Having broken the alliance with the Crown of Aragon, from 1353 to 1409, the Arborean giudici Marianus IV, Hugh III and Brancaleone Doria (husband of Eleanor of Arborea), succeeded in occupying all of Sardinia except the heavily fortified towns of the Castle of Cagliari and Alghero, which for years remained as the only Aragonese dominions in Sardinia (Sardinian–Aragonese war).

In 1409, Martin I of Sicily, king of Sicily and heir to the crown of Aragon, defeated the Sardinians at the Battle of Sanluri. The battle was fought by about 20,000 Sardinian, Genoese and French knights, enrolled from their kingdom at a time when the population of Sardinia had been greatly depleted by the plague. Despite the Sardinian army outnumbering the Aragonese army, they were defeated.

The Judicate of Arborea disappeared in 1420, when its rights were sold by the last king for 100,000 gold florins, and after some of its most notable men switched sides in exchange for privileges. For example, Leonardo Cubello, with some claim to the crown being from a family related to the Kings of Arborea, was granted the title of Marquis of Oristano and feudal rights on a territory that partly overlapped with the original extension of the Kingdom of Arborea in exchange for his subjection to the Aragonese monarchs.

The conquest of Sardinia by the Kingdom of Aragon meant the introduction of the feudal system throughout Sardinia. Thus Sardinia is probably the only European country where feudalism was introduced in the transition period from the Middle Ages to the early modern period, at a time when feudalism had already been abandoned by many other European countries.

=== Spanish period ===
In 1469, the heir to Sardinia, Ferdinand II of Aragon, married Isabel of Castile, and the &quot;Kingdom of Sardinia&quot; (which was separated from Corsica) was to be inherited by their Habsburg grandson, Charles I of Spain, with the state symbol of the Four Moors. The successors of Charles I of Spain, in order to defend their Mediterranean territories from raids of the Barbary pirates, fortified the Sardinian shores with a system of coastal lookout towers, allowing the gradual resettlement of some coastal areas.

The Kingdom of Sardinia remained Aragonese-Spanish for about 400 years, from 1323 to 1708, assimilating a number of Spanish traditions, customs and linguistic expressions, nowadays vividly portrayed in the folklore parades of Saint Efisio in Cagliari (1 May), the Cavalcade on Sassari (last but one Sunday in May), and the Redeemer in Nuoro (28 August). To this day Catalan is still spoken in the north-western city of Alghero (l&#x27;Alguer).

Many famines have been reported in Sardinia. According to Stephen L. Dyson and Robert J. Rowland, &quot;The Jesuits of Cagliari recorded years during the late 16th century &quot;of such hunger and so sterile that the majority of the people could sustain life only with wild ferns and other weeds&quot; ... During the terrible famine of 1680, some 80,000 people, out of a total population of 250,000, are said to have died, and entire villages were devastated ... &quot;

=== Savoyard period ===
In 1708, as a consequence of the Spanish War of Succession, the rule of the Kingdom of Sardinia passed from King Philip V of Spain into the hands of the Austrians, who occupied the island. The Treaty of Utrecht granted Sardinia to the Austrians, but in 1717, Cardinal Giulio Alberoni, minister of Philip V of Spain, reoccupied Sardinia.

In 1718, with the Treaty of London, Sardinia was eventually handed over to the House of Savoy; this Alpine dynasty would go on to introduce the Italian language on the island forty years later in 1760, thereby starting a process of Italianization amongst the islanders.

In 1793, Sardinians repelled the French &quot;Expédition de Sardaigne&quot; during the French Revolutionary Wars. On 23 February 1793, Domenico Millelire, commanding the Sardinian fleet, defeated the fleets of the French Republic near the Maddalena archipelago, of which then-lieutenant Napoleon Bonaparte was a leader. Millelire became the first recipient of the Gold Medal of Military Valor of the Italian Armed Forces. In the same month, Sardinians stopped the attempted French landing on the beach of Quartu Sant&#x27;Elena, near the Capital of Cagliari. Because of these successes, the representatives of the nobility and clergy (&quot;Stamenti&quot;) formulated five requests addressed to the King Victor Amadeus III of Sardinia, but they were all met with rejection. Because of this discontent, on 28 April 1794, during an uprising in Cagliari, two Savoyard officials were killed; that was the spark that ignited a revolt (called the &quot;Sardinian Vespers&quot;) throughout the island, which started on 28 April 1794 (commemorated today as &quot;sa die de sa Sardigna&quot;) with the expulsion and execution of the Piedmontese officers for a few days from the Capital Cagliari. 

On 28 December 1795 Sassari insurgents demonstrating against feudalism, mainly from the region of Logudoro, occupied the city. On 13 February 1796, in order to prevent the spread of the revolt, the viceroy Filippo Vivalda gave the Sardinian magistrate Giovanni Maria Angioy the role of Alternos, which meant a substitute of the viceroy himself. Angioy moved from Cagliari to Sassari, and during his journey almost all the villages joined the uprising, demanding an end to feudalism and aiming to declare the island to be an independent republic, but once he was outnumbered by loyalist forces he fled to Paris and sought support for a French annexation of the island.

In 1798, the islet near Sardinia was attacked by the Tunisians and over 900 inhabitants were taken away as slaves. The final Muslim attack on the island was on Sant&#x27;Antioco on 16 October 1815, over a millennium since the first.

In 1799, as a consequence of the Napoleonic Wars in Italy, the Savoy royal family left Turin and took refuge in Cagliari for some fifteen years. In 1847, the Sardinian parliaments (&quot;Stamenti&quot;), in order to get the Piedmontese liberal reforms they could not afford due to their separated legal system, renounced their state autonomy and agreed to form a union with the Italian Mainland States (&quot;Stati di Terraferma&quot;), ending up with a single parliament, a single magistracy and a single government in Turin; this move aggravated the island&#x27;s peripheral condition and most of the pro-union supporters, including its leader Giovanni Siotto Pintor, would later regret it.
In 1820, the Savoyards imposed the Enclosures Act (&quot;Editto delle Chiudende&quot;) on the island, aimed at turning the land&#x27;s traditional collective ownership, a cultural and economic cornerstone of Sardinia since the Nuragic times, to private property. This gave rise to many abuses, as the reform ended up favouring the landholders while excluding the poor Sardinian farmers and shepherds, who witnessed the abolition of the communal rights and the sale of their lands. Many local rebellions like the Nuorese (&#x27;The Already Known&#x27; in Sardinian) riot in 1868, all repressed by the King&#x27;s army, resulted in an attempt to return to the past and reaffirm the right to use the once common land. However the common lands (called &quot;ademprivios&quot;) were never completely abolished, and they are still present in large number to this day (500,000 hectares of common lands were counted in 1956, of which 345,000 constituted by woods).

===Kingdom of Italy===

With the Perfect Fusion in 1848, the confederation of states powered by the Savoyard kings of Sardinia became a unitary and constitutional state and moved to the Italian Wars of Independence for the Unification of Italy, that were led for thirteen years. In 1861, being Italy united by a debated war campaign, the parliament of the Kingdom of Sardinia decided by law to change its name and the title of its king to Kingdom of Italy and King of Italy. Most Sardinian forests were cut down at this time, in order to provide the Piedmontese with raw materials, like wood, used to make railway sleepers on the mainland. The primary natural forests, praised by every traveller visiting Sardinia, would in fact be reduced to one-fifth of their original number, being little more than 100,000 hectares at the end of the century. From 1850 onward, taxes more than doubled in Sardinia, which compounded the already severe financial hardships facing the islanders, due to the Italo-French tariff war: between 1885 and 1897, the Sardinians saw their land being confiscated more than the rest of Italy combined as a result of tax evasion.

During the First World War, the Sardinian soldiers of the Brigata Sassari distinguished themselves. It was the first and only regional military unit in Italy, since the people enrolled were only Sardinians. The brigade suffered heavy losses and earned four Gold Medals of Military Valor. Sardinia lost more young people than any other Italian region on the front, with 138 casualties per 1000 soldiers compared to the Italian average of 100 casualties.

During the Fascist period, with the implementation of the policy of autarky, several swamps around the island were reclaimed and agrarian communities founded. The main communities were the village of Mussolinia (now called Arborea), populated by farmers from Veneto and Friuli, in the area of Oristano and Fertilia, populated at first by settlers from the Ferrara area, followed, after World War II, by a notable number of Istrian Italians and Dalmatian Italians hailing from territories lost to Yugoslavia, in the area adjacent the city of Alghero, within the region of Nurra. Also established during that time (1938) was the city of Carbonia, which became the main centre of coal mining activity, that attracted thousand of workers from the rest of the Island and the Italian mainland. The Sardinian writer Grazia Deledda won the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1926.
During the Second World War, Sardinia was an important air and naval base and was heavily bombed by the Allies, especially the city of Cagliari. German troops left the island on 8 September 1943, a few days after the Armistice of Cassibile, and retired to Corsica without fighting and bloodshed, after a bilateral agreement between the general Antonio Basso (Commander of the Armed Forces of Sardinia) and the German Karl Hans Lungerhausen, general of the 90th Panzergrenadier Division.

=== Post-Second World War period ===
In 1946, by popular referendum, Italy became a republic, with Sardinia being administered since 1948 by a special statute of autonomy. By 1951, malaria was successfully eliminated by the ERLAAS, Anti-malaric Regional Authority, and the support of the Rockefeller Foundation, which facilitated the commencement of the Sardinian tourist boom. With the increase in tourism, coal decreased in importance but Sardinia followed the Italian economic miracle.

In the early 1960s, an industrialisation effort was commenced, the so-called &quot;Piani di Rinascita&quot; (rebirth plans), with the initiation of major infrastructure projects on the island. These included the construction of new dams and roads, reforestation, agricultural zones on reclaimed marshland, and large industrial complexes (primarily oil refineries and related petrochemical operations). With the creation of petrochemical industries, thousands of ex-farmers became industrial workers. The 1973 oil crisis caused the termination of employment for thousands of workers employed in the petrochemical industries, which aggravated the emigration already present in the 1950s and 1960s.

Sardinia faced the creation of military bases on the island, like Decimomannu Air Base and Salto di Quirra (the biggest scientific military base in Europe) in the same decades. Even now, around 60% of all Italian and NATO military installations in Italy are on Sardinia, whose area is less than one-tenth of all the Italian territory and whose population is little more than the 2.5%; furthermore, they comprise over 35,000 hectares used for experimental weapons testing, where 80% of the military explosives in Italy are used.

Sardinian nationalism and local protest movements became stronger in the 1970s, and a number of bandits (&quot;anonima sarda&quot;) started a long series of kidnappings, which ended only in the 1990s. This also gave rise to various militant groups that blended separatist and communist ideas, the most famous being &quot;Barbagia Rossa&quot; and the Sardinian Armed Movement, which perpetrated several bombings and terrorist actions between the 1970s and the 1980s. In the span of just two years (1987–1988), 224 bombing attacks were reported.

In 1983 a prominent activist of a separatist party, the Sardinian Action Party (&quot;Partidu Sardu – Partito Sardo d&#x27;Azione&quot;), was elected president of the regional parliament, and in the 1980s several other movements calling for independence from Italy were born; in the 1990s some of them became political parties, even if in a rather disjointed manner. It was not until 1999 that the island&#x27;s languages (Sardinian, Sassarese, Gallurese, Algherese and Tabarchino) were recognised, even if just formally, together with Italian. The 35th G8 summit was planned by Prodi II Cabinet to be held in Sardinia, on the island of La Maddalena, in July 2009; however, in April 2009, the Italian Prime Minister, Silvio Berlusconi, decided, without convoking the Italian parliament or consulting the Sardinian governor of his own party, to move the summit, even though the works were almost completed, to L&#x27;Aquila, provoking heavy protests.

Today Sardinia is phasing in as an EU region, with a diversified economy focused on tourism and the tertiary sector. The economic efforts of the last twenty years have reduced the handicap of insularity, especially in the fields of low-cost air travel and advanced information technology. For example, the CRS4 (Center for Advanced Studies, Research and Development in Sardinia) developed the second European website and 1st in Italy in 1991 and webmail in 1995. CRS4 allowed several telecommunication companies and internet service providers based on the island to flourish, such as Videonline in 1994, Tiscali in 1998 and Andala Umts in 1999.

== Environment ==

Following an enormous reforestation plan Sardinia has become the Italian region with the largest forest extension. 1,213,250 hectares (12,132 km2) or 50% of the island is covered by forested areas. The &quot;Corpo forestale e di vigilanza ambientale della Regione Sarda&quot; is the Sardinian Forestry Corps. Sardinia is one of the regions in Italy which are most affected by forest fires during the summer.

The Regional Landscape Plan prohibits new building activities on the coast (except in urban centers), next to forests, lakes or other environmental or cultural sites and the Coastal conservation agency ensures the protection of natural areas on the Sardinian coast.

Renewable energies have increased noticeably in recent years, mainly wind power, favoured by the windy climate, but also solar power and biofuel, based on jatropha oil and colza oil. 586.8 megawatts of wind power capacity were installed on the island at the end of 2009.

=== Flora and fauna ===

Due to Sardinia&#x27;s continual isolation from mainland Europe even during glacial sea level lows (when it was connected to Corsica), Sardinia has a high level of endemism, with regards to both flora and fauna, including insects and arachnids, as well as terrestrial vertebrates, with endemic amphibians (including those also found on Corsica) including the Sardinian brook salamander, brown cave salamander, imperial cave salamander, Monte Albo cave salamander, Supramonte cave salamander, Sarrabus&#x27; cave salamander and the Sardinian tree frog (also found in Corsica), with lizards endemic to the archipelago including Bedriaga&#x27;s rock lizard, the Tyrrhenian wall lizard and Fitzinger&#x27;s algyroides.

During the Late Pleistocene, Sardinia and Corsica had a highly endemic terrestrial mammal fauna, all of which is now extinct, which included a field mouse (&quot;Rhagamys orthodon&quot;), a vole (&quot;Microtus henseli&quot;), a shrew (&quot;Asoriculus similis&quot;), a mole (&quot;Talpa tyrrhenica&quot;), a dwarf mammoth (&quot;Mammuthus&quot; &quot;lamarmorai&quot;), the Sardinian pika (&quot;Prolagus sardus&quot;), a jackal-sized canine, the Sardinian dhole (&quot;Cynotherium sardus&quot;), a mustelid (&quot;Enhydrictis galictoides&quot;), three species of otter (&quot;Algarolutra majori, Sardolutra ichnusae,&quot; and the gigantic &quot;Megalenhydris barbaricina&quot;) and a deer (&quot;Praemegaceros cazioti&quot;). Some of these animals were extinct by the beginning of the Holocene, with the deer species suggested to have persisted until around 7,600 years ago, and the shrew into the Neolithic, while the Sardinian pika, vole and field mouse are suggested to have persisted until around 3000–2000 years ago. The Sardinian pika in particular was historically abundant on the island, and was used by early inhabitants as a source of food. On the includes a variety of introduced mammal species, such as the Corsican red deer.

The island is inhabited by terrestrial tortoises and sea turtles like Hermann&#x27;s tortoise, the spur-thighed tortoise, marginated tortoise (&quot;Testudo marginata sarda&quot;), Nabeul tortoise, loggerhead sea turtle and green sea turtle.

Some birds of prey found here are the griffon vulture, common buzzard, golden eagle, long-eared owl, western marsh harrier, peregrine falcon, European honey buzzard, Sardinian goshawk (&quot;Accipiter gentilis arrigonii&quot;), Bonelli&#x27;s eagle and Eleonora&#x27;s falcon, whose name comes from Eleonor of Arborea, national heroine of Sardinia, expert in falconry.
The hundreds of lagoons and coastal lakes that dot the island are home for many species of wading birds, such as the greater flamingo.

Conversely, Sardinia lacks many species common on the European continent, such as the viper, wolf, bear and marmot.

The island has also long been used for grazing flocks of indigenous Sardinian sheep. The Sardinian Anglo-Arab is a horse breed that was established in Sardinia, where it has been selectively bred for more than one hundred years.

Three different breeds of dogs are peculiar to Sardinia: the Sardinian Shepherd Dog, the Dogo Sardesco and the Levriero Sardo.

=== Natural parks and reserves ===
Over of Sardinian territory is environmentally preserved (about 25% of the island&#x27;s territory).
The island has three national parks:
* 1. Asinara National Park,
* 2. Arcipelago di La Maddalena National Park, and
* 3. Gennargentu National Park.

Ten regional parks:
* 4. Parco del Limbara
* 5. Parco del Marghine e Goceano
* 6. Parco del Sinis – Montiferru
* 7. Parco di Monte Arci
* 8. Parco della Giara di Gesturi
* 9. Parco di Monte Linas – Oridda – Marganai
* 10. Parco dei Sette Fratelli – Monte Genas
* 11. Parco del Sulcis
* Parco naturale regionale di Porto Conte
* Parco regionale Molentargius – Saline

There are 60 wildlife reserves, 5 W.W.F oases, 25 natural monuments and one Geomineral Park, preserved by UNESCO.

Northern Sardinian Coasts are included in the Pelagos Sanctuary for Mediterranean Marine Mammals, a Marine Protected Area, that covers a surface of about , aimed at the protection of marine mammals.

== Education ==
According to the ISTAT census of 2001, the literacy rate in Sardinia among people below 65 years old is 99.5 percent. Total literacy rate (including people over 65) is 98.2 percent.
The illiteracy rate among males below 65 years old is 0.24 percent and among women 0.25 percent; the number of women that annually graduate at secondary high schools and universities is about 10–20 percent higher than men. Sardinia has the 2nd highest rate of school drop-out in Italy.

Sardinia has two public universities: the University of Sassari and the University of Cagliari, founded in the 16th and 17th century. 48,979 students were enrolled at universities in 2007–2008.

== Economy ==
Of the Italian regions located south of Rome, Sardinia&#x27;s economy is in the best state. The greatest amount of economic development took place inland, in the provinces of Cagliari and Sassari, characterized by a certain amount of enterprise. According to Eurostat, the 2014 nominal gross domestic product (GDP) was €33,356 million, €33,085 million in purchasing power parity, resulting in a GDP per capita of €19,900, which is 72% of the EU average. The per capita income in Sardinia is the highest of the southern half of Italy. The most populated provincial chief towns have higher incomes: in Cagliari the income per capita is €27,545, in Sassari €24,006, in Oristano €23,887, in Nuoro is €23,316 and in Olbia is €20,827. Sardinia is the 14th most productive region in the country and is the 16th for GRP per capita among Italian regions.

The Sardinian economy is, however, constrained due to the high costs of the transportation of goods and electricity, which is twice that of the continental Italian regions, and triple that of the EU average. Sardinia is the only Italian region that produces a surplus of electricity, and exports electricity to Corsica and the Italian mainland: in 2009, the new submarine power cable Sapei entered into operation. It links the Fiume Santo Power Station, in Sardinia, to the converter stations in Latina, in the Italian peninsula. The SACOI is another submarine power cable that links Sardinia to Italy, crossing Corsica, from 1965.

Small scale liquified natural gas terminals and a gas pipeline were under construction, and became operational in 2018. They will decrease the current high cost of the electric power in the island. , Sardinia has 2 GigaWatts (GW) of thermal power plants, 1 GW each of wind and solar power, and over 450 MW of hydropower.
Three main banks are headquartered in Sardinia; however, Banco di Sardegna and Banca di Sassari, are both originally from Sassari.

There are chances for Sardinia to become a tax haven as the whole island territory is free of custom duties, value added tax (VAT) and excise taxes on fuel; since February 2013, the town of Portoscuso has become the first free trade zone. According to the article 12 of the Sardinian Statute modified by the regional parliament in October 2013: &quot;The Territory of the Autonomous Region of Sardinia is located off the customs line and constitutes a Free Trade Zone enclosed by the surrounding sea; the access points consist of the seaports and the airports. The Sardinian Free Trade Zone is regulated by the laws of the European Union and Italy that are in force also in Livigno, Campione D&#x27;Italia, Gorizia, Savogna d&#x27;Isonzo and the Region of Aosta Valley&quot;.


=== Unemployment ===

The unemployment rate for the fourth quarter of 2008 was 8.6%; by 2012, the unemployment rate had increased to 14.6%. Its rise was due to the Great Recession that reduced Sardinian exports, mainly focused on refined oil, chemical products, and also mining and metallurgical products.

The unemployment rate dropped to 11.2% at the end of 2018, which is only 1.8 percentage points (pp) higher than the national average (9.4%) and 5.3pp lower than Southern Italian regions (16.5%), according to Italian National Institute of Statistics.

=== Economic sectors ===
This table shows the sectors of the Sardinian economy in 2011:
==== Primary ====

Sardinia is home to nearly four million sheep, almost half of the entire Italian assets and that makes the island one of the areas of the world with the highest density of sheep along with some parts of the United Kingdom and New Zealand (135 sheep every square kilometer versus 129 in UK and 116 in New Zealand). Sardinia has been for thousands of years specializing in sheep breeding, and, to a lesser extent, goats and cattle that is less productive of agriculture in relation to land use. It is probably in breeding and cattle ownership the economic base of the early proto-historic and monumental Sardinian civilization from Neolithic to the Iron Age.

Agriculture has also played a very important role in the economic history of the island, especially in the great plain of Campidano, particularly suitable for wheat farming. Sardinian soil often has insufficient or brackish water aquifers, even on its more permeable plains. As such, water scarcity was the first problem that was faced for the modernization of the sector, with the construction of a great barrier system of dams, which today contains nearly 2 billion cubic meters of water. The Sardinian agriculture is now linked to specific products such as cheese, wine, olive oil, artichoke, tomato for a growing product export. The reclamations have helped to extend the crops and to introduce other ones such as vegetables and fruit, next to the historical ones, olive and grapes that are present in the hilly areas. The Campidano plain, the largest lowland Sardinian produces oats, barley and durum, of which is one of the most important Italian producers. Among the vegetables, as well as artichokes, has a certain weight the production of oranges, and, before the reform of the sugar sector from the European Union, the cultivation of sugar beet. 

In the forests there is the cork oak, which grows naturally; Sardinia produces about 80% of Italian cork. The cork district, in the northern part of the Gallura region, around Calangianus and Tempio Pausania, is composed of 130 companies. Every year in Sardinia 200,000 quintals (20,000 tonnes) of cork are carved, and 40% of the end products are exported.

In fresh food, as well as artichokes, the production of tomatoes (including Camoni tomato) and citrus fruit are of a certain weight. Sardinia is the 5th Italian region for rice production, the main paddy fields are located in the Arborea Plain.

In addition to meat, Sardinia produces a wide variety of cheese, considering that half of the sheep milk produced in Italy is produced in Sardinia, and is largely worked by the cooperatives of the shepherds and small industries. Sardinia also produces most of the pecorino romano, a non-original product of the island, much of which is traditionally addressed to the Italian overseas communities. Sardinia boasts a centuries-old tradition of horse breeding since the Aragonese domination, whose cavalry drew from equine heritage of the island to strengthen their own army or to make a gift to the other sovereigns of Europe. Today the island boasts the highest number of horse herds in Italy.

There is little fishing (and no real maritime tradition), Portoscuso tunas are exported worldwide, but primarily to Japan.

==== Industry and handicraft ====

The once prosperous mining industry is still active though restricted to coal (Nuraxi Figus, hamlet of Gonnesa), antimony (Villasalto), gold (Furtei), bauxite (Olmedo) and lead and zinc (Iglesiente, Nurra). The granite extraction represents one of the most flourishing industries in the northern part of the island. The Gallura granite district is composed of 260 companies that work in 60 quarries, where 75% of the Italian granite is extracted.
The principal industries are chemicals (Porto Torres, Cagliari, Villacidro, Ottana), petrochemicals (Porto Torres, Sarroch), metalworking (Portoscuso, Portovesme, Villacidro), cement (Cagliari), pharmaceutical (Sassari), shipbuilding (Arbatax, Olbia, Porto Torres), oil rig construction (Arbatax), rail industry (Villacidro), arms industries at Domusnovas and food (sugar refineries at Villasor and Oristano, dairy at Arborea, Macomer and Thiesi, fish factory at Olbia).

In Sardinia is located the DASS (&quot;Distretto Aerospaziale della Sardegna&quot;), a consortium of companies, research centers and universities focused on aerospace industry and research. The aerospace manufacturer Vitrociset, in Villaputzu, is involved in the production of the stealth multirole fighter Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II.

Plans related to industrial conversion are in progress in the main industrial sites, like in Porto Torres, where seven research centres are developing the transformation from traditional fossil fuel related industry to an integrated production chain from vegetable oil using oleaginous seeds to bio-plastics.

Sardinia is involved in the industrial production of the AIRPod, an innovative car powered by compressed air, with the first factory being built in Bolotana.

Craft industries include rugs, jewelry, textile, lacework, basket making and coral.

==== Tertiary ====


The Sardinian economy is today focused on the overdeveloped tertiary sector (67.8% of employment), with commerce, services, information technology, public administration and especially on tourism (mainly seaside tourism), which represents the main industry of the island with 2,721 active companies and 189,239 rooms. In 2008 there were 2,363,496 arrivals (up 1.4% on 2007). In the same year, the airports of the island registered 11,896,674 passengers (up 1.24% on 2007).

Due to its isolated and insular location, Sardinia focused part of its economy on the development of digital technologies since the dawn of internet era: the first Italian website, one of the first webmail system and one of the first and largest internet providers (Video On Line) were realised by the CRS4, the first European online newspaper was developed by L&#x27;Unione Sarda and also the first Italian UMTS company was founded on the island. Today Sardinia is the second Italian region, after Lombardy, for investments in startups (owning the 20% of the Italian venture capital).

Sardinia has many small and picturesque villages, nine of them have been selected by (), a non-profit private association of small Italian towns of strong historical and artistic interest, that was founded on the initiative of the Tourism Council of the National Association of Italian Municipalities.

== Communications ==

On the island are headquartered some telecommunication companies and internet service providers, such as Tiscali and the Mediterranean Skylogic Teleport, a ground station controlled by satellite provider Eutelsat. Sardinia is the Italian region with the highest e-intensity index after the Aosta Valley (index measuring the relative maturity of Internet economies on the basis of three factors: enablement, engagement, and expenditure) and the region with the highest internet performances, such as fastest broadband connection in Italy.
Sardinia is also the Italian region with the highest percentage (41%) of 4G LTE users.
The Chinese multinational telecommunications equipment and systems companies ZTE and Huawei have development centers and innovation labs in Sardinia.

Sardinia has become Europe&#x27;s first region to fully adopt the new Digital Terrestrial Television broadcasting standard. From 1 November 2008 TV channels are broadcast only in digital.

== Transport ==

=== Airports ===

Sardinia has three international airports (Alghero-Fertilia/Riviera del Corallo Airport, Olbia-Costa Smeralda Airport and Cagliari-Elmas Airport) connected with the principal Italian cities and many European destinations, mainly in the United Kingdom, France, Spain and Germany, and two regional airports (Oristano-Fenosu Airport and Tortolì-Arbatax Airport). Internal air connections between Sardinian airports are limited to a daily Cagliari-Olbia flight. Sardinian citizens benefit from special sales on plane tickets for Rome and Milan (&quot;continuità territoriale&quot;), and several low-cost air companies operate on the island.

&quot;Airone - Compagnia Trasporti Aerei S.A.&quot; was an airline established in Cagliari in October 1944 , its founders intended it to be the answer to the need for fast connections between Sardinia and mainland Italy. The name itself recalled one of the most typical animals of the island&#x27;s wetlands. It is remembered as the first airline founded in Italy after the Second World War.

Air Italy (formerly known as Meridiana) was an airline headquartered in the airport of Olbia; it was founded as Alisarda in 1963 by the Aga Khan IV. The development of Alisarda followed the development of Costa Smeralda in the northeast part of the island, a well known vacation spot among billionaires and film actors worldwide.

=== Seaports ===
The ferry companies operating on the island are Tirrenia di Navigazione, Moby Lines, Corsica Ferries - Sardinia Ferries, Grandi Navi Veloci, Grimaldi Lines, Corsica Linea; they link the Sardinian seaports of Porto Torres, Olbia, Golfo Aranci, Arbatax, Santa Teresa Gallura and Cagliari with Civitavecchia, Genoa, Livorno, Naples, Palermo, Trapani, Piombino in Italy, Marseille, Toulon, Bonifacio, Propriano and Ajaccio in France and Barcelona in Spain.

Porto Torres is the largest port of Sardinia, while Olbia, Santa Teresa Gallura and Palau are the most popular arrival ports, based on passenger data between 2020-2024.

Caronte &amp; Tourist and Delcomar links the main island to the islands of La Maddalena and San Pietro.

About 40 tourist harbours are located along the Sardinian coasts.

=== Roads ===
Sardinia is the only Italian region without Autostrade (en:motorways), but the road network is well developed with a system of no-toll roads with dual carriageway, called &quot;superstrade&quot; (&#x27;super roads&#x27;) that connect the principal towns and the main airports and seaports; the speed limit is /. The principal road is the SS131 &quot;Carlo Felice&quot;, linking the south with the north of the island, crossing the most historic regions of Porto Torres and Cagliari; it is part of European route E25. The SS 131 d.c.n links Oristano with Olbia, crossing the hinterland Nuoro region. Other roads designed for high-capacity traffic link Sassari with Alghero, Sassari with Tempio Pausania, Sassari – Olbia, Cagliari – Tortolì, Cagliari – Iglesias, Nuoro – Lanusei. A work in progress is converting the main routes to highway standards, with the elimination of all intersections. The secondary inland and mountain roads are generally narrow with many hairpin turns, so the speed limits are very low.

Public transport buses reach every town and village at least once a day; however, due to the low density of population, the smallest territories are reachable only by car. The Azienda Regionale Sarda Trasporti (ARST) is the public regional bus transport agency. Networks of city buses serve the main towns (Cagliari, Iglesias, Oristano, Alghero, Sassari, Nuoro, Carbonia and Olbia).

In Sardinia 1,295,462 vehicles circulate, equal to 613 per 1,000 inhabitants.

=== Railways ===
The Sardinian railway system was developed starting from the 19th century by the Welsh engineer Benjamin Piercy.

Today there are two different railway operators:
* Trenitalia which connects the most populated towns and the main ports. This network is the most modern on the island, running primarily diesel locomotives such as the &quot;Alstom Minuetto&quot; and, from 2015 the faster tilting train CAF ATR365 and ATR 465, specifically designed for the Sardinian railway network;
* ARST: the trains run on narrow-gauge track, are generally slow, due to the tortuosity of the lines, except for the electrified tram-trains operating in the metropolitan areas of Sassari and Cagliari.

The &quot;Trenino Verde&quot; (&quot;Little Green Train&quot;) is a railway tourism service operated by ARST. Vintage railcars and steam locomotives run through the wildest parts of the island. They allow the traveller to have scenic views impossible to see from the main roads.

== Demographics ==

With a population density of 69/km2, slightly more than a third of the national average, Sardinia is the fourth-least populated region in Italy. In the recent past the population distribution was anomalous compared to that of other Italian regions lying on the sea. In fact, contrary to the general trend, most urban settlement, with the exception of the fortified cities of Cagliari, Alghero, Castelsardo and few others, has taken place not primarily along the coast but in the subcoastal areas and towards the centre of the island. Historical reasons for this include the repeated Saracen raids during the Middle Ages and then Barbary raids until the early 19th century (making the coast unsafe), widespread pastoral activities inland, and the swampy nature of the coastal plains (reclaimed definitively only in the 20th century). The situation has been reversed with the expansion of seaside tourism; all of Sardinia&#x27;s major urban centres are now located near the coasts, and the island&#x27;s interior is very sparsely populated.

It is the region with the lowest total fertility rate (1.087 births per woman) and the second-lowest birth rate of Italy (which is already one of the lowest in the world). Combined with the aging of population going rather fast (in 2009, people older than 65 were 18.7%), rural depopulation is quite a big issue: between 1991 and 2001, 71.4% of Sardinian villages have lost population (32 more than 20% and 115 between 10% and 20%), with over 30 of them being at risk to become ghost towns. It is predicted that at that rate, Sardinia will be the European island with the second-lowest population density, immediately after Iceland, by 2080.

Nonetheless, the overall population estimate has remained relatively stable because of a considerable immigration flow, mainly from the Italian mainland, but also from Eastern Europe (especially Romania), Africa and Asia.

=== Life expectancy ===
Average life expectancy is slightly over 82 years (85 for women and 79.7 for men). Sardinia shares with the Japanese island of Okinawa the highest rate of centenarians in the world (22 centenarians per 100,000 inhabitants).
Sardinia is the first discovered Blue Zone, a demographic or geographic area in the world with an oversize concentration of centenarians and supercentenarians.

=== Foreign immigration ===
In 2023, there were 50,211 foreign national residents, forming 3,2% of the total Sardinian population. The most represented nationalities were:

* 11,313
* 4,289
* 3,982
* 3,253
* 2,885
* 1,969
* 1,795
* 1,406
* 1,214
* 1,047
* 1,037
* 946
* 788
* 763
* 762
* 710
=== Main cities and Functional Urban Areas ===

Sardinia&#x27;s most populated cities are Cagliari and Sassari. The Metropolitan City of Cagliari has 431,302 inhabitants, or about ¼ of the population of the entire island. Eurostat has identified in Sardinia two Functional Urban Areas: Cagliari, with 477,000 inhabitants, and Sassari, with 222,000 inhabitants.
== Government and politics ==

Sardinia is one of the five Italian autonomous regions, along with the Aosta Valley, Trentino-Alto Adige/Südtirol, Friuli-Venezia Giulia and Sicily. Its particular statute, which in itself is a constitutional law, gives the region a limited degree of autonomy, entailing the right to carry out the administrative functions of the local body and to create its own laws in a strictly defined number of domains.

The regional administration is constituted by three authorities:
* the Regional Council (legislative power)
* the Regional Junta (executive power)
* the President (chief of executive power)

=== Administrative divisions ===
Since 2016, Sardinia is divided into four provinces (Nuoro, Oristano, Sassari, South Sardinia) and the metropolitan city of Cagliari.
In April 2021, under Sardinian Regional Council&#x27;s Regional Law Nr. 7, Sardinian administrative divisions were reorganized; the former provinces of Olbia-Tempio (now bearing the name Gallura-North East Sardinia), Ogliastra, Medio Campidano and Carbonia-Iglesias (now bearing the name Sulcis Iglesiente) were restored, the metropolitan city of Cagliari would be expanded with other municipalities from the to-be eliminated Province of South Sardinia, and the western part of the Province of Sassari would be reorganized into the new metropolitan city of Sassari. Whilst the Italian government challenged the law, thus stalling its implementation, on 12 March 2022, the Constitutional Court ruled in favor of the Autonomous Region of Sardinia. On 13 April 2023, the regional council, at the proposal of the regional government, approved an amendment to the 2021 reform, defining the timeframe and manner of its implementation, which would see its full implementation in 2024.

=== Military installations ===

Around 60% of all the military installations in Italy are in Sardinia, whose area is less than one-tenth of all the Italian territory and whose population is little more than the 2,5%. The island hosts NATO joint forces and Israeli military forces, which use the island&#x27;s territory to simulate war games; the Inter-service Test and Training Range of Salto di Quirra (PISQ) is one of the most important experimental
military training centres in Europe. The bases, used for manufacturing plants and military testing grounds, totally take up more than 350 km2 of the island&#x27;s land, making Sardinia the most militarized region in Italy and the most militarized island in Europe.

Besides the land-occupying installations, where 80% of the military explosives in Italy are used, there are also other military structures located on the sea and along the coastline, roughly equivalent to 20000 km2 (little less than the island&#x27;s surface), being made inaccessible to the civil population when military exercises are held.

Among the most notable military bases on the island are the Interagency Polygons in Quirra, Capo Teulada and Capo Frasca, used by Italian and NATO forces to test-fire ballistic missiles and weapons and by Italian and European Space Agency to test space vehicles and for orbital launches. Until 2008, the US navy also had a nuclear submarine base in the Maddalena Archipelago.

Depleted uranium and thorium dust from missile tests has been linked to an increase in cancers according to activists and local politicians. In the late 1980s, a high level of birth defects occurred near the Salto di Quirra weapons testing site after old munitions were destroyed.

== Culture ==

Sardinia is the only autonomous region in Italy where its special Statute uses the term &quot;popolo&quot; (distinct people) to refer to its inhabitants. While this formula is also used by Veneto, which unlike Sardinia is an ordinary region, the Sardinian Statute is adopted with a constitutional law. In both cases, such term is not meant to imply any legal difference between Sardinians and any other citizen of the country.

=== Architecture ===


Of the prehistoric architecture in Sardinia there are numerous testimonies such as the &quot;domus de janas&quot; (hypogeic tombs), the Giants&#x27; grave, the megalithic circles, the menhirs, the dolmens and the well temples; however, the element that more than any other characterizes the Sardinian prehistoric landscape are the nuraghe; the remains of thousands of these Bronze Age buildings of various types (simple and complex) are still visible today. There are also numerous traces left by the Phoenicians and Punics who introduced new urban forms on the coasts.

The Romans gave a new administrative structure to the whole island through the restructuring of several cities, the creation of new centers and the construction of many infrastructures of which the ruins remain, such as the palace of Re Barbaro in Porto Torres or the Roman Amphitheatre of Cagliari. Even from the early Christian and Byzantine epoch there are several testimonies throughout the territory both on the coasts and inside, especially linked to buildings of worship.

A particular development had Romanesque architecture during the Judicates period. Starting from 1063 the Sardinian Judges (), through substantial donations, had favored the arrival to the island of monks of different orders from various regions of Italy and France. These circumstances favored in turn the arrival to the island of workers from Pisa, Lombardy, Provence and Muslim Spain, giving rise to unprecedented artistic manifestations, marked by the fusion of these experiences.

The cornerstone in the evolution of Romanesque architectural forms was the basilica of San Gavino in Porto Torres. Among the most relevant examples there are the cathedrals of Sant&#x27;Antioco di Bisarcio (Ozieri), San Pietro di Sorres in Borutta, San Nicola di Ottana, the palatine chapel of Santa Maria del Regno of Ardara, the Santa Giusta Cathedral, Nostra Signora di Tergu, the Basilica di Saccargia in Codrongianos and Santa Maria di Uta and, of the 13th century, the cathedrals of Santa Maria di Monserrato (Tratalias) and San Pantaleo (Dolianova). As for military architecture, numerous castles to defend the territory were built during this period. At the beginning of the 14th century date the fortifications and towers of Cagliari, designed by Giovanni Capula.

After their arrival in 1324, the Aragonese concentrated the first realizations in Cagliari; the oldest Catalan Gothic church in Sardinia is the shrine of Our Lady of Bonaria. Also in Cagliari in the same years the Aragonese chapel was built inside the cathedral. In the first half of the fifteenth century a real Gothic jewel was built, the complex of San Domenico, which included the church and the convent, almost completely destroyed during the air raids of 1943, and of which only the cloister remains. Other works were the churches of San Francesco of Stampace (of which only a part of the cloister remains), Sant&#x27;Eulalia and San Giacomo. In Alghero in the second half of the fifteenth century the construction of the church of San Francesco and in the sixteenth century of the cathedral began.

Renaissance architecture, although poorly represented, includes notable examples such as the installation of the cathedral of San Nicola di Sassari (late Gothic but with a strong Renaissance influence), the church of Sant&#x27;Agostino di Cagliari (designed by Palearo Fratino), the church of Santa Caterina in Sassari (designed by Bernardoni, a pupil of Vignola).

On the contrary, the Baroque architecture has found wide prominence, interesting examples are the Collegiata di Sant&#x27;Anna in Cagliari, the facade of the Cathedral of San Nicola in Sassari, the church of San Michele in Cagliari, as well as the cathedral of Cagliari, Ales and Oristano, rebuilt or modified between the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.

Starting from the nineteenth century, new architectural forms of neoclassical inspiration spread throughout the island. Among the most important figures of this architectural and urban phase is that of the architect from Cagliari Gaetano Cima, whose works are scattered throughout the Sardinian territory. Alongside the works of Cima, it is worth mentioning those of Giuseppe Cominotti (Palazzo and Civic Theater of Sassari) and Antonio Cano (dome of S. Maria di Betlem in Sassari and the cathedral of Santa Maria della Neve in Nuoro). In the second half of the nineteenth century in Sassari was built the neo Gothic palace Giordano (1878) which is one of the earliest examples of revivalism in the island.

An interesting realization of eclectic style, derived from the union between revivalist and Art Nouveau models, appears to be the City hall of Cagliari, completed in the early twentieth century. The advent of fascism has strongly influenced architecture in Sardinia in the twenties and thirties: interesting achievements of that period are the new centers of Fertilia, Arborea and the city of Carbonia, one of the greatest examples of rationalist architecture.

=== Art ===

Numerous findings of the typical statues of the Mother Goddess and pottery engraved with geometric designs testify the artistic expressions of the Pre-Nuragic peoples. Subsequently, the Nuragic civilization produced hundreds of bronze statuettes and the enigmatic stone statuary of the Giants of Mont&#x27;e Prama.

The union between the nuragic populations and the merchants coming from every part of the Mediterranean led to a refined production of gold artifacts, rings, earrings and jewelry of all kinds, but also votive steles and wall decorations. In addition to architecture linked to public works, the Romans introduced the mosaics and decorated the rich villas of the patricians with sculptures and paintings.

In the Middle Ages, during the Judicates period, the architecture of the churches were enriched with capitals, sarcophagi, frescoes, marble altars and later embellished with retables, paintings by important artists such as the Master of Castelsardo, Pietro Cavaro, Andrea Lusso, and the school of the so-called Master of Ozieri who was headed by Giovanni del Giglio and Pietro Giovanni Calvano, of Senese origin.

In the nineteenth century and in early twentieth century originated the myths of an uncontaminated and timeless island. Recounted by the many travelers who visited Sardinia in that period, like D. H. Lawrence, such myths were celebrated mainly by Sardinian artists such as Giuseppe Biasi, Francesco Ciusa, Filippo Figari, Mario Delitala and Stanis Dessy. In their works they highlighted the autochthonous values of the agro-pastoral world, not yet homologated to the modernity that was pressing from the outside. Other important Sardinian artists of the second half of the twentieth century were Costantino Nivola, Maria Lai, Albino Manca and Pinuccio Sciola.

=== World Heritage Sites ===

Megalithic building structures called nuraghes are scattered in great numbers throughout Sardinia. Su Nuraxi di Barumini is a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1997.

=== Languages ===


Italian, which is the official language throughout Italy, is the most widely spoken language today, followed by the island&#x27;s indigenous language, Sardinian (&quot;sardu&quot;).

Sardinian is a distinct branch of the Romance language family, going either by the same name or by Southern Romance: it is therefore a separate language rather than an Italian dialect, and it is also closer to its Latin roots than Italian itself. Sardinian has been formally recognized as one of Italy&#x27;s twelve historical ethnolinguistic minorities since 1997, by regional and Italian law. The language has been influenced by Catalan, Spanish and recently Italian, while the once spoken Paleo-Sardinian language contributes many features to it in many ancient remnants.

In 2006 the regional administration has approved the use of a single standardised writing system, the so-called &quot;Limba Sarda Comuna&quot;, in official acts. As a literary language, Sardinian is gaining importance, despite heated debate about the lack of a commonly acknowledged standard orthography and controversial proposed solutions to this problem. The two main orthographies of the language are in fact Campidanese (&quot;sardu campidanesu&quot;), used in central southern Sardinia, and Logudorese (&quot;sardu logudoresu&quot;), extending northwards almost to the suburbs of Sassari. The Sardinian language is quite different from the other Romance languages and is homogeneous in terms of morphology, syntax and lexicon, but it also shows a spectrum of variation in terms of phonetics between the Northern and the Southern dialects.

Sassarese (&quot;sassaresu&quot;) and Gallurese (&quot;gadduresu&quot;) are classified as Corso-Sardinian languages, therefore belonging to the Italo-Dalmatian branch rather than to the Sardinian one, and are spoken in the north.

In Sardinia there are a few language islands: the Algherese dialect (&quot;alguerés&quot;) of Catalan is spoken in the city of Alghero; on the islands of San Pietro and Sant&#x27;Antioco, located in the extreme south west of Sardinia, the local population speaks a variant of Ligurian called Tabarchino (&quot;tabarchin&quot;); fewer and fewer people speak Venetian, Friulian and Istriot in Arborea and Fertilia, since these villages have been populated in the 1920s and 1930s by mainland colonists who came from northeast Italy, and families from Istria and Dalmatia immediately after World War II.

Due to the Italian assimilation policies carried out since the late 18th century and the ongoing absorption into the Italian culture, over the course of time the once prevalent indigenous language has been increasingly losing ground to Italian and the process of ongoing language shift has led to its endangerment. In fact, according to the data published by ISTAT in 2006, 52.5% of the Sardinian population speaks only Italian in the family environment, while 29.3% alternates Italian and Sardinian and only 16.6% uses Sardinian or other non-Italian languages; outside the circle of family and friends, the last option drops to 5.2%. The resulting Italianization has led to a steep decline of the Sardinian language as well as produced a new non-standard variety of today&#x27;s majority idiom, Italian: regional Italian of Sardinia (, &quot;IrS&quot;).

Following the recent growth of the foreign-born population, the presence of other languages, principally Romanian, Arabic, Wolof and Chinese, is also expanding in some urban areas.

=== Literature ===
The first literary work in Sardinian language dates back to the second half of the 15th century: a poem inspired by the life of the holy Porto Torres martyrs by the archbishop of Sassari Antonio Cano. Literary production had a remarkable development in the 16th century, the protagonist was Antonio Lo Frasso, his &quot;Los diez libros de Fortuna de Amor&quot; is mentioned in the Don Quixote by Miguel de Cervantes. This work is written mainly in Spanish, but there are parts written in Catalan and in the Sardinian language. Multilingualism was a characteristic trait of the islanders of that time, among them Sigismondo Arquer, Giovanni Francesco Fara and Pietro Delitala stood out. Delitala wrote in Italian, then Tuscan, and Gerolamo Araolla in all the three languages (Sardinian, Spanish and Italian). But already in the 17th century there was a total integration in the Iberian world as demonstrated by the works in Spanish of the poets José Delitala y Castelvì, Joseph Zatrillas Vico and the writers Francesco Angelo de Vico and Salvatore Vidal.

From 1720, with the passage of the Kingdom of Sardinia, to the House of Savoy, Italian became the official language. In the 19th century there is an interest of Sardinian authors for the history and culture of Sardinia: Giovanni Spano undertakes the first archaeological excavations, Giuseppe Manno writes the first great general history of the island, Pasquale Tola publishes important documents of the past and writes biographies of illustrious Sardinians. Alberto La Marmora travels the island far and wide, studying in detail and writing a four-part work entitled &quot;Voyage en Sardaigne&quot;.

The Sardinian society of the Early 20th century is told by Grazia Deledda, the only italian woman to win a Nobel Prize in Literature to date, Enrico Costa, and the poet Sebastiano Satta. In this century, we must remember also the literary production of political characters of great value such as Antonio Gramsci and Emilio Lussu. After the Second World War, Giuseppe Dessì emerged, known mainly for his novel &quot;Paese d&#x27;ombre&quot;. In more recent years, the autobiographical novels of Gavino Ledda &quot;Padre Padrone&quot; and Salvatore Satta &quot;Il Giorno del Giudici&quot; had a wide echo, in addition to the works of Sergio Atzeni and other writers active in the recent decades.

=== Traditional clothes ===

Colourful and of various and original forms, the Sardinian traditional clothes are a clear symbol of belonging to specific collective identities. Although the basic model is homogeneous and common throughout the island, each town or village has its own traditional clothing which differentiates it from the others.

=== Music ===

Sardinia is home to one of the oldest forms of vocal polyphony, generally known as cantu a tenore. In 2005, Unesco classed the &quot;cantu a tenore&quot; among intangible world heritage. Several famous musicians have found it irresistible, including Frank Zappa, Ornette Coleman, and Peter Gabriel. The latter travelled to the town of Bitti in the central mountainous region and recorded the now world-famous Tenores di Bitti CD on his Real World label. The guttural sounds produced in this form make a remarkable sound, similar to Tuvan throat singing. Another polyphonic style of singing, more like the Corsican &quot;paghjella&quot; and liturgic in nature, is found in Sardinia and is known as &quot;cantu a cuncordu&quot;.

Another unique instrument is the launeddas. Three reed-canes (two of them glued together with beeswax) produce distinctive harmonies, which have their roots many thousands of years ago, as demonstrated by the bronze statuettes from Ittiri, of a man playing the three reed canes, dated to 2000 BC.

Beyond this, the tradition of &quot;cantu a chiterra&quot; (guitar songs) has its origins in town squares, when artists would compete against one another. The most famous singer of this genre are Maria Carta and Elena Ledda.

Sardinian culture is alive and well, and young people are actively involved in their own music and dancing. In 2004, BBC presenter Andy Kershaw travelled to the island with Sardinian music specialist Pablo Farba and interviewed many artists. His programme can be heard on BBC Radio 3. Sardinia has produced a number of notable jazz musicians such as Antonello Salis, Marcello Melis, and Paolo Fresu.

The main opera houses of the island are the Teatro Lirico in Cagliari and the Teatro Comunale in Sassari.

=== Cuisine ===


Meat, dairy products, grains and vegetables constitute the most basic elements of the traditional Sardinian diet, along with, to a lesser extent, seafoods such as rock lobster (&quot;aligusta&quot;), scampi, bottarga (&quot;butàriga&quot;), squid, and tuna.

Suckling pig (&quot;porcheddu&quot;) and wild boar (&quot;sirbone&quot;) are roasted on the spit or boiled in stews of beans and vegetables, thickened with bread.
Herbs such as mint and myrtle are used. Much Sardinian bread is made dry, which keeps longer than high-moisture breads.
Those are baked as well, including &quot;civraxiu&quot;, &quot;coccoi pintau&quot;, a highly decorative bread and &quot;pistoccu&quot; made with flour and water only, originally meant for herders, but often served at home with tomatoes, basil, oregano, garlic and a strong cheese. Traditional cheeses include &quot;pecorino sardo&quot;, &quot;pecorino romano&quot;, &quot;casizolu&quot;, &quot;ricotta&quot; and the &quot;casu martzu&quot; (notable for containing live insect larvae).

One of the most famous of foods is &quot;pane carasau&quot;, the flat bread of Sardinia, famous for its thin crunchiness. Originally the making of this bread was a hard process which needed three women to do the job. This flat bread is always made by hand as it gives a different flavor the more the dough is worked. After working the dough it is rolled out in very thin circles and placed in an extremely hot stone oven where the dough will blow up into a ball shape. Once the dough achieves that state it is then removed from the oven where it is then cut into two thin sheets and stacked to go back into the oven.

Alcoholic beverages include many indigenous wines such as Cannonau, Malvasia, Vernaccia, Vermentino, various liquors like Abbardente, Filu Ferru and Mirto. Beer is the most drunk alcoholic beverage; Sardinia boasts the highest consumption per capita of beer in Italy (twice higher than the national average). Birra Ichnusa is the most commercialized beer produced in Sardinia.

== Sports ==

=== Football ===

Cagliari is home to Cagliari Calcio, which was founded in 1920 and play in Serie A, the Italian first division; it won the Italian Championship in the 1969–70 Serie A season, becoming the first club in Southern Italy to achieve such a result. Today, home matches are played at the Unipol Domus.

The island&#x27;s other major teams are Olbia&#x27;s Olbia Calcio and Sassari&#x27;s Torres Calcio; they both usually play in the national lower leagues. However the latter&#x27;s women&#x27;s team counterparts Torres Femminile are 7 times national champions.

The Sardinian national football team has also joined CONIFA, a football federation for all associations outside FIFA.

=== Basketball ===
Sassari is home to Dinamo Basket Sassari, the only Sardinian professional basketball club playing in the Lega Basket Serie A, the highest level club competition in Italian professional basketball.
It was founded in 1960, and is also known as Dinamo Banco di Sardegna thanks to a long sponsorship deal with the Sardinian bank. Since its promotion in Lega A in 2010, it has been enjoying the support of fans from Sassari and all over Sardinia with full-house matches on every game played at home. Dinamo Sassari achieved the highest titles in the Italian basketball in 2015, winning the Coppa Italia, the Supercoppa and the Italian basketball championship.

=== Motor racing ===
In the Province of Sassari is the Mores motor racing circuit, the only FIA Circuit homologated by CSAI (Cars) and the IMF (Motorcycles), in Sardinia.

Cagliari hosted a Formula 3000 race in 2002 and 2003 on a 2.414-km street circuit around Sant&#x27;Elia stadium. In 2003, Renault F1&#x27;s Jarno Trulli and former Ferrari driver Jean Alesi did a spectacular exhibition. At the Grand Prix BMW-F1 driver Robert Kubica took part in a F3 car, as did BMW WTCC Augusto Farfus, GP2&#x27;s Fairuz Fauzy and Vitaly Petrov. Since 2004 Sardinia has hosted the Rally d&#x27;Italia Sardegna, a rally competition in the FIA World Rally Championship schedule. The rally is held on narrow, twisty, sandy and bumpy mountainous roads in the north of the island.

=== Water sports ===
Sardinia is well known for scuba diving and snorkeling activities also due to the many underwater caves and caverns located in Alghero and Cala Gonone, Capo Caccia and Punta Giglio limestone cliffs, and many sunken shipwrecks. Around the island there are many diving centers offering scuba diving services with equipment rental and guided tours.
On the island of Caprera is the &quot;Centro Velico Caprera&quot;, considered one of the largest sailing schools in the Mediterranean Sea, founded in 1967.

The Yacht Club Costa Smeralda, located in Porto Cervo and founded in 1967, is the main yachting club on the island.

Annually the island hosts a Superyacht Regatta, previously sponsored by Loro Piana, but from 2021 onwards by Giorgio Armani, and the Maxi Yacht Rolex Cup.
Part of the Louis Vuitton Trophy was held in the Maddalena archipelago in 2010.

&quot;Vento di Sardegna&quot; (&#x27;Wind of Sardinia&#x27;) was a sailboat sponsored by the Autonomous Region of Sardinia. Its skipper, Andrea Mura, won the Single-Handed Trans-Atlantic Race in 2013 and in 2017, the Two Handed Transatlantic Race (Twostar) regatta in 2012 and the Route du Rhum.

Porto Pollo, north of Palau, is a bay well known by windsurfers and kitesurfers. The bay is divided by a thin tongue of land that separates it into areas for advanced and beginner/intermediate windsurfers. There is also a restricted area for kitesurfing. Many freestyle windsurfers went to Porto Pollo for training and 2007 saw the finale of the freestyle Pro Kids Europe 2007 contest. Because of the Venturi effect between Sardinia and Corsica, the western wind accelerates between the islands and creates the wind that makes Porto Pollo popular among windsurfing enthusiasts.

Cagliari hosts regularly international regattas, such as the RC44 championship, Farr 40 World championship, Audi MedCup and Kite Championships. In view of the 36th America&#x27;s Cup, scheduled to take place in New Zealand in 2021, &quot;Luna Rossa Challenge&quot; has chosen Cagliari as place for its preparation.

=== Winter sports ===
Four ski resorts are located on the Gennargentu Range at Separadorgiu, Monte Spada, S&#x27;Arena and Bruncu Spina; they are equipped with ski schools, chairlifts, skilifts and ski equipment hire.

=== Traditional sports ===

&quot;S&#x27;Istrumpa&quot;, also known as Sardinian Wrestling, is a traditional Sardinian sport, officially recognized by the Italian National Olympic Committee (C.O.N.I.) and the International Federation of Celtic Wrestling (I.F.C.W.). It shows similarities to Scottish Backhold and the gouren. Istrumpa&#x27;s wrestlers participate annually at the championships for Celtic wrestling stiles.

Sardinia boasts ancient equestrian traditions and is the Italian region with the highest number of horse riders (29% of population) and boasts also fine darts tradition, which many believe originated in the Sassari region of the country towards the end of the 15th century. In those days, the darts were carved from beech (&quot;fagus&quot;) wood and the flights were feathers drawn from the indigenous purple swamphen (named in Italian , &#x27;sultana bird&#x27;), famed for its spectacular violet-blue plumage.

== See also ==

* History of Sardinia
* List of islands of Italy
* List of monarchs of Sardinia
* List of tourist attractions in Sardinia
* Sardinian people, List of Sardinians
* Sardinian language
* Sardinian Literary Spring
* Sardinian literature
* Sardinian medieval kingdoms

== References ==
===Notes===

===Bibliography===
* 
* UNESCO World Heritage Site inscription data for Su Nuraxi di Barumini (2008) 

==Further reading==

* Edward Burman. &quot;Sardinia: Island of Myths, Giants and Magic&quot; (2019) 
* Robert Tennant. &quot;Sardinia and its Resources&quot; (2010)
* Nick Bruno. &quot;Insight Guide Sardinia&quot;(2010)
* Tracey Heatherington. &quot;Wild Sardinia: Indigeneity and the Global Dreamtimes of Environmentalism&quot; (2010) 314 pages; examines the clash between conservation efforts and traditional commons; focuses on resistance in the town of Orgosolo to Gennargentu National Park.
* Fabrizio Arditio. &quot;Sardinia&quot; (Eyewitness Travel Guide) (2009) excerpt and text search
* Duncan Garwood. &quot;Sardinia&quot; (Regional Guide) (2009) excerpt and text search
* &quot;Sardinia in Five Senses&quot; by Charming Italy Publishers (2008)
* Robert Andrews. &quot;The Rough Guide to Sardinia&quot; (Rough Guide Travel Guides) (2007) excerpt and text search
* Bernard Lortat-Jacob. &quot;Sardinian Chronicles&quot; (1995)
* Mary Delane. &quot;Sardinia: The Undefeated Island&quot; (1968)
* Margaret Guido. &quot;Sardinia, Ancient Peoples and Places&quot; (1963)
* Amelie Posse Brazdova. &quot;Sardinia Side Show&quot; (1930)
* William Henry Smyth. &quot;Sketch of the present state of the island of Sardinia&quot; (1928) From Google books
* D. H. Lawrence. &quot;Sea and Sardinia&quot; (1921)
* &quot;The Island of Sardinia&quot; by John Warre Tyndale vol I (1849) From Google books
* &quot;The Island of Sardinia&quot; by John Warre Tyndale vol II (1849) From Google books
* &quot;The Island of Sardinia&quot; by John Warre Tyndale vol III (1849) From Google books

== External links ==

* Department of Tourism, Crafts and Commerce of Sardinia
* Sardegna Digital Library 
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="0" end="8" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24" end="38" title="Mediterranean islands#By area" label="second-largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="53" end="70" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="78" end="84" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q16110" start="101" end="115" title="Regions of Italy" label="twenty regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="119" end="124" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q145694" start="152" end="169" title="Italian Peninsula" label="Italian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="180" end="187" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14112" start="231" end="238" title="Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q788176" start="299" end="316" title="Autonomous administrative division" label="domestic autonomy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="336" end="351" title="Regions of Italy#Autonomous regions with special statute" label="special statute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="372" end="401" title="Sardinia" label="Autonomous Region of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="419" end="426" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33976" start="431" end="440" title="Sardinian language" label="Sardinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q15089" start="470" end="479" title="provinces of Italy" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q48800793" start="486" end="503" title="Metropolitan cities of Italy" label="metropolitan city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897" start="571" end="579" title="Cagliari" label="Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q585704" start="622" end="631" title="Algherese dialect" label="Algherese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="632" end="639" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q61566" start="746" end="767" title="Linguistic minority" label="linguistic minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q335214" start="776" end="794" title="Endangered language" label="gravely endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q33111" start="945" end="953" title="Corsican language" label="Corsican"/>
<link wikidata="Q845441" start="965" end="974" title="Sassarese language" label="Sassarese"/>
<link wikidata="Q612220" start="979" end="988" title="Gallurese language" label="Gallurese"/>
<link wikidata="Q373416" start="1002" end="1021" title="Tabarchino" label="Tabarchino Ligurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q37813" start="1065" end="1075" title="ecosystems" label="ecosystems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421436" start="1407" end="1427" title="Nuragic civilization" label="Nuragic civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137656" start="1513" end="1521" title="ethnonym" label="ethnonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806983" start="1550" end="1559" title="Latinisation of names" label="romanised"/>
<link wikidata="Q643314" start="1613" end="1623" title="Nora Stone" label="Nora Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="1731" end="1740" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q371884" start="1787" end="1794" title="Timaeus (dialogue)" label="Timaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="1809" end="1814" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q657246" start="1863" end="1876" title="Ancient Greek literature" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140968" start="1896" end="1906" title="Sardinian people" label="its people"/>
<link wikidata="Q232615" start="1986" end="1992" title="Sardis" label="Sardis"/>
<link wikidata="Q620765" start="2031" end="2036" title="Lydia" label="Lydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421436" start="2098" end="2105" title="Nuragic civilization" label="Nuragic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894673" start="2121" end="2128" title="Sherden" label="Sherden"/>
<link wikidata="Q193850" start="2141" end="2152" title="Sea Peoples" label="Sea Peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276974" start="2295" end="2307" title="Sardus" label="Sardus Pater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682708" start="2526" end="2534" title="Sardonicism" label="sardonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="2546" end="2565" title="classical antiquity" label="classical antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="2775" end="2792" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="2800" end="2806" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="2818" end="2824" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q645258" start="3037" end="3047" title="Argentiera" label="Argentiera"/>
<link wikidata="Q645271" start="3097" end="3112" title="Sea of Sardinia" label="Sea of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q38882" start="3178" end="3192" title="Tyrrhenian Sea" label="Tyrrhenian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q14112" start="3311" end="3318" title="Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q145694" start="3324" end="3341" title="Italian Peninsula" label="Italian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="3343" end="3349" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="3351" end="3358" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5765" start="3364" end="3380" title="Balearic Islands" label="Balearic Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q101081" start="3386" end="3394" title="Provence" label="Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q38882" start="3400" end="3414" title="Tyrrhenian Sea" label="Tyrrhenian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="3430" end="3447" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q207911" start="3575" end="3594" title="Strait of Bonifacio" label="Strait of Bonifacio"/>
<link wikidata="Q14112" start="3674" end="3681" title="Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q554394" start="3829" end="3832" title="ria" label="ria"/>
<link wikidata="Q75507" start="4012" end="4026" title="Palaeozoic Era" label="Palaeozoic Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q79064" start="4032" end="4040" title="Cambrian" label="Cambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q10739169" start="4041" end="4057" title="Lower Ordovician" label="Lower Ordovician"/>
<link wikidata="Q15315" start="4194" end="4200" title="schist" label="schist"/>
<link wikidata="Q332748" start="4202" end="4210" title="trachyte" label="trachyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="4212" end="4218" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="4269" end="4278" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q167741" start="4283" end="4291" title="Dolomite (mineral)" label="dolomite"/>
<link wikidata="Q385753" start="4394" end="4410" title="Punta La Marmora" label="Punta La Marmora"/>
<link wikidata="Q955286" start="4452" end="4463" title="Gennargentu" label="Gennargentu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945873" start="4526" end="4539" title="Monte Limbara" label="Monte Limbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q732021" start="4565" end="4594" title="Monte Rasu" label="Chain of Marghine and Goceano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3861176" start="4643" end="4653" title="Monte Albo" label="Monte Albo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3862470" start="4709" end="4725" title="Sulcis Mountains" label="Sulcis Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3861687" start="4734" end="4745" title="Monte Linas" label="Monte Linas"/>
<link wikidata="Q954942" start="4866" end="4875" title="Campidano" label="Campidano"/>
<link wikidata="Q13652" start="4901" end="4909" title="Oristano" label="Oristano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897" start="4914" end="4922" title="Cagliari" label="Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q599939" start="4931" end="4936" title="Nurra" label="Nurra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121259" start="5009" end="5014" title="Tirso (river)" label="Tirso"/>
<link wikidata="Q645271" start="5043" end="5058" title="Sea of Sardinia" label="Sea of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106976" start="5064" end="5072" title="Coghinas" label="Coghinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243685" start="5084" end="5094" title="Flumendosa" label="Flumendosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397" start="5112" end="5128" title="artificial lakes" label="artificial lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q878556" start="5191" end="5202" title="Lake Omodeo" label="Lake Omodeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403009" start="5207" end="5220" title="Lake Coghinas" label="Lake Coghinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q946242" start="5258" end="5272" title="Lago di Baratz" label="Lago di Baratz"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="5484" end="5492" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633778" start="5501" end="5510" title="elevation" label="elevation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857578" start="6533" end="6545" title="thunderstorm" label="thunderstorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q860333" start="6564" end="6575" title="flash flood" label="flash flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065271" start="6640" end="6653" title="Gulf of Genoa" label="Gulf of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15215530" start="6935" end="6952" title="Cyclone Cleopatra" label="Cyclone Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q955286" start="7674" end="7685" title="Gennargentu" label="Gennargentu"/>
<link wikidata="Q193742" start="7848" end="7855" title="Mistral (wind)" label="Mistral"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="8114" end="8125" title="Paleolithic" label="Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421436" start="8221" end="8228" title="Nuragic civilization" label="Nuragic"/>
<link wikidata="Q807310" start="8402" end="8410" title="Barbagia" label="Barbagia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="8534" end="8543" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="8577" end="8585" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="8621" end="8625" title="Ancient Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q202763" start="8698" end="8715" title="Early Middle Ages" label="Early Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q42211" start="8745" end="8752" title="Vandals" label="Vandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="8761" end="8771" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantines"/>
<link wikidata="Q742313" start="8980" end="8989" title="Sardinian medieval kingdoms" label="Judicates"/>
<link wikidata="Q62825" start="8995" end="9021" title="Italian maritime republics" label="Italian maritime republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365493" start="9025" end="9029" title="Republic of Pisa" label="Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="9034" end="9039" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q204920" start="9133" end="9148" title="Crown of Aragon" label="Crown of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q165154" start="9243" end="9262" title="Kingdom of Sardinia" label="Kingdom of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="9331" end="9337" title="Alps" label="Alpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q200229" start="9338" end="9352" title="House of Savoy" label="House of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q943326" start="9374" end="9391" title="Perfect Fusion" label="politically merge"/>
<link wikidata="Q145694" start="9443" end="9459" title="Italian peninsula" label="Italian Mainland"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="9488" end="9507" title="Italian unification" label="Italian unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="9616" end="9632" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="9686" end="9702" title="Italy" label="Italian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562060" start="9916" end="9929" title="Corbeddu Cave" label="Corbeddu Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979625" start="10088" end="10108" title="Last Glacial Maximum" label="Last Glacial Maximum"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="10222" end="10232" title="Mesolithic" label="Mesolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="10264" end="10273" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34245" start="10303" end="10320" title="6th millennium BC" label="6th millennium BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q85758238" start="10353" end="10375" title="Early European Farmers" label="Early European Farmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035710" start="10480" end="10495" title="Cardium pottery" label="Cardium pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473758" start="10536" end="10550" title="Ozieri culture" label="Ozieri culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q878481" start="10564" end="10577" title="Aegean Islands" label="Aegean origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q665247" start="10618" end="10626" title="hypogeum" label="hypogeum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238775" start="10642" end="10656" title="domus de Janas" label="domus de Janas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007186" start="10668" end="10685" title="Arzachena culture" label="Arzachena culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q962651" start="10689" end="10696" title="Gallura" label="Gallura"/>
<link wikidata="Q164240" start="10713" end="10721" title="megalith" label="megalith"/>
<link wikidata="Q11467" start="10776" end="10786" title="metallurgy" label="metallurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="10790" end="10796" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="10801" end="10807" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q130253" start="10843" end="10855" title="Chalcolithic" label="Chalcolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q470867" start="10870" end="10884" title="Beaker culture" label="Beaker culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q466039" start="10915" end="10933" title="Continental Europe" label="Continental Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="11127" end="11137" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q747396" start="11145" end="11162" title="Bonnanaro culture" label="Bonnanaro culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347305" start="11231" end="11245" title="Polada culture" label="Polada culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q688292" start="11703" end="11710" title="nuraghe" label="nuraghe"/>
<link wikidata="Q56258655" start="12189" end="12209" title="Nuraghe Santu Antine" label="Nuraghe Santu Antine"/>
<link wikidata="Q253241" start="12223" end="12232" title="Su Nuraxi (Barumini)" label="Su Nuraxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005265" start="12249" end="12264" title="Nuraghe Arrubiu" label="Nuraghe Arrubiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523627" start="12775" end="12793" title="Giants&amp;#x27; grave" label="Giants&amp;#x27; grave"/>
<link wikidata="Q959458" start="12952" end="12964" title="Su Romanzesu" label="Su Romanzesu"/>
<link wikidata="Q294729" start="12976" end="12981" title="Bitti" label="Bitti"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="13112" end="13118" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q34095" start="13481" end="13487" title="bronze" label="bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894673" start="13636" end="13643" title="Sherden" label="Sherden"/>
<link wikidata="Q193850" start="13660" end="13671" title="Sea Peoples" label="Sea Peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q530894" start="13803" end="13820" title="Talaiotic culture" label="Talaiotic culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5765" start="13828" end="13844" title="Balearic Islands" label="Balearic Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q472258" start="13853" end="13873" title="Torrean civilization" label="Torrean civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336" start="13877" end="13893" title="Corse-du-Sud" label="Southern Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="14022" end="14028" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="14030" end="14035" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14037" end="14052" title="Geography of Greece#Mainland" label="Mainland Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="14286" end="14295" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897" start="14587" end="14594" title="Cagliari" label="Caralis"/>
<link wikidata="Q677175" start="14596" end="14600" title="Nora, Italy" label="Nora"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904892" start="14602" end="14608" title="Bithia, Italy" label="Bithia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782566" start="14610" end="14615" title="Sulci" label="Sulci"/>
<link wikidata="Q736689" start="14621" end="14628" title="Tharros" label="Tharros"/>
<link wikidata="Q205947" start="14630" end="14638" title="Claudius Claudianus" label="Claudian"/>
<link wikidata="Q82070" start="14757" end="14761" title="Tyre, Lebanon" label="Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="14810" end="14818" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383747" start="14915" end="14928" title="Punics" label="Carthaginians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727446" start="14988" end="14995" title="Malchus (general)" label="Malchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132393" start="15269" end="15282" title="Mercenary War" label="Mercenary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286" start="15294" end="15309" title="First Punic War" label="First Punic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="15328" end="15334" title="Ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q281345" start="15427" end="15447" title="Corsica and Sardinia" label="Corsica and Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q756780" start="15660" end="15668" title="Colonia (Roman)" label="colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q391316" start="15677" end="15694" title="Porto Torres" label="Turris Lybissonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10710" start="15699" end="15706" title="Posada, Sardinia" label="Feronia"/>
<link wikidata="Q807310" start="15918" end="15926" title="Barbagia" label="Barbaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q134313" start="15948" end="15957" title="Barbarian" label="Barbarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="16092" end="16097" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="16323" end="16342" title="Germanic peoples" label="east Germanic tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q42211" start="16350" end="16357" title="Vandals" label="Vandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329305" start="16436" end="16456" title="East Roman army" label="eastern Roman troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248771" start="16699" end="16706" title="praeses" label="praeses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293530" start="16915" end="16920" title="Godas" label="Godas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="16924" end="16932" title="Visigoth" label="Visigoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="16953" end="16969" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="16973" end="16981" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q310962" start="16995" end="17003" title="Hilderic" label="Hilderic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2965829" start="17018" end="17037" title="Nicene Christianity" label="Nicene Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q294777" start="17062" end="17069" title="Gelimer" label="Gelimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q83922" start="17074" end="17079" title="Arian" label="Arian"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="17315" end="17326" title="Justinian I" label="Justinian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q174943" start="17593" end="17603" title="Belisarius" label="Belisarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="17807" end="17823" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q42211" start="17833" end="17840" title="Vandals" label="Vandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="17872" end="17883" title="Justinian I" label="Justinian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q174943" start="17902" end="17912" title="Belisarius" label="Belisarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q598261" start="17920" end="17940" title="Battle of Tricamarum" label="Battle of Tricamarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q103122" start="18152" end="18162" title="Ostrogoths" label="Ostrogoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q36387" start="18272" end="18287" title="Byzantine Greek" label="Byzantine Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q385692" start="18412" end="18424" title="Fordongianus" label="Fordongianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q829120" start="18455" end="18458" title="dux" label="dux"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="18484" end="18496" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="18545" end="18553" title="Paganism" label="Paganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="18588" end="18599" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q44258" start="18715" end="18732" title="Basil of Caesarea" label="Basil of Caesarea"/>
<link wikidata="Q807310" start="18841" end="18849" title="Barbagia" label="Barbagia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402199" start="19047" end="19054" title="Hospito" label="Hospito"/>
<link wikidata="Q42827" start="19056" end="19070" title="Pope Gregory I" label="Pope Gregory I"/>
<link wikidata="Q718985" start="19601" end="19622" title="Gregory the Patrician" label="Gregory the Patrician"/>
<link wikidata="Q246737" start="19624" end="19640" title="Exarchate of Africa" label="Exarch of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q925960" start="19671" end="19701" title="Muslim conquest of the Maghreb" label="Muslim conquest of the Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="19839" end="19847" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="19855" end="19860" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="19935" end="19940" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q207600" start="20100" end="20109" title="Aghlabids" label="Aghlabids"/>
<link wikidata="Q28162861" start="20110" end="20119" title="Siege of Melite (870)" label="conquered"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="20134" end="20139" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q14112" start="20190" end="20197" title="Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3687154" start="20852" end="20877" title="Muslim conquest of Sicily" label="Muslim conquest of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q170503" start="20911" end="20926" title="Pope Nicholas I" label="Pope Nicholas I"/>
<link wikidata="Q170504" start="21034" end="21048" title="Pope John VIII" label="Pope John VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q463903" start="21151" end="21175" title="De Administrando Imperio" label="De Administrando Imperio"/>
<link wikidata="Q48809137" start="21358" end="21370" title="Lacon-Gunale" label="Lacon-Gunale"/>
<link wikidata="Q193379" start="21396" end="21402" title="Archon" label="Archon"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="21473" end="21481" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q36387" start="21879" end="21894" title="Byzantine Greek" label="Byzantine Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="21910" end="21917" title="Romance languages" label="Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082046" start="22046" end="22062" title="Mujahid al-Amiri" label="Mujahid al-Amiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q252323" start="22078" end="22121" title="Taifa of Dénia" label="the ruler of Dénia and the Balearic Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="22135" end="22152" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966454" start="22226" end="22240" title="Pisan–Genoese expeditions to Sardinia" label="Christians won"/>
<link wikidata="Q742313" start="22894" end="22902" title="Sardinian medieval kingdoms" label="Judicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q742313" start="23108" end="23117" title="Sardinian medieval kingdoms" label="Judicates"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="23357" end="23366" title="feudalism" label="feudalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3693942" start="23495" end="23513" title="Crown of the Realm" label="Crown of the Realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q62825" start="23756" end="23771" title="maritime republics" label="maritime powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="23775" end="23780" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q13375" start="23785" end="23789" title="Pisa" label="Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q199442" start="23822" end="23839" title="Kingdom of Aragon" label="Kingdom of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297073" start="23846" end="23866" title="Giudicato of Cagliari" label="Judicate of Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983505" start="23914" end="23939" title="Torchitorio V of Cagliari" label="Torchitorio V of Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983524" start="23959" end="23970" title="William III of Cagliari" label="William III"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="23992" end="24009" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Republic of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3949039" start="24079" end="24089" title="Santa Igia" label="Santa Igia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365493" start="24206" end="24222" title="Republic of Pisa" label="Republic of Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267653" start="24228" end="24252" title="Della Gherardesca family" label="Della Gherardesca family"/>
<link wikidata="Q706003" start="24473" end="24498" title="Ugolino della Gherardesca" label="Ugolino della Gherardesca"/>
<link wikidata="Q13661" start="24568" end="24576" title="Iglesias, Sardinia" label="Iglesias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="24605" end="24611" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761381" start="24627" end="24647" title="Giudicato of Logudoro" label="Judicate of Logudoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="24704" end="24721" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Republic of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359661" start="24780" end="24788" title="Adelasia of Torres" label="Adelasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23928746" start="24831" end="24836" title="Doria (family)" label="Doria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="24863" end="24868" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241847" start="24897" end="24904" title="Giudicato of Arborea" label="Arborea"/>
<link wikidata="Q13629" start="24924" end="24931" title="Sassari" label="Sassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q86667177" start="24939" end="24955" title="Republic of Sassari" label="a small republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115680" start="24980" end="24999" title="Italian city-states" label="Italian city-states"/>
<link wikidata="Q170156" start="25022" end="25034" title="Confederation" label="confederated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723760" start="25079" end="25098" title="Giudicato of Gallura" label="Judicate of Gallura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133774" start="25146" end="25159" title="Nino Visconti" label="Nino Visconti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="25173" end="25188" title="Dante Alighieri" label="Dante Alighieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241847" start="25254" end="25273" title="Giudicato of Arborea" label="Judicate of Arborea"/>
<link wikidata="Q13652" start="25282" end="25290" title="Oristano" label="Oristano"/>
<link wikidata="Q204920" start="25583" end="25592" title="Crown of Aragon" label="Aragonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q134646" start="25636" end="25654" title="Pope Boniface VIII" label="Pope Boniface VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q18643" start="25696" end="25708" title="motu proprio" label="motu proprio"/>
<link wikidata="Q165154" start="25779" end="25810" title="Kingdom of Sardinia" label="Kingdom of Sardinia and Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599340" start="25841" end="25868" title="War of the Sicilian Vespers" label="War of the Sicilian Vespers"/>
<link wikidata="Q939200" start="25925" end="25948" title="Capetian House of Anjou" label="Capetian House of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040" start="25953" end="25959" title="Aragon" label="Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q312735" start="26084" end="26102" title="James II of Aragon" label="James II of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403866" start="26256" end="26273" title="Aragonese conquest of Sardinia" label="military campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q380088" start="26324" end="26331" title="Alfonso IV of Aragon" label="Alfonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q154674" start="26624" end="26640" title="Peace of Utrecht" label="Peace of Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256243" start="26742" end="26755" title="Carta de Logu" label="Carta de Logu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112851" start="26842" end="26864" title="Marianus IV of Arborea" label="Marianus IV of Arborea"/>
<link wikidata="Q155244" start="26942" end="26960" title="Eleanor of Arborea" label="Eleanor of Arborea"/>
<link wikidata="Q33976" start="26992" end="27001" title="Sardinian language" label="Sardinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q336823" start="27316" end="27334" title="Peter IV of Aragon" label="Peter IV of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="27689" end="27695" title="feudalism" label="feudal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3693942" start="27851" end="27865" title="Corona de Logu" label="Corona de Logu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112851" start="28322" end="28333" title="Marianus IV of Arborea" label="Marianus IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279560" start="28335" end="28343" title="Hugh III of Arborea" label="Hugh III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643341" start="28348" end="28365" title="Brancaleone Doria" label="Brancaleone Doria"/>
<link wikidata="Q155244" start="28378" end="28396" title="Eleanor of Arborea" label="Eleanor of Arborea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897" start="28490" end="28498" title="Cagliari" label="Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q166282" start="28503" end="28510" title="Alghero" label="Alghero"/>
<link wikidata="Q21190134" start="28582" end="28605" title="Sardinian–Aragonese war" label="Sardinian–Aragonese war"/>
<link wikidata="Q468616" start="28618" end="28636" title="Martin I of Sicily" label="Martin I of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762486" start="28717" end="28734" title="Battle of Sanluri" label="Battle of Sanluri"/>
<link wikidata="Q650702" start="29105" end="29117" title="Florin (Italian coin)" label="gold florins"/>
<link wikidata="Q15695801" start="29339" end="29358" title="Marquisate of Oristano" label="Marquis of Oristano"/>
<link wikidata="Q238179" start="29507" end="29525" title="List of Aragonese monarchs" label="Aragonese monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q199442" start="29560" end="29577" title="Kingdom of Aragon" label="Kingdom of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="29779" end="29798" title="early modern period" label="early modern period"/>
<link wikidata="Q12860" start="29941" end="29963" title="Ferdinand II of Aragon" label="Ferdinand II of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q45859" start="29973" end="29990" title="Isabel of Castile" label="Isabel of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q165154" start="30006" end="30025" title="Kingdom of Sardinia" label="Kingdom of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="30115" end="30133" title="Charles I of Spain" label="Charles I of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549267" start="30164" end="30174" title="Maure" label="Four Moors"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="30194" end="30212" title="Charles I of Spain" label="Charles I of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q899359" start="30283" end="30298" title="Barbary pirates" label="Barbary pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q166282" start="30849" end="30856" title="Alghero" label="Alghero"/>
<link wikidata="Q166282" start="30858" end="30871" title="l&amp;#x27;Alguer" label="l&amp;#x27;Alguer"/>
<link wikidata="Q168247" start="30880" end="30886" title="famine" label="famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="30983" end="30990" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897" start="30994" end="31002" title="Cagliari" label="Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="31403" end="31428" title="Spanish War of Succession" label="Spanish War of Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577303" start="31446" end="31465" title="Kingdom of Sardinia (1720–1861)" label="Kingdom of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170467" start="31478" end="31500" title="King Philip V of Spain" label="King Philip V of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="31523" end="31532" title="Empire of Austria" label="Austrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q154674" start="31563" end="31580" title="Treaty of Utrecht" label="Treaty of Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="31605" end="31614" title="Empire of Austria" label="Austrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q539927" start="31638" end="31653" title="Giulio Alberoni" label="Giulio Alberoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q170467" start="31667" end="31684" title="Philip V of Spain" label="Philip V of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8349925" start="31686" end="31705" title="Spanish conquest of Sardinia" label="reoccupied Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q200229" start="31787" end="31801" title="House of Savoy" label="House of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="31852" end="31868" title="Italian language" label="Italian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675071" start="31940" end="31954" title="Italianization" label="Italianization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283625" start="32025" end="32048" title="Expédition de Sardaigne" label="Expédition de Sardaigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q207318" start="32066" end="32091" title="French Revolutionary Wars" label="French Revolutionary Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q75591" start="32114" end="32132" title="Domenico Millelire" label="Domenico Millelire"/>
<link wikidata="Q575828" start="32218" end="32239" title="Maddalena archipelago" label="Maddalena archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="32266" end="32284" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q15042072" start="32343" end="32371" title="Gold Medal of Military Valor" label="Gold Medal of Military Valor"/>
<link wikidata="Q349511" start="32379" end="32399" title="Italian Armed Forces" label="Italian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q284516" start="32484" end="32506" title="Quartu Sant&amp;#x27;Elena" label="Quartu Sant&amp;#x27;Elena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897" start="32528" end="32536" title="Cagliari" label="Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q312681" start="32683" end="32713" title="Victor Amadeus III of Sardinia" label="Victor Amadeus III of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897" start="32821" end="32829" title="Cagliari" label="Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3944151" start="33034" end="33055" title="sa die de sa Sardigna" label="sa die de sa Sardigna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897" start="33156" end="33164" title="Cagliari" label="Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q13629" start="33188" end="33195" title="Sassari" label="Sassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868135" start="33266" end="33274" title="Logudoro" label="Logudoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256232" start="33420" end="33441" title="Giovanni Maria Angioy" label="Giovanni Maria Angioy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555173" start="33745" end="33753" title="Loyalism" label="loyalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="33890" end="33897" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="33944" end="33949" title="slave" label="slave"/>
<link wikidata="Q286709" start="33997" end="34014" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Antioco" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Antioco"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="34104" end="34119" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="34158" end="34163" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q943326" start="34427" end="34439" title="Perfect Fusion" label="form a union"/>
<link wikidata="Q13649" start="35276" end="35283" title="Nuoro" label="Nuorese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259176" start="35491" end="35503" title="common lands" label="common lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q943326" start="35755" end="35769" title="Perfect Fusion" label="Perfect Fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q920894" start="35908" end="35936" title="First Italian War of Independence" label="Italian Wars of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="35945" end="35965" title="Unification of Italy" label="Unification of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="36161" end="36177" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q271148" start="36182" end="36195" title="King of Italy" label="King of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="36885" end="36900" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662312" start="36932" end="36947" title="Sassari Mechanized Brigade" label="Brigata Sassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q15042072" start="37131" end="37160" title="Gold Medal of Military Valor" label="Gold Medals of Military Valor"/>
<link wikidata="Q747081" start="37339" end="37346" title="Italian Fascism" label="Fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q309070" start="37396" end="37403" title="autarky" label="autarky"/>
<link wikidata="Q382568" start="37551" end="37558" title="Arborea" label="Arborea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243" start="37587" end="37593" title="Veneto" label="Veneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q160570" start="37598" end="37604" title="Friuli" label="Friuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134146" start="37634" end="37642" title="Fertilia" label="Fertilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13362" start="37684" end="37691" title="Ferrara" label="Ferrara"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="37714" end="37726" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6089050" start="37751" end="37767" title="Istrian Italians" label="Istrian Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533689" start="37772" end="37790" title="Dalmatian Italians" label="Dalmatian Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="37824" end="37834" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q166282" start="37869" end="37876" title="Alghero" label="Alghero"/>
<link wikidata="Q599939" start="37899" end="37904" title="Nurra" label="Nurra"/>
<link wikidata="Q13660" start="37963" end="37971" title="Carbonia, Italy" label="Carbonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880211" start="38005" end="38016" title="coal mining" label="coal mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728" start="38137" end="38151" title="Grazia Deledda" label="Grazia Deledda"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="38160" end="38186" title="Nobel Prize for Literature" label="Nobel Prize for Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="38207" end="38223" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="38300" end="38306" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q196502" start="38413" end="38435" title="Armistice of Cassibile" label="Armistice of Cassibile"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38613" end="38635" title="Karl Hans Lungerhausen" label="Karl Hans Lungerhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q275914" start="38652" end="38681" title="90th Light Infantry Division (Wehrmacht)" label="90th Panzergrenadier Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="38865" end="38872" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q862034" start="38972" end="38994" title="Rockefeller Foundation" label="Rockefeller Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257682" start="39083" end="39090" title="Tourism in Sardinia" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q492173" start="39147" end="39171" title="Italian economic miracle" label="Italian economic miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="39197" end="39214" title="industrialisation" label="industrialisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364904" start="39597" end="39610" title="petrochemical" label="petrochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q268592" start="39611" end="39621" title="Industry (economics)" label="industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="39678" end="39693" title="1973 oil crisis" label="1973 oil crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q245016" start="39902" end="39915" title="military base" label="military base"/>
<link wikidata="Q320196" start="39937" end="39957" title="Decimomannu Air Base" label="Decimomannu Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q428283" start="39962" end="39977" title="Salto di Quirra" label="Salto di Quirra"/>
<link wikidata="Q547509" start="40400" end="40421" title="Sardinian nationalism" label="Sardinian nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q273120" start="40432" end="40448" title="protest movement" label="protest movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207519" start="40496" end="40503" title="Sardinian banditry" label="bandits"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852306" start="40511" end="40524" title="anonima sarda" label="anonima sarda"/>
<link wikidata="Q318296" start="40557" end="40568" title="kidnappings" label="kidnappings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="40676" end="40685" title="communist" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866571" start="40750" end="40774" title="Sardinian Armed Movement" label="Sardinian Armed Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299105" start="41001" end="41023" title="Sardinian Action Party" label="Sardinian Action Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q33976" start="41368" end="41377" title="Sardinian language" label="Sardinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q845441" start="41379" end="41388" title="Sassarese language" label="Sassarese"/>
<link wikidata="Q612220" start="41390" end="41399" title="Gallurese" label="Gallurese"/>
<link wikidata="Q585704" start="41401" end="41410" title="Algherese dialect" label="Algherese"/>
<link wikidata="Q36106" start="41415" end="41425" title="Ligurian (Romance language)" label="Tabarchino"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="41481" end="41488" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q923134" start="41494" end="41508" title="35th G8 summit" label="35th G8 summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720224" start="41524" end="41540" title="Prodi II Cabinet" label="Prodi II Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q340757" start="41582" end="41594" title="La Maddalena" label="La Maddalena"/>
<link wikidata="Q11860" start="41662" end="41679" title="Silvio Berlusconi" label="Silvio Berlusconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q47720" start="41771" end="41784" title="The People of Freedom" label="his own party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476" start="41854" end="41867" title="L&amp;#x27;Aquila" label="L&amp;#x27;Aquila"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="41931" end="41933" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q190915" start="42128" end="42147" title="Low-cost carrier" label="low-cost air travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11661" start="42161" end="42183" title="information technology" label="information technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3648907" start="42202" end="42206" title="CRS4" label="CRS4"/>
<link wikidata="Q35127" start="42305" end="42312" title="website" label="website"/>
<link wikidata="Q327618" start="42342" end="42349" title="webmail" label="webmail"/>
<link wikidata="Q726572" start="42500" end="42507" title="Tiscali" label="Tiscali"/>
<link wikidata="Q407009" start="42520" end="42531" title="3 Italy" label="Andala Umts"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="42937" end="42949" title="forest fires" label="forest fires"/>
<link wikidata="Q937959" start="43144" end="43171" title="Conservatoria delle Coste" label="Coastal conservation agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q12705" start="43237" end="43255" title="Renewable energies" label="Renewable energies"/>
<link wikidata="Q43302" start="43306" end="43316" title="wind power" label="wind power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483757" start="43358" end="43369" title="solar power" label="solar power"/>
<link wikidata="Q128991" start="43374" end="43381" title="biofuel" label="biofuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q74644" start="43392" end="43404" title="jatropha oil" label="jatropha oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q697248" start="43409" end="43418" title="colza oil" label="colza oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q43302" start="43439" end="43449" title="wind power" label="wind power"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="43698" end="43706" title="endemism" label="endemism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541790" start="43893" end="43919" title="Sardinian brook salamander" label="Sardinian brook salamander"/>
<link wikidata="Q675352" start="43921" end="43942" title="brown cave salamander" label="brown cave salamander"/>
<link wikidata="Q540469" start="43944" end="43968" title="imperial cave salamander" label="imperial cave salamander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930708" start="43970" end="43996" title="Monte Albo cave salamander" label="Monte Albo cave salamander"/>
<link wikidata="Q615179" start="43998" end="44024" title="Supramonte cave salamander" label="Supramonte cave salamander"/>
<link wikidata="Q4665983" start="44026" end="44056" title="Sarrabus&amp;#x27; cave salamander" label="Sarrabus&amp;#x27; cave salamander"/>
<link wikidata="Q513659" start="44065" end="44084" title="Sardinian tree frog" label="Sardinian tree frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q14112" start="44100" end="44107" title="Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122191" start="44160" end="44187" title="Bedriaga&amp;#x27;s rock lizard" label="Bedriaga&amp;#x27;s rock lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035115" start="44193" end="44215" title="Tyrrhenian wall lizard" label="Tyrrhenian wall lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q243950" start="44220" end="44247" title="Fitzinger&amp;#x27;s algyroides" label="Fitzinger&amp;#x27;s algyroides"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811507" start="44412" end="44429" title="Rhagamys orthodon" label="Rhagamys orthodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q30592235" start="44452" end="44468" title="Microtus henseli" label="Microtus henseli"/>
<link wikidata="Q44966006" start="44492" end="44510" title="Asoriculus" label="Asoriculus similis"/>
<link wikidata="Q30591940" start="44533" end="44549" title="Talpa tyrrhenica" label="Talpa tyrrhenica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157559" start="44575" end="44619" title="Mammuthus lamarmorai" label="&amp;quot;Mammuthus&amp;quot; &amp;quot;lamarmorai&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048895" start="44626" end="44640" title="Sardinian pika" label="Sardinian pika"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118534" start="44699" end="44714" title="Sardinian dhole" label="Sardinian dhole"/>
<link wikidata="Q25437" start="44751" end="44759" title="Mustelidae" label="mustelid"/>
<link wikidata="Q108030483" start="44767" end="44790" title="Enhydrictis" label="Enhydrictis galictoides"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723954" start="44829" end="44847" title="Algarolutra majori" label="Algarolutra majori"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423823" start="44849" end="44868" title="Sardolutra" label="Sardolutra ichnusae"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808419" start="44899" end="44924" title="Megalenhydris barbaricina" label="Megalenhydris barbaricina"/>
<link wikidata="Q25095511" start="44950" end="44971" title="Praemegaceros" label="Praemegaceros cazioti"/>
<link wikidata="Q763725" start="45473" end="45490" title="Corsican red deer" label="Corsican red deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q262555" start="45563" end="45586" title="Hermann&amp;#x27;s tortoise" label="Hermann&amp;#x27;s tortoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q504549" start="45592" end="45613" title="spur-thighed tortoise" label="spur-thighed tortoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q645356" start="45615" end="45634" title="marginated tortoise" label="marginated tortoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q192095" start="45691" end="45712" title="loggerhead sea turtle" label="loggerhead sea turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q199458" start="45717" end="45733" title="green sea turtle" label="green sea turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q48428" start="45741" end="45754" title="birds of prey" label="birds of prey"/>
<link wikidata="Q177856" start="45774" end="45789" title="griffon vulture" label="griffon vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q25385" start="45791" end="45805" title="common buzzard" label="common buzzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q41181" start="45807" end="45819" title="golden eagle" label="golden eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25384" start="45821" end="45835" title="long-eared owl" label="long-eared owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q26431" start="45837" end="45858" title="western marsh harrier" label="western marsh harrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q30535" start="45860" end="45876" title="peregrine falcon" label="peregrine falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q170466" start="45878" end="45900" title="European honey buzzard" label="European honey buzzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q234722" start="45964" end="45984" title="Bonelli&amp;#x27;s eagle" label="Bonelli&amp;#x27;s eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q212243" start="45989" end="46011" title="Eleonora&amp;#x27;s falcon" label="Eleonora&amp;#x27;s falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q155244" start="46035" end="46053" title="Eleonor of Arborea" label="Eleonor of Arborea"/>
<link wikidata="Q211011" start="46095" end="46103" title="falconry" label="falconry"/>
<link wikidata="Q179863" start="46222" end="46238" title="greater flamingo" label="greater flamingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q651012" start="46327" end="46332" title="Viperinae" label="viper"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="46334" end="46338" title="wolf" label="wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q11788" start="46340" end="46344" title="bear" label="bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q131567" start="46349" end="46355" title="marmot" label="marmot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3473575" start="46426" end="46441" title="Sardinian sheep" label="Sardinian sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299835" start="46447" end="46467" title="Sardinian Anglo-Arab" label="Sardinian Anglo-Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410835" start="46649" end="46671" title="Sardinian Shepherd Dog" label="Sardinian Shepherd Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655236" start="46677" end="46690" title="Dogo Sardesco" label="Dogo Sardesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q6535837" start="46699" end="46713" title="Levriero Sardo" label="Levriero Sardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510355" start="46873" end="46887" title="Italian national park" label="national parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091068" start="46894" end="46915" title="Asinara National Park" label="Asinara National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q536703" start="46922" end="46962" title="Arcipelago di La Maddalena National Park" label="Arcipelago di La Maddalena National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425154" start="46973" end="46998" title="Gennargentu National Park" label="Gennargentu National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q837856" start="47005" end="47019" title="List of regional parks of Italy" label="regional parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093927" start="47142" end="47170" title="Giara di Gesturi" label="Parco della Giara di Gesturi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="47474" end="47480" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537757" start="47529" end="47579" title="Pelagos Sanctuary for Mediterranean Marine Mammals" label="Pelagos Sanctuary for Mediterranean Marine Mammals"/>
<link wikidata="Q214195" start="47716" end="47721" title="National Institute of Statistics (Italy)" label="ISTAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q532822" start="48210" end="48231" title="University of Sassari" label="University of Sassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067315" start="48240" end="48262" title="University of Cagliari" label="University of Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="48417" end="48421" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897" start="48552" end="48560" title="Cagliari" label="Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q13629" start="48565" end="48572" title="Sassari" label="Sassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q217659" start="48636" end="48644" title="Eurostat" label="Eurostat"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="48663" end="48685" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="48732" end="48755" title="purchasing power parity" label="purchasing power parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="48835" end="48852" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q13652" start="49043" end="49051" title="Oristano" label="Oristano"/>
<link wikidata="Q13649" start="49064" end="49069" title="Nuoro" label="Nuoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q13630" start="49088" end="49093" title="Olbia" label="Olbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574919" start="49118" end="49164" title="List of Italian regions by GDP" label="the 14th most productive region in the country"/>
<link wikidata="Q65078037" start="49172" end="49199" title="List of Italian regions by GRP per capita" label="the 16th for GRP per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q14112" start="49535" end="49542" title="Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="49551" end="49567" title="Italy" label="Italian mainland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117949" start="49586" end="49607" title="submarine power cable" label="submarine power cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3943420" start="49608" end="49613" title="Sapei" label="Sapei"/>
<link wikidata="Q13410" start="49720" end="49726" title="Latina, Lazio" label="Latina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2204736" start="49758" end="49763" title="SACOI" label="SACOI"/>
<link wikidata="Q358333" start="49869" end="49890" title="liquified natural gas" label="liquified natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q200297" start="50090" end="50109" title="thermal power plant" label="thermal power plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="50166" end="50176" title="hydropower" label="hydropower"/>
<link wikidata="Q806205" start="50235" end="50252" title="Banco di Sardegna" label="Banco di Sardegna"/>
<link wikidata="Q806162" start="50257" end="50273" title="Banca di Sassari" label="Banca di Sassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q272051" start="50353" end="50362" title="tax haven" label="tax haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q182290" start="50404" end="50417" title="custom duties" label="custom duties"/>
<link wikidata="Q128635" start="50419" end="50434" title="value added tax" label="value added tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q202704" start="50500" end="50510" title="Portoscuso" label="Portoscuso"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="51114" end="51131" title="unemployment rate" label="unemployment rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="51252" end="51267" title="Great Recession" label="Great Recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049848" start="51472" end="51488" title="percentage point" label="percentage point"/>
<link wikidata="Q207989" start="51556" end="51572" title="Southern Italy" label="Southern Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q214195" start="51603" end="51643" title="Italian National Institute of Statistics" label="Italian National Institute of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="51793" end="51798" title="sheep" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934" start="52165" end="52169" title="goat" label="goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="52175" end="52181" title="cattle" label="cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="52383" end="52392" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q954942" start="52533" end="52542" title="Campidano" label="Campidano"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="52570" end="52575" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q25517" start="52879" end="52890" title="cubic meter" label="cubic meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q93165" start="52985" end="52994" title="olive oil" label="olive oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q23041430" start="52996" end="53005" title="artichoke" label="artichoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501" start="53007" end="53013" title="tomato" label="tomato"/>
<link wikidata="Q37083" start="53180" end="53185" title="olive" label="olive"/>
<link wikidata="Q10978" start="53190" end="53196" title="grapes" label="grapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12104" start="53294" end="53298" title="oats" label="oats"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="53300" end="53306" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q618324" start="53311" end="53316" title="durum" label="durum"/>
<link wikidata="Q13191" start="53459" end="53465" title="orange (fruit)" label="orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="53498" end="53503" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q151964" start="53555" end="53565" title="sugar beet" label="sugar beet"/>
<link wikidata="Q156137" start="53597" end="53605" title="cork oak" label="cork oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q49444" start="53679" end="53683" title="cork (material)" label="cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q962651" start="53722" end="53729" title="Gallura" label="Gallura"/>
<link wikidata="Q340721" start="53745" end="53756" title="Calangianus" label="Calangianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13645" start="53761" end="53776" title="Tempio Pausania" label="Tempio Pausania"/>
<link wikidata="Q81513" start="54022" end="54028" title="citrus" label="citrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="54099" end="54103" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q382568" start="54157" end="54164" title="Arborea" label="Arborea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246024" start="54437" end="54452" title="pecorino romano" label="pecorino romano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265288" start="54615" end="54629" title="horse breeding" label="horse breeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q204920" start="54640" end="54649" title="Crown of Aragon" label="Aragonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q47315" start="54668" end="54675" title="cavalry" label="cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q202704" start="54925" end="54935" title="Portoscuso" label="Portoscuso"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146274" start="54936" end="54940" title="tuna" label="tuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="55099" end="55103" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3858432" start="55105" end="55117" title="Nuraxi Figus" label="Nuraxi Figus"/>
<link wikidata="Q286304" start="55129" end="55136" title="Gonnesa" label="Gonnesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099" start="55139" end="55147" title="antimony" label="antimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q285560" start="55149" end="55159" title="Villasalto" label="Villasalto"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="55162" end="55166" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q287490" start="55168" end="55174" title="Furtei" label="Furtei"/>
<link wikidata="Q102078" start="55177" end="55184" title="bauxite" label="bauxite"/>
<link wikidata="Q390772" start="55186" end="55192" title="Olmedo, Sardinia" label="Olmedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="55198" end="55202" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="55207" end="55211" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1657176" start="55213" end="55223" title="Iglesiente" label="Iglesiente"/>
<link wikidata="Q599939" start="55225" end="55230" title="Nurra" label="Nurra"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="55237" end="55244" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q391316" start="55513" end="55525" title="Porto Torres" label="Porto Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897" start="55527" end="55535" title="Cagliari" label="Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q13654" start="55537" end="55547" title="Villacidro" label="Villacidro"/>
<link wikidata="Q295564" start="55549" end="55555" title="Ottana" label="Ottana"/>
<link wikidata="Q391316" start="55574" end="55586" title="Porto Torres" label="Porto Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q284901" start="55588" end="55595" title="Sarroch" label="Sarroch"/>
<link wikidata="Q13654" start="55636" end="55646" title="Villacidro" label="Villacidro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897" start="55657" end="55665" title="Cagliari" label="Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q13629" start="55684" end="55691" title="Sassari" label="Sassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q626925" start="55708" end="55715" title="Arbatax" label="Arbatax"/>
<link wikidata="Q13630" start="55717" end="55722" title="Olbia" label="Olbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q391316" start="55724" end="55736" title="Porto Torres" label="Porto Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q626925" start="55761" end="55768" title="Arbatax" label="Arbatax"/>
<link wikidata="Q13654" start="55786" end="55796" title="Villacidro" label="Villacidro"/>
<link wikidata="Q286246" start="55818" end="55828" title="Domusnovas" label="Domusnovas"/>
<link wikidata="Q285617" start="55859" end="55867" title="Villasor" label="Villasor"/>
<link wikidata="Q382568" start="55891" end="55898" title="Arborea" label="Arborea"/>
<link wikidata="Q295248" start="55900" end="55907" title="Macomer" label="Macomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q391563" start="55912" end="55918" title="Thiesi" label="Thiesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454620" start="55920" end="55932" title="fish factory" label="fish factory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56162" end="56172" title="Vitrociset" label="Vitrociset"/>
<link wikidata="Q285528" start="56177" end="56187" title="Villaputzu" label="Villaputzu"/>
<link wikidata="Q29261" start="56252" end="56285" title="Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II" label="Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489350" start="56655" end="56661" title="AIRPod" label="AIRPod"/>
<link wikidata="Q294746" start="56746" end="56754" title="Bolotana" label="Bolotana"/>
<link wikidata="Q26643" start="56967" end="56975" title="commerce" label="commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="56977" end="56985" title="tertiary sector of the economy" label="services"/>
<link wikidata="Q11661" start="56987" end="57009" title="information technology" label="information technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q31728" start="57011" end="57032" title="public administration" label="public administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257682" start="57051" end="57058" title="Tourism in Sardinia" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3648907" start="57639" end="57643" title="CRS4" label="CRS4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548903" start="57698" end="57717" title="L&amp;#x27;Unione Sarda" label="L&amp;#x27;Unione Sarda"/>
<link wikidata="Q129238" start="57865" end="57873" title="Startup company" label="startups"/>
<link wikidata="Q726572" start="58354" end="58361" title="Tiscali" label="Tiscali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349167" start="58405" end="58419" title="ground station" label="ground station"/>
<link wikidata="Q848336" start="58453" end="58461" title="Eutelsat" label="Eutelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1222" start="58539" end="58551" title="Aosta Valley" label="Aosta Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q79703" start="58863" end="58866" title="LTE (telecommunication)" label="LTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q136484" start="58951" end="58954" title="ZTE" label="ZTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q160120" start="58959" end="58965" title="Huawei" label="Huawei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083894" start="59095" end="59125" title="Digital Terrestrial Television" label="Digital Terrestrial Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321390" start="59292" end="59336" title="Alghero-Fertilia Airport" label="Alghero-Fertilia/Riviera del Corallo Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432236" start="59338" end="59366" title="Olbia - Costa Smeralda Airport" label="Olbia-Costa Smeralda Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q139983" start="59371" end="59393" title="Cagliari-Elmas Airport" label="Cagliari-Elmas Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="59501" end="59507" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054204" start="59555" end="59578" title="Oristano-Fenosu Airport" label="Oristano-Fenosu Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114107" start="59583" end="59606" title="Tortolì Airport" label="Tortolì-Arbatax Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="59774" end="59778" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="59783" end="59788" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q190915" start="59840" end="59862" title="Low-cost carrier" label="low-cost air companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q49547426" start="60280" end="60289" title="Air Italy (2018–2020)" label="Air Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156345" start="60309" end="60318" title="Meridiana" label="Meridiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q13630" start="60367" end="60372" title="Olbia" label="Olbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726953" start="60392" end="60400" title="Alisarda" label="Alisarda"/>
<link wikidata="Q311793" start="60416" end="60427" title="Aga Khan IV" label="Aga Khan IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726953" start="60448" end="60456" title="Alisarda" label="Alisarda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136383" start="60485" end="60499" title="Costa Smeralda" label="Costa Smeralda"/>
<link wikidata="Q476272" start="60676" end="60699" title="Tirrenia di Navigazione" label="Tirrenia di Navigazione"/>
<link wikidata="Q833314" start="60701" end="60711" title="Moby Lines" label="Moby Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q682210" start="60713" end="60747" title="Corsica Ferries - Sardinia Ferries" label="Corsica Ferries - Sardinia Ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543002" start="60749" end="60767" title="Grandi Navi Veloci" label="Grandi Navi Veloci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057367" start="60769" end="60783" title="Grimaldi Lines" label="Grimaldi Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q391316" start="60836" end="60848" title="Porto Torres" label="Porto Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q13630" start="60850" end="60855" title="Olbia" label="Olbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q340731" start="60857" end="60869" title="Golfo Aranci" label="Golfo Aranci"/>
<link wikidata="Q626925" start="60871" end="60878" title="Arbatax" label="Arbatax"/>
<link wikidata="Q341023" start="60880" end="60900" title="Santa Teresa Gallura" label="Santa Teresa Gallura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897" start="60905" end="60913" title="Cagliari" label="Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q242533" start="60919" end="60932" title="Civitavecchia" label="Civitavecchia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="60934" end="60939" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6761" start="60941" end="60948" title="Livorno" label="Livorno"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="60950" end="60956" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656" start="60958" end="60965" title="Palermo" label="Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13664" start="60967" end="60974" title="Trapani" label="Trapani"/>
<link wikidata="Q157824" start="60976" end="60984" title="Piombino" label="Piombino"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="60995" end="61004" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q44160" start="61006" end="61012" title="Toulon" label="Toulon"/>
<link wikidata="Q204051" start="61014" end="61023" title="Bonifacio, Corse-du-Sud" label="Bonifacio"/>
<link wikidata="Q736749" start="61025" end="61034" title="Propriano" label="Propriano"/>
<link wikidata="Q40104" start="61039" end="61046" title="Ajaccio" label="Ajaccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="61061" end="61070" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q340757" start="61327" end="61339" title="La Maddalena" label="La Maddalena"/>
<link wikidata="Q120399" start="61344" end="61354" title="Carloforte" label="San Pietro"/>
<link wikidata="Q115943227" start="61482" end="61492" title="Autostrade" label="Autostrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q46622" start="61497" end="61505" title="motorway" label="motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302778" start="61584" end="61600" title="dual carriageway" label="dual carriageway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3974735" start="61776" end="61781" title="Strada statale 131 Charles Felix" label="SS131"/>
<link wikidata="Q312683" start="61788" end="61800" title="Carlo Felice" label="Carlo Felice"/>
<link wikidata="Q391316" start="61894" end="61906" title="Porto Torres" label="Porto Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897" start="61911" end="61919" title="Cagliari" label="Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q106123" start="61935" end="61949" title="European route" label="European route"/>
<link wikidata="Q3974736" start="61959" end="61971" title="Strada statale 131 Diramazione Centrale Nuorese" label="SS 131 d.c.n"/>
<link wikidata="Q13652" start="61978" end="61986" title="Oristano" label="Oristano"/>
<link wikidata="Q13630" start="61992" end="61997" title="Olbia" label="Olbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13649" start="62023" end="62028" title="Nuoro" label="Nuoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q13629" start="62089" end="62096" title="Sassari" label="Sassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q166282" start="62102" end="62109" title="Alghero" label="Alghero"/>
<link wikidata="Q13629" start="62111" end="62118" title="Sassari" label="Sassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q13645" start="62124" end="62139" title="Tempio Pausania" label="Tempio Pausania"/>
<link wikidata="Q13629" start="62141" end="62148" title="Sassari" label="Sassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q13630" start="62151" end="62156" title="Olbia" label="Olbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897" start="62158" end="62166" title="Cagliari" label="Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q13659" start="62169" end="62176" title="Tortolì" label="Tortolì"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897" start="62178" end="62186" title="Cagliari" label="Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q13661" start="62189" end="62197" title="Iglesias, Sardinia" label="Iglesias"/>
<link wikidata="Q13649" start="62199" end="62204" title="Nuoro" label="Nuoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q13657" start="62207" end="62214" title="Lanusei" label="Lanusei"/>
<link wikidata="Q269949" start="62268" end="62275" title="highway" label="highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q285783" start="62315" end="62328" title="Intersection (road)" label="intersections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130302" start="62401" end="62413" title="hairpin turn" label="hairpin turn"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="62451" end="62467" title="Public transport" label="Public transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638" start="62468" end="62473" title="buses" label="buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q3601148" start="62662" end="62666" title="ARST (company)" label="ARST"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897" start="62758" end="62766" title="Cagliari" label="Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q13661" start="62768" end="62776" title="Iglesias, Sardinia" label="Iglesias"/>
<link wikidata="Q13652" start="62778" end="62786" title="Oristano" label="Oristano"/>
<link wikidata="Q166282" start="62788" end="62795" title="Alghero" label="Alghero"/>
<link wikidata="Q13629" start="62797" end="62804" title="Sassari" label="Sassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q13649" start="62806" end="62811" title="Nuoro" label="Nuoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q13660" start="62813" end="62821" title="Carbonia, Sardinia" label="Carbonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13630" start="62826" end="62831" title="Olbia" label="Olbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3638260" start="63027" end="63042" title="Benjamin Piercy" label="Benjamin Piercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q286650" start="63096" end="63106" title="Trenitalia" label="Trenitalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q309084" start="63263" end="63290" title="Alstom" label="&amp;quot;Alstom Minuetto&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q671188" start="63317" end="63330" title="tilting train" label="tilting train"/>
<link wikidata="Q838212" start="63331" end="63353" title="Construcciones y Auxiliar de Ferrocarriles" label="CAF ATR365 and ATR 465"/>
<link wikidata="Q3601148" start="63414" end="63418" title="ARST (company)" label="ARST"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112477" start="63438" end="63450" title="narrow gauge railways" label="narrow-gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q844054" start="63541" end="63552" title="tram-trains" label="tram-trains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544435" start="63592" end="63599" title="Sassari Tram-train" label="Sassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548435" start="63604" end="63612" title="Cagliari Metro-tramway" label="Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262790" start="63625" end="63638" title="Trenino Verde" label="Trenino Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q420962" start="63683" end="63698" title="tourist railway" label="railway tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q752392" start="63733" end="63740" title="railcar" label="railcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q171043" start="63746" end="63762" title="steam locomotive" label="steam locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="63922" end="63940" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897" start="64290" end="64298" title="Cagliari" label="Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q166282" start="64300" end="64307" title="Alghero" label="Alghero"/>
<link wikidata="Q233797" start="64309" end="64320" title="Castelsardo" label="Castelsardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q105763" start="64498" end="64505" title="Saracen" label="Saracen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="64523" end="64534" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q501768" start="64544" end="64551" title="Barbary" label="Barbary"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="64988" end="65008" title="total fertility rate" label="total fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q203516" start="65056" end="65066" title="birth rate" label="birth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q284137" start="65233" end="65245" title="Population decline" label="depopulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q74047" start="65433" end="65443" title="ghost town" label="ghost town"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="65579" end="65586" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="65853" end="65868" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q766445" start="65972" end="65979" title="Okinawa Prefecture" label="Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944360" start="66000" end="66012" title="centenarians" label="centenarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299670" start="66102" end="66111" title="Blue Zone" label="Blue Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622022" start="66638" end="66667" title="Metropolitan City of Cagliari" label="Metropolitan City of Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q217659" start="66744" end="66752" title="Eurostat" label="Eurostat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175539" start="66784" end="66805" title="Functional Urban Area" label="Functional Urban Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q16110" start="66942" end="66968" title="Italian autonomous regions" label="Italian autonomous regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1222" start="66985" end="66997" title="Aosta Valley" label="Aosta Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237" start="66999" end="67027" title="Trentino-Alto Adige/Südtirol" label="Trentino-Alto Adige/Südtirol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250" start="67029" end="67050" title="Friuli-Venezia Giulia" label="Friuli-Venezia Giulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="67055" end="67061" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q719967" start="67108" end="67126" title="Italian Constitution" label="constitutional law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3687397" start="67395" end="67411" title="Regional Council of Sardinia" label="Regional Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q16220" start="67601" end="67606" title="Province of Nuoro" label="Nuoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q16225" start="67608" end="67616" title="Province of Oristano" label="Oristano"/>
<link wikidata="Q16272" start="67618" end="67625" title="Province of Sassari" label="Sassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498165" start="67627" end="67641" title="Province of South Sardinia" label="South Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48800793" start="67651" end="67668" title="Metropolitan cities of Italy" label="metropolitan city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897" start="67672" end="67680" title="Cagliari" label="Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="68895" end="68899" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674702" start="68917" end="68924" title="Israeli army" label="Israeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q392953" start="69928" end="69935" title="Italian Space Agency" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="69940" end="69961" title="European Space Agency" label="European Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q575828" start="70076" end="70097" title="Maddalena Archipelago" label="Maddalena Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q428283" start="70308" end="70323" title="Salto di Quirra" label="Salto di Quirra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="70418" end="70435" title="Regions of Italy#Autonomous regions with special statute" label="autonomous region"/>
<link wikidata="Q820655" start="70463" end="70470" title="Statute" label="Statute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243" start="70586" end="70592" title="Veneto" label="Veneto"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="70622" end="70637" title="Regions of Italy#Regions with ordinary statute" label="ordinary region"/>
<link wikidata="Q11206" start="70679" end="70697" title="constitutional law" label="constitutional law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238775" start="70941" end="70955" title="domus de janas" label="domus de janas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523627" start="70984" end="71002" title="Giants&amp;#x27; grave" label="Giants&amp;#x27; grave"/>
<link wikidata="Q193475" start="71032" end="71038" title="menhir" label="menhir"/>
<link wikidata="Q101659" start="71045" end="71051" title="dolmen" label="dolmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3909778" start="71061" end="71073" title="Nuragic holy well" label="well temples"/>
<link wikidata="Q688292" start="71179" end="71186" title="nuraghe" label="nuraghe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="71222" end="71232" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="71349" end="71360" title="Phoenicians" label="Phoenicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383747" start="71365" end="71371" title="Punics" label="Punics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="71423" end="71429" title="Ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q391316" start="71667" end="71679" title="Porto Torres" label="Porto Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844403" start="71687" end="71717" title="Roman Amphitheatre of Cagliari" label="Roman Amphitheatre of Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="71733" end="71748" title="early Christian" label="early Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="71753" end="71762" title="Byzantine" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q46261" start="71928" end="71951" title="Romanesque architecture" label="Romanesque architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q742313" start="71963" end="71972" title="Sardinian medieval kingdoms" label="Judicates"/>
<link wikidata="Q145694" start="72147" end="72152" title="Italian peninsula" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13375" start="72243" end="72247" title="Pisa" label="Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210" start="72249" end="72257" title="Lombardy" label="Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q101081" start="72259" end="72267" title="Provence" label="Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="72272" end="72284" title="Muslim Spain" label="Muslim Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q473277" start="72459" end="72481" title="basilica of San Gavino" label="basilica of San Gavino"/>
<link wikidata="Q3663726" start="72560" end="72589" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Antioco di Bisarcio" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Antioco di Bisarcio"/>
<link wikidata="Q391167" start="72591" end="72597" title="Ozieri" label="Ozieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2219967" start="72600" end="72620" title="San Pietro di Sorres" label="San Pietro di Sorres"/>
<link wikidata="Q390450" start="72624" end="72631" title="Borutta" label="Borutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q962662" start="72633" end="72653" title="San Nicola (Ottana)" label="San Nicola di Ottana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537739" start="72678" end="72699" title="Santa Maria del Regno" label="Santa Maria del Regno"/>
<link wikidata="Q390138" start="72703" end="72709" title="Ardara, Sardinia" label="Ardara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623346" start="72715" end="72737" title="Santa Giusta Cathedral" label="Santa Giusta Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3669440" start="72739" end="72762" title="Nostra Signora di Tergu" label="Nostra Signora di Tergu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543539" start="72768" end="72789" title="Basilica di Saccargia" label="Basilica di Saccargia"/>
<link wikidata="Q390687" start="72793" end="72805" title="Codrongianos" label="Codrongianos"/>
<link wikidata="Q287802" start="72810" end="72828" title="Santa Maria, Uta" label="Santa Maria di Uta"/>
<link wikidata="Q286747" start="72900" end="72909" title="Tratalias" label="Tratalias"/>
<link wikidata="Q3663714" start="72915" end="72927" title="Dolianova Cathedral" label="San Pantaleo"/>
<link wikidata="Q283870" start="72929" end="72938" title="Dolianova" label="Dolianova"/>
<link wikidata="Q29582867" start="72980" end="72987" title="Castles of Sardinia" label="castles"/>
<link wikidata="Q15921929" start="73140" end="73155" title="Giovanni Capula" label="Giovanni Capula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897" start="73240" end="73248" title="Cagliari" label="Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895430" start="73261" end="73275" title="Catalan Gothic" label="Catalan Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886939" start="73302" end="73331" title="shrine of Our Lady of Bonaria" label="shrine of Our Lady of Bonaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q166282" start="73810" end="73817" title="Alghero" label="Alghero"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273465" start="73946" end="73955" title="Alghero Cathedral" label="cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q236122" start="73964" end="73988" title="Renaissance architecture" label="Renaissance architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q728211" start="74077" end="74100" title="Sassari Cathedral" label="cathedral of San Nicola"/>
<link wikidata="Q13629" start="74104" end="74111" title="Sassari" label="Sassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q840829" start="74351" end="74371" title="Baroque architecture" label="Baroque architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073495" start="74578" end="74599" title="Cagliari Cathedral" label="cathedral of Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q382548" start="74601" end="74605" title="Ales, Sardinia" label="Ales"/>
<link wikidata="Q13652" start="74610" end="74618" title="Oristano" label="Oristano"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="74756" end="74768" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q169548" start="74921" end="74933" title="Gaetano Cima" label="Gaetano Cima"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="75297" end="75307" title="neo Gothic" label="neo Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216982" start="75372" end="75382" title="Revivalism (architecture)" label="revivalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537632" start="75429" end="75443" title="Eclecticism in art" label="eclectic style"/>
<link wikidata="Q34636" start="75491" end="75502" title="Art Nouveau" label="Art Nouveau"/>
<link wikidata="Q25550691" start="75529" end="75538" title="City hall" label="City hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="75608" end="75615" title="fascism" label="fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134146" start="75758" end="75766" title="Fertilia" label="Fertilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q382568" start="75768" end="75775" title="Arborea" label="Arborea"/>
<link wikidata="Q13660" start="75792" end="75800" title="Carbonia, Sardinia" label="Carbonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535546" start="75834" end="75858" title="rationalist architecture" label="rationalist architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q334486" start="75922" end="75936" title="Mother Goddess" label="Mother Goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007450" start="76021" end="76040" title="Pre-Nuragic Sardinia" label="Pre-Nuragic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421436" start="76060" end="76080" title="Nuragic civilization" label="Nuragic civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q928345" start="76102" end="76119" title="Nuragic bronze statuettes" label="bronze statuettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817134" start="76160" end="76187" title="Giants of Mont&amp;#x27;e Prama" label="Giants of Mont&amp;#x27;e Prama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="76280" end="76293" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="76325" end="76329" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q46847" start="76341" end="76345" title="ring (jewellery)" label="ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q168456" start="76348" end="76356" title="earrings" label="earrings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253440" start="76506" end="76513" title="Roman mosaic" label="mosaics"/>
<link wikidata="Q154668" start="76551" end="76561" title="patricians" label="patricians"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="76601" end="76611" title="Middle Age" label="Middle Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q193893" start="76695" end="76702" title="capital (architecture)" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q48634" start="76705" end="76715" title="sarcophagi" label="sarcophagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q134194" start="76717" end="76725" title="frescoes" label="frescoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="76727" end="76733" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q3714446" start="76768" end="76775" title="retable" label="retable"/>
<link wikidata="Q583132" start="76821" end="76842" title="Master of Castelsardo" label="Master of Castelsardo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="76844" end="76857" title="Pietro Cavaro" label="Pietro Cavaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q30879691" start="76905" end="76921" title="Master of Ozieri" label="Master of Ozieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3768468" start="76940" end="76959" title="Giovanni del Giglio" label="Giovanni del Giglio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751" start="76992" end="76996" title="Siena" label="Sene"/>
<link wikidata="Q34970" start="77202" end="77216" title="D. H. Lawrence" label="D. H. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3770124" start="77281" end="77295" title="Giuseppe Biasi" label="Giuseppe Biasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3749795" start="77297" end="77312" title="Francesco Ciusa" label="Francesco Ciusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136448" start="77604" end="77621" title="Costantino Nivola" label="Costantino Nivola"/>
<link wikidata="Q676378" start="77651" end="77666" title="Pinuccio Sciola" label="Pinuccio Sciola"/>
<link wikidata="Q688292" start="77737" end="77744" title="nuraghe" label="nuraghe"/>
<link wikidata="Q253241" start="77798" end="77819" title="Su Nuraxi di Barumini" label="Su Nuraxi di Barumini"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="77825" end="77831" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="77832" end="77851" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="77885" end="77892" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33976" start="78036" end="78045" title="Sardinian language" label="Sardinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="78106" end="78122" title="Romance language" label="Romance language"/>
<link wikidata="Q145345" start="78167" end="78183" title="Southern Romance" label="Southern Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="78282" end="78287" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q61566" start="78395" end="78421" title="minority language" label="ethnolinguistic minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="78499" end="78506" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110149" start="78560" end="78584" title="Paleo-Sardinian language" label="Paleo-Sardinian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827436" start="78762" end="78780" title="Limba Sarda Comuna" label="Limba Sarda Comuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q35348" start="79057" end="79068" title="Campidanese Sardinian" label="Campidanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q777974" start="79141" end="79151" title="Logudorese Sardinian" label="Logudorese"/>
<link wikidata="Q13629" start="79230" end="79237" title="Sassari" label="Sassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="79296" end="79313" title="Romance languages" label="Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q38311" start="79345" end="79355" title="Morphology (linguistics)" label="morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="79357" end="79363" title="syntax" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q8096" start="79368" end="79375" title="lexicon" label="lexicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35395" start="79431" end="79440" title="phonetics" label="phonetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q33384" start="79479" end="79486" title="dialect" label="dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q845441" start="79490" end="79499" title="Sassarese language" label="Sassarese"/>
<link wikidata="Q612220" start="79528" end="79537" title="Gallurese" label="Gallurese"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="79580" end="79605" title="Corsican language#Corsican in Sardinia" label="Corso-Sardinian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313381" start="79634" end="79656" title="Italo-Dalmatian languages" label="Italo-Dalmatian branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q957314" start="79749" end="79764" title="language island" label="language island"/>
<link wikidata="Q585704" start="79771" end="79788" title="Algherese dialect" label="Algherese dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="79815" end="79822" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q166282" start="79848" end="79855" title="Alghero" label="Alghero"/>
<link wikidata="Q912934" start="79875" end="79885" title="San Pietro Island" label="San Pietro"/>
<link wikidata="Q286709" start="79890" end="79907" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Antioco" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Antioco"/>
<link wikidata="Q36106" start="79997" end="80005" title="Ligurian language" label="Ligurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q32724" start="80078" end="80086" title="Venetian language" label="Venetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33441" start="80088" end="80096" title="Friulian language" label="Friulian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35845" start="80101" end="80108" title="Istriot language" label="Istriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q382568" start="80112" end="80119" title="Arborea" label="Arborea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134146" start="80124" end="80132" title="Fertilia" label="Fertilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q579075" start="80234" end="80249" title="northeast Italy" label="northeast Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q639912" start="80269" end="80275" title="Istria" label="Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="80280" end="80288" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="80307" end="80319" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q193579" start="80419" end="80429" title="cultural assimilation" label="absorption"/>
<link wikidata="Q266961" start="80593" end="80607" title="language shift" label="language shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q335214" start="80623" end="80635" title="Endangered language" label="endangerment"/>
<link wikidata="Q214195" start="80681" end="80686" title="National Institute of Statistics (Italy)" label="ISTAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675071" start="80971" end="80985" title="Italianization" label="Italianization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="81127" end="81155" title="Regional Italian#Sardinia" label="regional Italian of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="81283" end="81291" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="81293" end="81299" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34257" start="81301" end="81306" title="Wolof language" label="Wolof"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="81311" end="81318" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201830" start="81670" end="81687" title="Antonio Lo Frasso" label="Antonio Lo Frasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q480" start="81760" end="81771" title="Don Quixote" label="Don Quixote"/>
<link wikidata="Q5682" start="81775" end="81794" title="Miguel de Cervantes" label="Miguel de Cervantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q30081" start="81906" end="81921" title="Multilingualism" label="Multilingualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3898009" start="82010" end="82033" title="Giovanni Francesco Fara" label="Giovanni Francesco Fara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3903836" start="82038" end="82053" title="Pietro Delitala" label="Pietro Delitala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1611295" start="82109" end="82125" title="Gerolamo Araolla" label="Gerolamo Araolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q18201449" start="82349" end="82370" title="Joseph Zatrillas Vico" label="Joseph Zatrillas Vico"/>
<link wikidata="Q165154" start="82469" end="82488" title="Kingdom of Sardinia" label="Kingdom of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q200229" start="82497" end="82511" title="House of Savoy" label="House of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261894" start="82654" end="82668" title="Giovanni Spano" label="Giovanni Spano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3770883" start="82718" end="82732" title="Giuseppe Manno" label="Giuseppe Manno"/>
<link wikidata="Q3897158" start="82787" end="82800" title="Pasquale Tola" label="Pasquale Tola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113730" start="82893" end="82911" title="Alberto La Marmora" label="Alberto La Marmora"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728" start="83095" end="83109" title="Grazia Deledda" label="Grazia Deledda"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="83143" end="83168" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3953793" start="83205" end="83221" title="Sebastiano Satta" label="Sebastiano Satta"/>
<link wikidata="Q83003" start="83333" end="83348" title="Antonio Gramsci" label="Antonio Gramsci"/>
<link wikidata="Q694799" start="83353" end="83365" title="Emilio Lussu" label="Emilio Lussu"/>
<link wikidata="Q554416" start="83395" end="83409" title="Giuseppe Dessì" label="Giuseppe Dessì"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496463" start="83531" end="83543" title="Gavino Ledda" label="Gavino Ledda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037919" start="83574" end="83589" title="Salvatore Satta" label="Salvatore Satta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3898400" start="83669" end="83682" title="Sergio Atzeni" label="Sergio Atzeni"/>
<link wikidata="Q179465" start="84145" end="84154" title="polyphony" label="polyphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q774475" start="84175" end="84189" title="canto a tenore" label="cantu a tenore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="84200" end="84206" title="Unesco" label="Unesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q127330" start="84342" end="84353" title="Frank Zappa" label="Frank Zappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q208797" start="84355" end="84370" title="Ornette Coleman" label="Ornette Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q175195" start="84376" end="84389" title="Peter Gabriel" label="Peter Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q294729" start="84427" end="84432" title="Bitti" label="Bitti"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092262" start="84501" end="84517" title="Tenores di Bitti" label="Tenores di Bitti"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="84518" end="84520" title="CD" label="CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q108757333" start="84624" end="84644" title="Tuvan throat singing" label="Tuvan throat singing"/>
<link wikidata="Q33111" start="84697" end="84705" title="Corsican language" label="Corsican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543785" start="84853" end="84862" title="launeddas" label="launeddas"/>
<link wikidata="Q143739" start="84914" end="84921" title="beeswax" label="beeswax"/>
<link wikidata="Q390865" start="85052" end="85058" title="Ittiri" label="Ittiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="85178" end="85184" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q459019" start="85314" end="85325" title="Maria Carta" label="Maria Carta"/>
<link wikidata="Q429583" start="85330" end="85341" title="Elena Ledda" label="Elena Ledda"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="85461" end="85464" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754508" start="85475" end="85487" title="Andy Kershaw" label="Andy Kershaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390856" start="85731" end="85742" title="Paolo Fresu" label="Paolo Fresu"/>
<link wikidata="Q153562" start="85754" end="85766" title="opera houses" label="opera houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897" start="85806" end="85814" title="Cagliari" label="Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q13629" start="85842" end="85849" title="Sassari" label="Sassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q916760" start="86033" end="86045" title="Spiny lobster" label="rock lobster"/>
<link wikidata="Q10662375" start="86070" end="86076" title="scampi" label="scampi"/>
<link wikidata="Q894875" start="86078" end="86086" title="bottarga" label="bottarga"/>
<link wikidata="Q23015" start="86129" end="86141" title="Suckling pig" label="Suckling pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q47859" start="86306" end="86310" title="Mentha" label="mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q592173" start="86727" end="86741" title="Pecorino Sardo" label="pecorino sardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246024" start="86755" end="86770" title="pecorino romano" label="pecorino romano"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048956" start="86784" end="86792" title="casizolu" label="casizolu"/>
<link wikidata="Q216781" start="86806" end="86813" title="ricotta" label="ricotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q255819" start="86834" end="86845" title="casu martzu" label="casu martzu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922854" start="86939" end="86951" title="pane carasau" label="pane carasau"/>
<link wikidata="Q390242" start="87574" end="87582" title="Grenache" label="Cannonau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165349" start="87584" end="87592" title="Malvasia" label="Malvasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361955" start="87594" end="87603" title="Vernaccia" label="Vernaccia"/>
<link wikidata="Q387147" start="87605" end="87615" title="Vermentino" label="Vermentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q397926" start="87638" end="87648" title="Aguardiente" label="Abbardente"/>
<link wikidata="Q693078" start="87650" end="87660" title="Grappa" label="Filu Ferru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938578" start="87665" end="87670" title="Mirto (liqueur)" label="Mirto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2099630" start="87825" end="87838" title="Birra Ichnusa" label="Birra Ichnusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897" start="87926" end="87934" title="Cagliari" label="Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900" start="87946" end="87961" title="Cagliari Calcio" label="Cagliari Calcio"/>
<link wikidata="Q15804" start="88001" end="88008" title="Serie A" label="Serie A"/>
<link wikidata="Q903558" start="88077" end="88092" title="1969–70 Serie A" label="1969–70 Serie A"/>
<link wikidata="Q207989" start="88128" end="88142" title="Southern Italy" label="Southern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q30880646" start="88207" end="88219" title="Unipol Domus" label="Unipol Domus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13630" start="88262" end="88267" title="Olbia" label="Olbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415539" start="88275" end="88287" title="Olbia Calcio 1905" label="Olbia Calcio"/>
<link wikidata="Q13629" start="88292" end="88299" title="Sassari" label="Sassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q963110" start="88307" end="88320" title="Torres Calcio" label="Torres Calcio"/>
<link wikidata="Q606060" start="88402" end="88414" title="Women&amp;#x27;s association football" label="women&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157106" start="88433" end="88449" title="A.S.D. FC Sassari Torres Femminile" label="Torres Femminile"/>
<link wikidata="Q922935" start="88462" end="88480" title="Serie A (women&amp;#x27;s football)" label="national champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q62573126" start="88487" end="88519" title="Sardinia national football team" label="Sardinian national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q15999031" start="88536" end="88542" title="Confederation of Independent Football Associations" label="CONIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="88595" end="88599" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q13629" start="88621" end="88628" title="Sassari" label="Sassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q36482" start="88640" end="88661" title="Dinamo Basket Sassari" label="Dinamo Basket Sassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="88695" end="88705" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q929124" start="88726" end="88745" title="Lega Basket Serie A" label="Lega Basket Serie A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675148" start="89206" end="89218" title="Italian Basketball Cup" label="Coppa Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059904" start="89224" end="89234" title="Italian Basketball Supercup" label="Supercoppa"/>
<link wikidata="Q17652290" start="89243" end="89274" title="2014–15 Lega Basket Serie A" label="Italian basketball championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q16272" start="89305" end="89324" title="Province of Sassari" label="Province of Sassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630487" start="89332" end="89358" title="Autodromo di Mores" label="Mores motor racing circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q179412" start="89369" end="89372" title="Fédération Internationale de l&amp;#x27;Automobile" label="FIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897" start="89449" end="89457" title="Cagliari" label="Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q362400" start="89467" end="89479" title="Formula 3000" label="Formula 3000"/>
<link wikidata="Q483110" start="89553" end="89560" title="stadium" label="stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686" start="89571" end="89578" title="Renault" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="89579" end="89581" title="F1" label="F1"/>
<link wikidata="Q171350" start="89589" end="89601" title="Jarno Trulli" label="Jarno Trulli"/>
<link wikidata="Q27586" start="89613" end="89620" title="Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q172777" start="89628" end="89638" title="Jean Alesi" label="Jean Alesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036" start="89676" end="89686" title="Italian Grand Prix" label="Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q506749" start="89730" end="89732" title="Formula Three" label="F3"/>
<link wikidata="Q208744" start="89770" end="89773" title="GP2 Series" label="GP2"/>
<link wikidata="Q350476" start="89781" end="89793" title="Fairuz Fauzy" label="Fairuz Fauzy"/>
<link wikidata="Q82901" start="89798" end="89811" title="Vitaly Petrov" label="Vitaly Petrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294855" start="89848" end="89876" title="Rally d&amp;#x27;Italia Sardegna" label="Rally d&amp;#x27;Italia Sardegna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856" start="89880" end="89885" title="rallying" label="rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q179412" start="89905" end="89908" title="Fédération Internationale de l&amp;#x27;Automobile" label="FIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852" start="89909" end="89933" title="World Rally Championship" label="World Rally Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096878" start="90092" end="90104" title="scuba diving" label="scuba diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471422" start="90109" end="90119" title="snorkeling" label="snorkeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q166282" start="90192" end="90199" title="Alghero" label="Alghero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026145" start="90204" end="90215" title="Cala Gonone" label="Cala Gonone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="90217" end="90228" title="Capo Caccia" label="Capo Caccia"/>
<link wikidata="Q845310" start="90428" end="90435" title="Caprera" label="Caprera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946167" start="90449" end="90470" title="Centro Velico Caprera" label="Centro Velico Caprera"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="90531" end="90548" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022357" start="90572" end="90597" title="Yacht Club Costa Smeralda" label="Yacht Club Costa Smeralda"/>
<link wikidata="Q919630" start="90610" end="90621" title="Porto Cervo" label="Porto Cervo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686544" start="90757" end="90767" title="Loro Piana" label="Loro Piana"/>
<link wikidata="Q157054" start="90794" end="90808" title="Giorgio Armani" label="Giorgio Armani"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="90829" end="90838" title="Rolex Cup" label="Rolex Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3837624" start="90852" end="90872" title="Louis Vuitton Trophy La Maddalena" label="Louis Vuitton Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q575828" start="90889" end="90910" title="Maddalena archipelago" label="Maddalena archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777694" start="91079" end="91112" title="Single-Handed Trans-Atlantic Race" label="Single-Handed Trans-Atlantic Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232165" start="91218" end="91229" title="Porto Pollo" label="Porto Pollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q333389" start="91240" end="91245" title="Palau (OT)" label="Palau"/>
<link wikidata="Q191051" start="91270" end="91281" title="windsurfing" label="windsurfers"/>
<link wikidata="Q219554" start="91286" end="91297" title="kitesurfing" label="kitesurfers"/>
<link wikidata="Q725699" start="91619" end="91633" title="Venturi effect" label="Venturi effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q14112" start="91655" end="91662" title="Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344830" start="91836" end="91844" title="regattas" label="regattas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436200" start="91877" end="91884" title="Farr 40" label="Farr 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q936268" start="91905" end="91916" title="Audi MedCup" label="Audi MedCup"/>
<link wikidata="Q955286" start="92171" end="92182" title="Gennargentu" label="Gennargentu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114833" start="92487" end="92521" title="Italian National Olympic Committee" label="Italian National Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878361" start="92623" end="92640" title="Scottish Backhold" label="Scottish Backhold"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088619" start="92649" end="92655" title="gouren" label="gouren"/>
<link wikidata="Q131471" start="92908" end="92913" title="darts" label="darts"/>
<link wikidata="Q13629" start="92962" end="92969" title="Sassari" label="Sassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q25403" start="93071" end="93076" title="beech" label="beech"/>
<link wikidata="Q25036531" start="93158" end="93173" title="purple swamphen" label="purple swamphen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516605" start="93287" end="93306" title="History of Sardinia" label="History of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422116" start="93309" end="93333" title="List of islands of Italy" label="List of islands of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q845435" start="93336" end="93364" title="List of monarchs of Sardinia" label="List of monarchs of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643513" start="93367" end="93406" title="List of tourist attractions in Sardinia" label="List of tourist attractions in Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140968" start="93409" end="93425" title="Sardinian people" label="Sardinian people"/>
<link wikidata="Q15220946" start="93427" end="93445" title="List of Sardinians" label="List of Sardinians"/>
<link wikidata="Q33976" start="93448" end="93466" title="Sardinian language" label="Sardinian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q14758079" start="93469" end="93494" title="Sardinian Literary Spring" label="Sardinian Literary Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447615" start="93497" end="93517" title="Sardinian literature" label="Sardinian literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q742313" start="93520" end="93547" title="Sardinian medieval kingdoms" label="Sardinian medieval kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742326" start="94761" end="94782" title="Amelie Posse Brazdova" label="Amelie Posse Brazdova"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334102" start="94824" end="94843" title="William Henry Smyth" label="William Henry Smyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q34970" start="94938" end="94952" title="D. H. Lawrence" label="D. H. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3473567" start="94960" end="94976" title="Sea and Sardinia" label="Sea and Sardinia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29378" wikidata="Q11937" url="?curid=29378" title="Scrooge McDuck">
<text>Scrooge McDuck (occasionally stylized as $crooge McDuck) is a cartoon character created in 1947 for The Walt Disney Company by Carl Barks. Appearing in Disney comics, Scrooge is a Scottish-born American anthropomorphic duck. Like his nephew, Donald Duck, he has a yellow-orange bill, legs, and feet. He typically wears a red or blue frock coat, top hat, pince-nez glasses, and spats varying in color. He is portrayed in animation as speaking with a Scottish accent. Originally intended to be used only once, Scrooge became one of the most popular characters in the Disney comics world, as well as Barks&#x27; signature work. Scrooge is an extremely rich duck who lives in the fictional city of Duckburg (which is also Donald Duck and Huey, Dewey, and Louie&#x27;s home city) in the fictional U.S. state of Calisota (a blend of California and Minnesota), whose claimed location is in real-world California, United States.

Named after the character Ebenezer Scrooge from Charles Dickens&#x27; 1843 holiday novella &quot;A Christmas Carol&quot;, Scrooge is an incredibly rich business magnate and self-proclaimed &quot;adventure-capitalist&quot;, whose dominant character traits are his wealth, frugality, and tendency to seek more money through adventure and treasure hunting. Scrooge founded the company called McDuck Enterprises. He is the maternal uncle of Donald Duck and Della Duck, the maternal great uncle of Huey, Dewey, and Louie, a financial backer of inventor Gyro Gearloose, and the world&#x27;s richest person — all within the context of the fictional Donald Duck universe. His business interests are comically diverse and all-inclusive. Both his &quot;Money Bin&quot; and Scrooge himself are often used as humorous metonyms for great wealth in popular culture around the world.

McDuck was initially characterized as a greedy miser and antihero (similar to Dickens&#x27; original Scrooge character). However, in later appearances, he has often been portrayed as a thrifty hero, adventurer, and explorer. He was originally created by Barks as an antagonist for Donald Duck, first appearing in the 1947 story &quot;Christmas on Bear Mountain&quot; (&quot;Four Color&quot; #178). However, McDuck&#x27;s popularity grew so large that he became a major figure in the Donald Duck universe. In 1952, he received his own comic book series, called &quot;Uncle Scrooge&quot;, originally published from 1952–1984, and has had various revivals over the years (as have other Disney comic lines). The most recent revival, by IDW Publishing, ran from 2015–2020.

Scrooge was most famously drawn by his creator Carl Barks, and then later by Don Rosa. Like other Disney franchise characters, Scrooge McDuck has gained international popularity, resulting in literature that&#x27;s often translated into other languages. The comics have remained Scrooge&#x27;s primary medium, although he has also appeared in animated feature films and television programs, most extensively in the TV series &quot;DuckTales&quot; (1987–1990), and its reboot (2017–2021), as the main protagonist of both series.

== Comics history ==
=== First appearance ===

Scrooge McDuck, maternal uncle of previously established character Donald Duck, made his first named appearance in the story &quot;Christmas on Bear Mountain;&quot; it was published in Dell&#x27;s &quot;Four Color Comics&quot; #178 on October 22, 1947, and written and drawn by artist Carl Barks. His appearance may have been based on a similar-looking Scottish &quot;thrifty saver&quot; Donald Duck character from the 1943 propaganda short &quot;The Spirit of &#x27;43&quot;.

In &quot;Christmas on Bear Mountain&quot;, Scrooge was a bearded, bespectacled, reasonably wealthy old duck, visibly leaning on his cane and living in isolation in a &quot;huge mansion&quot;. Scrooge&#x27;s misanthropic thoughts in this first story are quite pronounced: &quot;Here I sit in this big lonely dump, waiting for Christmas to pass! Bah! That silly season when everybody loves everybody else! A curse on it! Me—I&#x27;m different! Everybody hates me, and I hate everybody!&quot;

Barks later reflected on the portrayal, saying &quot;Scrooge in &#x27;Christmas on Bear Mountain&#x27; was only my first idea of a rich, old uncle. I had made him too old and too weak. I discovered later on that I had to make him more active. I could not make an old guy like that do the things I wanted him to do.&quot;

=== Recurring character ===
Barks would later claim that he originally only intended to use Scrooge as a one-shot character, but then decided Scrooge (and his fortune) could prove useful for motivating further stories. Barks continued to experiment with Scrooge&#x27;s appearance and personality over the next four years.

Scrooge&#x27;s second appearance in &quot;The Old Castle&#x27;s Secret&quot; (first published in June 1948) had him recruiting his nephews to search for a family treasure hidden in Dismal Downs, the McDuck&#x27;s ancestral family castle built in the middle of Rannoch Moor in Scotland. &quot;Foxy Relations&quot; (first published in November 1948) was the first story where Scrooge is called by his title and catchphrase &quot;The Richest Duck in the World&quot;.

=== First hints of Scrooge&#x27;s past ===
The story &quot;Voodoo Hoodoo&quot;, first published in Dell&#x27;s &quot;Four Color Comics&quot; #238 in August 1949, was the first story to hint at Scrooge&#x27;s past with the introduction of two figures. The first was Foola Zoola, an old African sorcerer and chief of the Voodoo tribe who cursed Scrooge, seeking revenge for the destruction of his village and the taking of his tribe&#x27;s lands by Scrooge decades earlier.

Scrooge privately admitted to his nephews that he had used an army of &quot;cutthroats&quot; to get the tribe to abandon their lands, in order to establish a rubber plantation. The event was set in 1879 by Carl Barks, but it would later be retconned by Don Rosa to 1909 to better fit with Scrooge&#x27;s later-established personal history in &quot;The Empire-Builder from Calisota&quot;.

The second figure from Scrooge&#x27;s past was Bombie the Zombie, the would-be assassin sent from Foola Zoola to enact the sorcerer&#x27;s curse and revenge. He sought Scrooge for decades before reaching Duckburg, mistaking Donald for Scrooge.

Barks, with a note of skepticism often found in his stories, explained the zombie was a living person who has never died but has somehow gotten under the influence of a sorcerer. Although some scenes of the story were intended as a parody of Bela Lugosi&#x27;s &quot;White Zombie&quot;, the story is the first to not only focus on Scrooge&#x27;s past but also touch on the darkest aspects of his personality.

=== Later stories ===
&quot;Trail of the Unicorn&quot;, first published in February 1950, introduced Scrooge&#x27;s private zoo. One of his pilots had managed to photograph the last living unicorn, which lived in the Indian part of the Himalayas. Scrooge offered a reward to competing cousins Donald Duck and Gladstone Gander for whoever captured the unicorn for Scrooge&#x27;s collection.

This was also the story that introduced Scrooge&#x27;s private airplane. Barks would later establish Scrooge as an experienced aviator; Donald had previously been shown as a skilled aviator, as was Flintheart Glomgold in later stories. In comparison, Huey, Dewey, and Louie were depicted as only having taken flying lessons in the story &quot;Frozen Gold&quot; (published in January 1945).

&quot;The Pixilated Parrot&quot;, first published in July 1950, introduced a precursor to Scrooge&#x27;s money bin. In this story, Scrooge&#x27;s central office building is said to contain &quot;three cubic acres of money&quot;. Two burglars (one of which is referred to as Butch) who briefly appear during the story are considered to be the precursors of the Beagle Boys.

=== Scrooge as a major character ===
&quot;The Magic Hourglass&quot;, first published in September 1950, was arguably the first story to change the focus of the Duck stories from Donald to Scrooge. During the story, several themes were introduced for Scrooge.

Donald first mentions in this story that his uncle practically owns Duckburg, a statement that Scrooge&#x27;s rival John D. Rockerduck would later dispute. Scrooge first hints that he was not born into wealth as he remembers buying the Hourglass in Morocco when he was a member of a ship&#x27;s crew as a cabin boy. It&#x27;s also the first story in which Scrooge mentions reading and speaking other languages besides his native English; during the story, he reads and speaks Arabic.

Scrooge&#x27;s proficiency in languages would become apparent in future stories. Barks and Rosa depicted Scrooge as being fluent in Arabic, Dutch, German, Mongolian, Spanish, Mayan, Bengali, Finnish, and a number of Chinese dialects. Scrooge acquired this knowledge from years of living or traveling to the various regions of the world where those languages are spoken. Later writers would depict Scrooge having at least a working knowledge of several other languages. He also encountered several historical figures during his lifetime, such as U.S. President Roosevelt (&quot;The Buckaroo of the Badlands&quot;, &quot;The Invader of Fort Duckburg&quot;, and &quot;The Sharpie of the Culebra Cut&quot;), Apache leader Geronimo (&quot;The Vigilante of Pizen Bluff&quot;), Czar Nicholas II of Russia (&quot;The Empire-Builder from Calisota&quot;), and philologist Elias Lönnrot (&quot;The Quest for Kalevala&quot;).

In &quot;The Magic Hourglass,&quot; Scrooge is shown in a more positive light than in previous stories, but his more villainous side is still evident. He is seen attempting to reacquire a magic hourglass that he gave to Donald, before finding out that it acted as a protective charm for him. Scrooge starts losing one billion dollars each minute and comments that he will go bankrupt within 600 years. This line is a parody of Orson Welles&#x27;s line in &quot;Citizen Kane,&quot; &quot;You know, Mr. Thatcher, at the rate of a million dollars a year, I&#x27;ll have to close this place in ... 60 years.&quot; To convince his nephews to return it, he pursues them throughout Morocco. Scrooge interrogates Donald by having him tied up and tickled with a feather in an attempt to get Donald to reveal the location of the hourglass. The former finally manages to retrieve it, exchanging the item for a flask of water, as he had found his nephews exhausted and left in the desert with no supplies. As Scrooge explains, he intended to give them a higher offer, but he just could not resist having somebody at his mercy without taking advantage of it.

=== Final developments ===
&quot;A Financial Fable&quot;, first published in March 1951, had Scrooge teaching Donald some lessons in productivity as the source of wealth, along with the laws of supply and demand. Perhaps more importantly, it was also the first story where Scrooge observes how diligent and industrious Huey, Louie, and Dewey are, making them more similar to himself rather than to Donald. In Barks&#x27; stories, Donald is depicted as working hard on occasion, but given the choice often proves to be lazy. The three younger nephews first side with Scrooge rather than Donald in this story, with the bond between granduncle and grandnephews strengthening in later stories. However, there have been rare instances where Donald proved invaluable to Scrooge, such as when the group traveled back in time to Ancient Egypt to retrieve a pharaoh&#x27;s papyrus. Donald cautions against taking it with him, as no one would believe the story unless it was unearthed. He then buries it and makes a marking point from the Nile River; Scrooge thinks to himself admiringly, &quot;Donald must have swallowed the !&quot;

&quot;Terror of the Beagle Boys&quot;, first published in November 1951, introduced the readers to the Beagle Boys. Although new to the series, Scrooge seems to be already familiar with them. 

&quot;The Big Bin on Killmotor Hill&quot; introduced Scrooge&#x27;s money bin, built on Killmotor Hill in the center of Duckburg. In the Ducktales 2017 reboot, the Money Bin is built on an island on Audubon Bay. The island is connected to a small bridge that leads to downtown Duckburg.

By this point, Scrooge had become familiar to readers in the United States and Europe. Other Disney writers and artists, including Italian writer Romano Scarpa, began using Scrooge in their own stories. Western Publishing, then the publisher of North American Disney comics, began thinking about using Scrooge as a protagonist rather than a supporting character, and then decided to launch Scrooge in his own self-titled comic. &quot;Uncle Scrooge&quot; #1, featuring the story &quot;Only a Poor Old Man&quot;, was published in March 1952. This story, along with &quot;Back to the Klondike&quot;, first published a year later in March 1953, became the biggest influences in how Scrooge&#x27;s character, past, and beliefs would become defined.

After this point, Barks produced most of his longer stories in &quot;Uncle Scrooge&quot;, with a focus mainly on adventure, while his ten-page stories for Walt Disney&#x27;s Comics and Stories continued to feature Donald as the star and focused on comedy. In Scrooge&#x27;s stories, Donald and his nephews were cast as Scrooge&#x27;s assistants who accompanied the latter in his adventures around the world. This change of focus from Donald to Scrooge was also reflected in stories by other contemporary writers. Since then, Scrooge remains a central figure of the Duck comics&#x27; universe, thus the coining of the term &quot;Scrooge McDuck Universe&quot;.

=== Modern era ===
After Barks&#x27;s retirement, the character continued under other artists. However, in 1972, Barks was persuaded to write more stories for Disney. He wrote Junior Woodchuck stories where Scrooge often plays the part of the villain, closer to the role he had before acquiring his own series. Under Barks, Scrooge always was a malleable character who would take on whatever persona was convenient to the plot.

The Italian writer and artist Romano Scarpa made several additions to Scrooge McDuck&#x27;s lore, including characters such as Brigitta MacBridge, Scrooge&#x27;s self-styled fiancée, and Gideon McDuck, a newspaper editor who is Scrooge&#x27;s brother. Those characters have appeared mostly in European comics. This is also the case for Scrooge&#x27;s rival John D. Rockerduck (created by Barks for just one story) and Donald&#x27;s cousin Fethry Duck, who sometimes works as a reporter for Scrooge&#x27;s newspaper.

Another major development was the arrival of writer and artist Don Rosa in 1986, with his story &quot;The Son of the Sun&quot;; it released by Gladstone Publishing and nominated for a Harvey Award, one of the comics industry&#x27;s highest honors. Rosa has said in interviews that he considers Scrooge to be his favorite Disney character. Unlike most other Disney writers, Don Rosa considered Scrooge as a historical character whose Disney adventures had occurred in the fifties and sixties and ended (in his undepicted death) in 1967 when Barks retired. He considered only Barks&#x27;s stories as canonical, and fleshed out a timeline and a family tree based on Barks&#x27;s stories. Eventually he wrote and drew &quot;The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck&quot;, a full history in twelve chapters, which received an Eisner Award in 1995; l

Later editions included additional chapters. Under Rosa, Scrooge became more ethical; while he never cheats, he ruthlessly exploits any loopholes. He owes his fortune to his hard work and his money bin is &quot;full of souvenirs&quot; since every coin reminds him of a specific circumstance.

Daan Jippes, who can mimic Barks&#x27;s art to a close extent, repenciled all of Barks&#x27;s 1970s Junior Woodchucks stories, as well as Barks&#x27;s final Uncle Scrooge stories from the 1990s to the early 2000s. Other notable Disney artists who have worked with the Scrooge character include Michael Peraza, Marco Rota, William Van Horn, and Tony Strobl.

In an interview with the Norwegian &quot;Aftenposten&quot; from 1992, Don Rosa says that &quot;in the beginning Scrooge [owed] his existence to his nephew Donald, but that has changed and today it&#x27;s Donald that [owes] his existence to Scrooge,&quot; and he also says that this is one of the reasons why he is so interested in Scrooge.

== Characterization ==
=== Overview ===

The character is almost exclusively portrayed as having worked his way up the financial ladder from humble immigrant roots. His characteristics are believed to be strongly influenced by the life of a real, incredibly wealthy Scottish-American business magnate, Andrew Carnegie, as well as Ebenezer Scrooge, the rich miser from Charles Dickens&#x27; novella &quot;A Christmas Carol&quot;, McDuck&#x27;s namesake.

The comic book series &quot;The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck&quot;, written and drawn by Don Rosa, shows Scrooge&#x27;s fictional life. As a young boy, he takes up a job polishing and shining boots in his native Glasgow. A pivotal moment comes in 1877 when a ditch-digger pays him with an 1875 US dime, which is useless as currency in 19th century Glasgow; he only notices what sort of coin he has been given after the man has left, as his boots were so caked with dirt, Scrooge fainted from exhaustion after finishing his work. Enraged, Scrooge vows to never be taken advantage of again, to be &quot;sharper than the sharpies, smarter than the smarties and tougher than the toughies&quot;. He takes a position as cabin boy on a Clyde cattle ship to the United States to make his fortune at the age of 13. In 1898, after many adventures, he finally ends up in Klondike, where he finds a golden rock the size of a goose egg. By the following year, he made his first $1,000,000 and bought the deed for Killmule Hill from Casey Coot, the son of Clinton Coot and grandson of Cornelius Coot, the founder of Duckburg. He finally ends up in Duckburg in 1902. After some dramatic events, where he faces both the Beagle Boys and President Theodore Roosevelt and his Rough Riders at the same time, he tears down the rest of the old Fort Duckburg and builds his famous Money Bin at the site.

In the years to follow, Scrooge travels all around the world to increase his fortune, while his family remains behind to manage the Money Bin. When Scrooge finally returns to Duckburg, he is the richest duck in the world, rivaled only by Flintheart Glomgold, John D. Rockerduck, and less prominently, the maharaja of the fictional country Howdoyoustan (play on Hindustan). His experiences, however, have changed him into a hostile miser, and his family leaves him in disgust. About twelve years later, he closes down his empire; he eventually returns to a public life five years later and restarts his business in the comic&#x27;s final chapter.

He keeps the majority of his wealth in a massive Money Bin overlooking the city of Duckburg. In the short &quot;Scrooge McDuck and Money&quot;, he remarks to his nephews that this money is &quot;just petty cash&quot;. In the Dutch and Italian version, he regularly forces Donald and his nephews to polish the coins one by one in order to pay off Donald&#x27;s debts; Scrooge will not pay them much for this lengthy, tedious, hand-breaking work. As far as he is concerned, even 5 cents an hour is too much expenditure. He does not even keep any to his personal estate, stating &quot;Money goes to the bin, not next of kin&quot;.

A shrewd businessman and noted tightwad, he is fond of diving into and swimming in his money without injury. His most famous prized possession is his Number One Dime. He is also the richest member of The Billionaires Club of Duckburg, a society which includes the most successful businessmen of the world and allows them to keep connections with each other. Glomgold and Rockerduck are also influential members of the Club.

===Wealth===

The sum of Scrooge&#x27;s wealth is unclear. According to Barks&#x27; &quot;The Second Richest Duck&quot; as noted by a &quot;Time&quot; article, Scrooge is worth &quot;one multiplujillion, nine obsquatumatillion, six hundred twenty-three dollars and sixty-two cents&quot;. The &quot;DuckTales&quot; episode &quot;Liquid Assets&quot;, Fenton Crackshell (Scrooge&#x27;s accountant) notes that McDuck&#x27;s money bin contains &quot;607 tillion 386 zillion 947 trillion 522 billion dollars and 36 cents&quot;. Don Rosa&#x27;s &quot;Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck&quot; notes that Scrooge amounts to &quot;five multiplujillion, nine impossibidillion, seven fantastica trillion dollars and sixteen cents&quot;. A thought bubble from Scrooge McDuck sitting in his car with his chauffeur in &quot;Walt Disney&#x27;s Christmas Parade&quot; No. 1 (published in 1949) that takes place in the story &quot;Letter to Santa&quot; clearly states &quot;What&#x27;s the use of having &#x27;eleven octillion dollars&#x27; if I don&#x27;t make a big noise about it?&quot;. In &quot;DuckTales the Movie: Treasure of the Lost Lamp&quot;, Scrooge mentions &quot;We quadzillionaires have our own ideas of fun.&quot; In the first episode of the &quot;DuckTales&quot; reboot, Scrooge states that he runs &quot;a multi-trillion-dollar business&quot;. In the Original Ducktales, (Episode 56 Season 1) He claims to have 72 Quadrillion dollars.

&quot;Forbes&quot; magazine has occasionally tried to estimate Scrooge&#x27;s wealth in real terms. In 2007, the magazine estimated his wealth at $28.8 billion. By 2011, it rose to $44.1 billion due to the rise in gold prices. In a 1970 comic, Scrooge says that he would be broke in 600 years if he lost 1 billion dollars a minute, putting his total estimated net worth at $315,360,000,000,000,000. A running gag is Scrooge always making profit on any business deal. Whatever the amount, Scrooge never considers it to be enough; he believes that he has to continue to earn money by any means possible. Additionally, &quot;Forbes&quot; does have him ranked at the number 1 spot on &quot;The Forbes Fictional 15&quot;.

=== Education ===
Scrooge never completed a formal education, as he left school at an early age. However, he has a sharp mind and is always ready to learn new skills. Because of his secondary occupation as a treasure hunter, Scrooge has become something of a scholar and an amateur archaeologist. Starting with Barks, several writers have explained how Scrooge becomes aware of the treasures he decides to pursue. This often involves periods of research consulting various written sources in search of passages that might lead him to treasure. Often Scrooge decides to search for the possible truth behind old legends, or discovers obscure references to the activities of ancient conquerors, explorers, and military leaders that he considers interesting enough to begin a new expedition.

As a result of his research, Scrooge has built up an extensive personal library, which includes many rare tomes. In the McDuck Archives, every work of McDuck&#x27;s expeditions studied by scholars such as Ms. Quackfaster. In Barks&#x27;s and Rosa&#x27;s stories, among the prized pieces of this library is an almost complete collection of Spanish and Dutch naval logs of the 16th and 17th centuries. Their references to the fates of other ships have often allowed Scrooge to locate sunken vessels and recover their treasures from their watery graves. Mostly self-taught as he is, Scrooge is a firm believer in the saying &quot;knowledge is power&quot;. Scrooge is also an accomplished linguist and entrepreneur, having learned to speak several different languages during his business trips around the world, selling refrigerators to Eskimos, wind to windmill manufacturers in the Netherlands, etc.

=== Morality and beliefs ===
Both as a businessman and as a treasure hunter, Scrooge is noted for his drive to set new goals and face new challenges. As Carl Barks described his character, for Scrooge there is &quot;always another rainbow&quot;. The phrase later provided the title for one of Barks&#x27;s better-known paintings depicting Scrooge. Periods of inactivity between adventures and lack of serious challenges tend to be depressing for Scrooge after a while; some stories see these phases take a toll on his health. Scrooge&#x27;s other motto is &quot;Work smarter, not harder.&quot;

As a businessman, Scrooge often resorts to aggressive tactics and deception. He seems to have gained significant experience in manipulating people and events towards his own ends. As often seen in stories by writer Guido Martina and occasionally by others, Scrooge is noted for his cynicism, especially towards ideals of morality when it comes to business and the pursuit of set goals. This has been noted by some as not being part of Barks&#x27;s original profile of the character, but has since come to be accepted as one valid interpretation of Scrooge&#x27;s way of thinking.

Scrooge seems to have a personal code of honesty that offers him an amount of self-control. He can often be seen contemplating the next course of action, divided between adopting a ruthless pursuit of his current goal against those tactics he considers more honest. At times, he can sacrifice his goal in order to remain within the limits of this sense of honesty. Several fans of the character have come to consider these depictions as adding to the depth of his personality, because based on the decisions he takes Scrooge can be both the hero and the villain of his stories. This is one thing he has in common with his nephew Donald. Scrooge&#x27;s sense of honesty also distinguishes him from his rival Flintheart Glomgold, who places no such self-limitations. During the cartoon series &quot;DuckTales&quot;, at times he would be heard saying to Glomgold, &quot;You&#x27;re a cheater, and cheaters &quot;never&quot; prosper!&quot;

Like his nephew Donald, Scrooge has also a temper and rarely hesitates to use cartoon violence against those who provoke his ire (often his nephew Donald, but also bill and tax collectors as well as door-to-door salesmen). However, he seems to be against the use of lethal force. On occasion, he has even saved the lives of enemies who had threatened his own life but were in danger of losing their own. According to Scrooge&#x27;s own explanation, this is to save himself from feelings of guilt over their deaths; he generally awaits no gratitude from them. Scrooge has also opined that only in fairy tales do bad people turn good, and that he is old enough to not believe in fairy tales. Scrooge believes in keeping his word—never breaking a promise once given. In Italian-produced stories of the 1950s to 1970s, however, particularly those written by Guido Martina, Scrooge often acts differently from in American or Danish comics productions.

Carl Barks gave Scrooge a definite set of ethics which were in tone with the time he was supposed to have made his fortune. The robber barons and industrialists of the 1890–1920s era were McDuck&#x27;s competition as he earned his fortune. Scrooge proudly asserts &quot;I made it by being tougher than the toughies and smarter than the smarties! And I made it square!&quot;. Barks&#x27;s creation is averse to dishonesty in the pursuit of wealth. When Disney filmmakers first contemplated a Scrooge feature cartoon in the fifties, the animators had no understanding of the Scrooge McDuck character and merely envisioned Scrooge as a duck version of Ebenezer Scrooge—a very unsympathetic character. In the end, they shelved the idea because a duck who gets all excited about money just was not funny enough.

In an interview, Barks summed up his beliefs about Scrooge and capitalism:

=== &quot;DuckTales&quot; ===

In the &quot;DuckTales&quot; series, Scrooge has care of the nephews (as Donald has joined the US Navy and is away on his tour of duty), and, as a result, his darker personality traits are downplayed. While most of his persona remain from the comics, he is notably more optimistic and level-headed in the animated cartoon. In an early episode, Scrooge credits his improved temperament to the nephews and Webby (his housekeeper&#x27;s granddaughter, who comes to live in Scrooge&#x27;s mansion), saying that &quot;for the first time since I left Scotland, I have a family&quot;. Though Scrooge is far from tyrannical in the comics, he is rarely so openly affectionate. While he still hunts for treasure in &quot;DuckTales&quot;, many episodes focus on his attempts to thwart villains. However, he remains just as tightfisted with money as he has always been. But he&#x27;s also affable and patient with his family and friends.

Scrooge displays a strict code of honor, insisting that the only valid way to acquire wealth is to &quot;earn it square,&quot; and he goes to great lengths to thwart those (sometimes even his own nephews) who gain money dishonestly. This code also prevents him from ever being dishonest himself, and he avows that &quot;Scrooge McDuck&#x27;s word is as good as gold.&quot; He also expresses great disgust at being viewed by others as a greedy liar and cheater.

The series fleshes out Scrooge&#x27;s upbringing by depicting his life as an individual who worked hard his entire life to earn his immense fortune and to fiercely defend it against those who were truly dishonest but also, he defends his family and friends from any dangers, including villains. His value teaches his nephews not to be dishonest with him or anybody else. It&#x27;s shown that money is no longer the most important thing in his life. For one episode, he was under a love spell, which caused him to lavish his time on a goddess over everything else. The nephews find out that the only way to break the spell is to make the person realize that the object of their love will cost them something they truly love. The boys make it appear that Scrooge&#x27;s love is allergic to money; however, he simply decides to give up his wealth so he can be with her. Later, when he realizes he will have to give up his nephews to be with her, the spell is immediately broken, showing that family is the most important thing to him.

On occasion, he demonstrates considerable physical strength by arm wrestling and beating bigger criminals on Aquatraz. He credits his strength to &quot;lifting money bags.&quot;

=== Voice ===
Another part of Scrooge&#x27;s persona is his Scottish accent. Dallas McKennon was the first actor to provide Scrooge&#x27;s voice for the 1960 Disneyland Records album, &quot;Donald Duck and His Friends&quot;.

When Scrooge later made his speaking animated debut in &quot;Scrooge McDuck and Money&quot; in 1967, he was voiced by Bill Thompson. Thompson had previously voiced Jock the Scottish Terrier in &quot;Lady and the Tramp&quot; and according to Alan Young, Thompson had some Scottish ancestry. Following &quot;Scrooge McDuck and Money&quot;&#x27;s release, Scrooge made no further animated appearances prior to Thompson&#x27;s death in 1971.

In 1974, Disneyland Records produced the album, &quot;An Adaptation of Dickens&#x27; Christmas Carol, Performed by The Walt Disney Players&quot;. Alan Young belonged to a Dickens Society and was asked to help adapt the story to fit in Disney characters. Young, whose parents were Scottish and who lived in Scotland for a few years when he was an infant, voiced Scrooge for this record in addition to voicing Mickey Mouse and Merlin from &quot;The Sword in the Stone&quot;. When Disney decided to adapt the record into the 1983 theatrical short, &quot;Mickey&#x27;s Christmas Carol&quot;, Young returned to voice Scrooge. Young remained as Disney&#x27;s official voice for Scrooge up until his death in 2016, although Will Ryan voiced Scrooge for the 1987 television special, &quot;Sport Goofy in Soccermania&quot; and Alan Reid voiced Scrooge for Tuomas Holopainen&#x27;s 2014 album, &quot;Music Inspired by the Life and Times of Scrooge&quot;. Young&#x27;s last performance as Scrooge was in the 2016 &quot;Mickey Mouse&quot; short, &quot;No&quot;.

Since Young&#x27;s death, several actors have provided Scrooge&#x27;s voice. John Kassir took over for the &quot;Mickey Mouse&quot; shorts starting with &quot;Duck the Halls&quot; in 2016 and its follow-up series &quot;The Wonderful World of Mickey Mouse&quot;. Eric Bauza voiced Scrooge for a cameo in the television series, &quot;Legend of the Three Caballeros&quot;. Scottish actor Enn Reitel voiced Scrooge for the English dub of &quot;Kingdom Hearts III&quot;, the 2022 life simulator game &quot;Disney Dreamlight Valley&quot;, and for the Disney Parks.

Bathgate native star David Tennant voices Scrooge for the 2017 reboot of &quot;DuckTales&quot; and the film &quot;Chip &#x27;n Dale: Rescue Rangers&quot;. According to executive producer Matt Youngberg:

=== Europe ===
Many of the European comics based on the Disney Universe have created their own version of Scrooge McDuck, usually involving him in slapstick adventures. This is particularly true of the Italian comics which were very popular in the 1960s–1990s in most parts of Western continental Europe. In these, Scrooge is mainly an anti-hero dragging his long-suffering nephews into treasure hunts and shady business deals. Donald is a reluctant participant in these travels, only agreeing to go along when his uncle reminds him of the debts and back-rent Donald owes him, threatens him with a sword or blunderbuss, or offers a share of the loot. When he promises Donald a share of the treasure, Scrooge will add a little loophole in the terms which may seem obscure at first but which he brings up at the end of the adventure to deny Donald his share, keeping the whole for himself. After Donald risks life and limb – something which Scrooge shows little concern for – he tends to end up with nothing.

Another running joke is Scrooge reminiscing about his adventures while gold prospecting in the Klondike much to Donald and the nephews&#x27; chagrin at hearing the never-ending and tiresome stories.

=== Age ===
According to Carl Barks&#x27; 1955 one-pager &quot;Watt an Occasion&quot; (&quot;Uncle Scrooge&quot; #12), Scrooge is 75 years of age. According to Don Rosa, Scrooge was born in Scotland in 1867, and earned his Number One Dime (or First Coin) exactly ten years later. The &quot;DuckTales&quot; episodes (and many European comics) show a Scrooge who hailed from Scotland in the 19th century, yet was clearly familiar with all the technology and amenities of the 1980s. Despite this extremely advanced age, Scrooge does not appear to be on the verge of dotage, and is vigorous enough to keep up with his nephews in adventures. With rare exceptions, there appears to be no sign of him slowing down.

Barks responded to some fan letters asking about Scrooge&#x27;s Adamic age, that in the story &quot;That&#x27;s No Fable!&quot;, when Scrooge drank water from a Fountain of Youth for several days, rather than making him young again (bodily contact with the water was required for that), ingesting the water rejuvenated his body and cured him of his rheumatism, which arguably allowed Scrooge to live beyond his expected years with no sign of slowdown or senility. Don Rosa&#x27;s solution to the issue of Scrooge&#x27;s age is that he set all of his stories in the 1950s or earlier, which was when he himself discovered and reveled in Barks&#x27; stories as a kid, and in his unofficial timelines, he had Scrooge die in 1967, at the age of 100 years.

In the 15th episode of the 2017 &quot;DuckTales&quot; reboot, &quot;The Golden Lagoon of White Agony Plains!&quot;, it is revealed that Scrooge was trapped in ice for five years and &quot;stuck in a timeless demon dimension&quot; called Demogorgana for an unknown amount of time, which is used to explain his longevity. In the 21st episode, &quot;The Other Bin of Scrooge McDuck!&quot;, Webby Vanderquack&#x27;s research on Scrooge reveals that he was born in 1867, as previously established by Rosa. This would make Scrooge 158 years old as of 2024.

== In popular culture ==

=== Cultural impact ===
&quot;Forbes&quot; magazine routinely lists Scrooge McDuck on its annual &quot;Fictional 15&quot; list of the richest fictional characters by net worth:
In 1972, Grupo Ronda S.A acquired the license to use the character among other Disney characters for their board game &quot;Tío Rico Mc. Pato.&quot; As of today, it is one of the most popular board games in Colombia and the direct competitor of &quot;Monopoly&quot; in the region.

In tribute to its famous native, Glasgow City Council added Scrooge to its list of &quot;Famous Glaswegians&quot; in 2007, alongside the likes of Billy Connolly and Charles Rennie Mackintosh.

In 2008 &quot;The Weekly Standard&quot; parodied the bailout of the financial markets by publishing a memo where Scrooge applies to the TARP program.

An extortionist named Arno Funke targeted German department store chain Karstadt from 1992 until his capture in 1994, under the alias &quot;Dagobert&quot;, the German (first) name for Scrooge McDuck.

In the &quot;Family Guy&quot; episode &quot;Lottery Fever&quot;, Peter injures himself trying to dive into a pile of coins like Scrooge McDuck.

In the 2013 episode of &quot;Breaking Bad&quot;, &quot;Buried&quot;, Saul Goodman associate Patrick Kuby remarks to fellow associate Huell Babineaux &quot;we are here to do a job, not channel Scrooge McDuck&quot; when Huell lies down on Walter White&#x27;s pile of cash stored in a storage facility locker.

In the &quot;Clarence&quot; episode &quot;Clarence&#x27;s Millions&quot;, Clarence dreams that he swims in money like Scrooge McDuck only on a pile of bills instead of coins until a money monster chases him.

&quot;Dagobertducktaks&quot; (&quot;Dagobert Duck&quot; is the Dutch name for Scrooge McDuck), a tax for the wealthy, was elected Dutch word of the year 2014 in a poll by Van Dale.

In August 2017, the YouTube channel &quot;The Film Theorists&quot;, hosted by Matthew &quot;MatPat&quot; Patrick, estimated the worth of the gold coins in the money bin of Scrooge McDuck based on four sources, with the lowest source equaling $52,348,493,767.50 and the highest source (&quot;three cubic acres&quot;) equaling $333,927,633,863,527.10 of gold value.

=== Scrooge McDuck Universe ===

The popularity of Scrooge McDuck comics spawned an entire mythology around the character, including new supporting characters, adventures, and life experiences as told by numerous authors. The popularity of the Duck universe – the fandom term for the associated intellectual properties that have developed from Scrooge&#x27;s stories over the years, including the city of Duckburg – has led Don Rosa to claim that &quot;in the beginning Scrooge [owed] his existence to his nephew Donald, but that has changed and today it&#x27;s Donald that [owes] his existence to Scrooge.&quot;

In addition to the many original and existing characters in stories about Scrooge McDuck, authors have frequently led historical figures to meet Scrooge over the course of his life. Most notably, Scrooge has met US president Theodore Roosevelt. Roosevelt and Scrooge would meet each other at least three times: in the Dakotas in 1883, in Duckburg in 1902, and in Panama in 1906. &quot;See Historical Figures in Scrooge McDuck stories&quot;.

Based on writer Don Rosa&#x27;s &quot;The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck&quot;, a popular timeline chronicling Scrooge&#x27;s adventures was created consisting of the most important &quot;facts&quot; about Scrooge&#x27;s life. &quot;See Scrooge McDuck timeline according to Don Rosa&quot;.

In 2014, composer Tuomas Holopainen of Nightwish released a conceptual album based on the book, &quot;The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck&quot;. The album is titled &quot;Music Inspired by the Life and Times of Scrooge&quot;. Don Rosa illustrated the cover artwork for the album.

=== In other media ===
Although first established as a character in the comic books, Scrooge has also appeared in various other mediums. Carl Barks created an earlier film prototype of Scrooge while working as the lead story man (writer/designer) of the early &quot;Donald Duck&quot; cartoons. The prototype was featured in the animated short, &quot;The Spirit of &#x27;43&quot;.

Scrooge&#x27;s voice was first heard on the 1960 record album &quot;Donald Duck and His Friends;&quot; Dal McKennon voiced the character for this appearance. It took the form of a short dramatization called &quot;Uncle Scrooge&#x27;s Rocket to the Moon&quot;, a story of how Scrooge builds a rocket to send all his money to the moon to protect it from the Beagle Boys. In 1961 this story was reissued as a 45rpm single record entitled &quot;Donald Duck and Uncle Scrooge&#x27;s Money Rocket.&quot;

Initially, Scrooge was to make his animated debut in the Donald Duck theatrical cartoons. Late in 1954, Carl Barks was asked by the Disney Studios if he would be free to write a script for a Scrooge McDuck 7-minute animated cartoon. Scrooge was a huge success in the comic books at the time, and Disney now wanted to introduce the miserly duck to theater audiences as well. Barks supplied the studios with a detailed 9-page script, telling the story of the happy-go-lucky Donald Duck working for the troubled Scrooge who tries to save his money from a hungry rat. Barks also sent number of sketches of his ideas for the short, including a money-sorting machine, which Barks had already used on the cover of one of the Uncle Scrooge issues. The script was never used as Disney soon after decided to concentrate on TV shows instead.

Scrooge&#x27;s first appearance in animated form (save for a brief &quot;Mickey Mouse Club&quot; television series cameo) was in Disney&#x27;s 1967 theatrical short &quot;Scrooge McDuck and Money&quot; (voiced by Bill Thompson), in which he teaches his nephews basic financial tips.

In 1974, Disneyland Records released an adaptation of the Charles Dickens&#x27; &quot;A Christmas Carol&quot;. Eight years later, Walt Disney Pictures produced a featurette of this same story, this time dubbed &quot;Mickey&#x27;s Christmas Carol&quot; (1983). He also appeared as himself in the television special &quot;Sport Goofy in Soccermania&quot; (1987).

Scrooge&#x27;s biggest role outside comics would come in the 1987 animated series &quot;DuckTales&quot;, a series loosely based on Carl Barks&#x27;s comics, and where Alan Young returned to voice him. In this series, premiered over two-hours on September 18, 1987, while the regular episodes began three days later, Scrooge becomes the legal guardian of Huey, Dewey and Louie when Donald joins the United States Navy. Scrooge&#x27;s &quot;DuckTales&quot; persona is considerably mellow compared to most previous appearances; his aggression is played down and his often duplicitous personality is reduced in many episodes to that of a curmudgeonly but well-meaning old uncle. Still, there are flashes of Barks&#x27; Scrooge to be seen, particularly in early episodes of the first season. Scrooge also appeared in &quot;DuckTales the Movie: Treasure of the Lost Lamp&quot;, released during the series&#x27; run. He was mentioned in the &quot;Darkwing Duck&quot; episode &quot;Tiff of the Titans&quot;, but never really seen, apart from on a billboard in Duckburg, in the aforementioned episode.

He has appeared in some episodes of &quot;Raw Toonage&quot;, two shorts of &quot;Mickey Mouse Works&quot; and some episodes (specially &quot;House of Scrooge&quot;) of &quot;House of Mouse&quot;, as well as the direct-to-video films &quot;Mickey&#x27;s Once Upon a Christmas&quot; and &quot;Mickey&#x27;s Twice Upon a Christmas&quot;. His video game appearances include the three &quot;DuckTales&quot; releases (&quot;DuckTales&quot;, &quot;DuckTales 2&quot;, and &quot;&quot;), and in &quot;Toontown Online&quot; as the accidental creator of the Cogs. Additionally, he is a secret playable character in 2008 quiz game, &quot;Disney TH!NK Fast&quot;. In the 2012 Nintendo 3DS game &quot;Epic Mickey: Power of Illusion&quot;, he is one of the first characters Mickey rescues, running a shop in the fortress selling upgrades and serving as a Sketch summon in which he uses his cane pogostick from the Ducktales NES games.
Scrooge also makes sporadic appearances in Disney&#x27;s and Square Enix&#x27;s &quot;Kingdom Hearts&quot; series, helping Mickey Mouse establish a world transit system to expand his business empire to other worlds. He first appears in &quot;Kingdom Hearts II&quot; as a minor non-playable character in Hollow Bastion, where he is trying to recreate his favorite ice cream flavor – sea-salt. Scrooge later appears in the prequel, &quot;Kingdom Hearts: Birth by Sleep&quot;, this time with a speaking role. He works on establishing an ice-cream business in Radiant Garden and gives Ventus three passes to the Dream Festival in Disney Town. Scrooge returns in &quot;Kingdom Hearts III&quot;, now managing a bistro in Twilight Town with the help of Remy from &quot;Ratatouille&quot;. Alan Young reprises the role in the English version of &quot;Birth by Sleep&quot;, while Enn Reitel voices the character in &quot;III&quot;.

Scrooge has appeared in the Boom! Studios &quot;Darkwing Duck&quot; comic, playing a key role at the end of its initial story, &quot;The Duck Knight Returns&quot;. Later he would also play a key role on the final story arc &quot;Dangerous Currency&quot;, where he teams up with Darkwing Duck in order to stop the Phantom Blot and Magica De Spell from taking over St. Canard and Duckburg.

In 2015, Scrooge was seen in the &quot;Mickey Mouse&quot; short &quot;Goofy&#x27;s First Love&quot;, where Mickey and Donald are trying to help Goofy find his love. Donald suggests money, and they head over to Scrooge&#x27;s mansion where Donald tells his uncle that Goofy needs a million dollars. Scrooge then has his butler kick them out. When Goofy is inadvertently launched from a treadmill and catapulted off another building, he lands in Scrooge&#x27;s mansion. The butler kicks Goofy out and the process repeats itself but this time Mickey and Donald are catapulted as well and kicked out by the butler. Scrooge is seen at the end attending Goofy&#x27;s wedding with a sandwich. In the 2016 &quot;Mickey Mouse&quot; Christmas special, &quot;Duck the Halls&quot;, after Young&#x27;s death, John Kassir took over voicing Scrooge McDuck, however he later tweeted that he won&#x27;t be reprising his role in the reboot. Kassir continues to voice the character in subsequent appearances in this series. Scrooge makes a cameo appearance in the &quot;Legend of the Three Caballeros&quot; episode &quot;Shangri-La-Di-Da&quot;.

In the &quot;DuckTales&quot; reboot, Scrooge is played by Scottish actor David Tennant. Tennant reprises the role in the film &quot;Chip &#x27;n Dale: Rescue Rangers&quot; in a cameo appearance, as well as in an episode of Chibiverse.

Scrooge also has a cameo appearance with his outfit from &quot;Mickey&#x27;s Christmas Carol&quot; in the 2023 short film &quot;Once Upon a Studio&quot;.

== See also==
===Comics===

* Clan McDuck and the Duck family
* &quot;Uncle Scrooge&quot; (comic book) / Disney comics
* Carl Barks – foundational comics artist/writer; created Scrooge
* Don Rosa – popular comics artist/writer of the following generation
* &quot;The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck&quot;, by Don Rosa
* &quot;Music Inspired by the Life and Times of Scrooge&quot;
* Inducks – Disney comics database / Donaldism – Disney comics fandom

===Animation===
* &quot;Scrooge McDuck and Money&quot; (1967) – Theatrical film
* &quot;Mickey&#x27;s Christmas Carol&quot; (1983) – Theatrical film
* &quot;Sport Goofy in Soccermania&quot; (1987) – TV special
* &quot;DuckTales&quot; (1987) – TV series
* &quot;DuckTales the Movie: Treasure of the Lost Lamp&quot; (1990) – Theatrical film
* &quot;Mickey&#x27;s Twice Upon a Christmas&quot; (2004) – Direct-to-video film
* &quot;DuckTales&quot; (2017) – TV series

== Notes ==


== Further reading ==

* &quot;Uncle Scrooge McDuck: His Life and Times&quot;, deluxe reprint volume; Edward Summer (editor), Celestial Arts 1981 
* &quot;The Carl Barks Library&quot;, Another Rainbow Publishing 1984
* &quot;The Complete Carl Barks Disney Library&quot;, Fantagraphics 2011
* &quot;Carl Barks and the Disney Comic Book&quot;, University Press of Mississippi, Thomas Andrae 2006 
* &quot;An Informal Biography of Scrooge McDuck&quot;, Jack Chalker, Mirage Press 1974 
* &quot;How to Read Donald Duck: Imperialist Ideology in the Disney Comic&quot;, Dorfman &amp; Mattelart, International General 1975 (Communist propaganda)
* &quot;Scrooge McDuck Capitalist and Proud of it!&quot;, Goldbrick &amp; Bond, USA-International Publications 2004 (Capitalist rebuttal of How to Read Donald Duck)
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11937" start="0" end="14" title="Scrooge McDuck" label="Scrooge McDuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q11937" start="41" end="55" title="Scrooge McDuck" label="$crooge McDuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="100" end="123" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="The Walt Disney Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q11941" start="127" end="137" title="Carl Barks" label="Carl Barks"/>
<link wikidata="Q906229" start="152" end="165" title="Disney comics" label="Disney comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476361" start="180" end="202" title="Scottish Americans" label="Scottish-born American"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="203" end="218" title="Anthropomorphism" label="anthropomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736439" start="219" end="223" title="duck" label="duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q6550" start="242" end="253" title="Donald Duck" label="Donald Duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q386621" start="333" end="343" title="frock coat" label="frock coat"/>
<link wikidata="Q110304" start="345" end="352" title="top hat" label="top hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q244570" start="354" end="363" title="pince-nez" label="pince-nez"/>
<link wikidata="Q15249085" start="377" end="382" title="spats (footwear)" label="spats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553250" start="449" end="457" title="Scottish English" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271714" start="639" end="653" title="High-net-worth individual" label="extremely rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q12301358" start="694" end="702" title="Duckburg" label="Duckburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q11965" start="734" end="756" title="Huey, Dewey, and Louie" label="Huey, Dewey, and Louie"/>
<link wikidata="Q12301358" start="806" end="814" title="Calisota" label="Calisota"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="827" end="837" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="842" end="851" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="906" end="919" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q626756" start="948" end="964" title="Ebenezer Scrooge" label="Ebenezer Scrooge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="970" end="985" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q62879" start="1019" end="1036" title="A Christmas Carol" label="A Christmas Carol"/>
<link wikidata="Q911554" start="1074" end="1090" title="business magnate" label="business magnate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6550" start="1359" end="1370" title="Donald Duck" label="Donald Duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746774" start="1375" end="1385" title="Della Duck" label="Della Duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q76557" start="1400" end="1411" title="Uncle" label="great uncle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11965" start="1415" end="1437" title="Huey, Dewey, and Louie" label="Huey, Dewey, and Louie"/>
<link wikidata="Q837005" start="1470" end="1484" title="Gyro Gearloose" label="Gyro Gearloose"/>
<link wikidata="Q12301358" start="1564" end="1584" title="Donald Duck universe" label="Donald Duck universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q41966" start="1728" end="1735" title="Metonymy" label="metonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499127" start="1839" end="1844" title="miser" label="miser"/>
<link wikidata="Q110910" start="1849" end="1857" title="antihero" label="antihero"/>
<link wikidata="Q245204" start="2058" end="2068" title="antagonist" label="antagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6550" start="2073" end="2084" title="Donald Duck" label="Donald Duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q782733" start="2126" end="2152" title="Christmas on Bear Mountain" label="Christmas on Bear Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528585" start="2166" end="2176" title="Four Color" label="Four Color"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770842" start="2358" end="2371" title="Uncle Scrooge" label="Uncle Scrooge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146596" start="2524" end="2538" title="IDW Publishing" label="IDW Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q24184" start="2638" end="2646" title="Don Rosa" label="Don Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="2904" end="2950" title="animation" label="animated feature films and television programs"/>
<link wikidata="Q214107" start="2992" end="3001" title="DuckTales (1987 TV series)" label="DuckTales"/>
<link wikidata="Q28739895" start="3029" end="3035" title="DuckTales (2017 TV series)" label="reboot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6550" start="3204" end="3215" title="Donald Duck" label="Donald Duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q782733" start="3268" end="3294" title="Christmas on Bear Mountain" label="Christmas on Bear Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11941" start="3422" end="3432" title="Carl Barks" label="Carl Barks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992011" start="3584" end="3606" title="The Spirit of &amp;#x27;43" label="The Spirit of &amp;#x27;43"/>
<link wikidata="Q219645" start="3822" end="3834" title="misanthropy" label="misanthropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q906840" start="4793" end="4821" title="The Old Castle&amp;#x27;s Secret" label="The Old Castle&amp;#x27;s Secret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773123" start="5011" end="5023" title="Rannoch Moor" label="Rannoch Moor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708515" start="5160" end="5171" title="catchphrase" label="catchphrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q177764" start="5535" end="5541" title="West African Vodun" label="Voodoo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5847" end="5864" title="Natural rubber#Cultivation" label="rubber plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q517361" start="5929" end="5935" title="retcon" label="retcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094573" start="6037" end="6069" title="The Empire-Builder from Calisota" label="The Empire-Builder from Calisota"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6125" end="6142" title="List of Donald Duck universe characters#Bombie the Zombie" label="Bombie the Zombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q170539" start="6555" end="6561" title="parody" label="parody"/>
<link wikidata="Q34529" start="6565" end="6576" title="Bela Lugosi" label="Bela Lugosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751461" start="6590" end="6602" title="White Zombie (movie)" label="White Zombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246" start="6922" end="6929" title="unicorn" label="unicorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="6969" end="6978" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q854212" start="7042" end="7058" title="Gladstone Gander" label="Gladstone Gander"/>
<link wikidata="Q842511" start="7322" end="7341" title="Flintheart Glomgold" label="Flintheart Glomgold"/>
<link wikidata="Q11965" start="7375" end="7397" title="Huey, Dewey, and Louie" label="Huey, Dewey, and Louie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7467" end="7478" title="Frozen Gold (comics)" label="Frozen Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q861555" start="7716" end="7721" title="Cube (arithmetic)" label="cubic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798441" start="7875" end="7886" title="Beagle Boys" label="Beagle Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775579" start="8266" end="8284" title="John D. Rockerduck" label="John D. Rockerduck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="8399" end="8406" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q8196" start="8626" end="8632" title="Arabic alphabet" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="9180" end="9194" title="President of the United States" label="U.S. President"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="9195" end="9204" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q651424" start="9212" end="9240" title="The Buckaroo of the Badlands" label="The Buckaroo of the Badlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094049" start="9254" end="9282" title="The Invader of Fort Duckburg" label="The Invader of Fort Duckburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763702" start="9300" end="9330" title="The Sharpie of the Culebra Cut" label="The Sharpie of the Culebra Cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q102090" start="9339" end="9345" title="Apache" label="Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q2791" start="9353" end="9361" title="Geronimo" label="Geronimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442999" start="9369" end="9397" title="The Vigilante of Pizen Bluff" label="The Vigilante of Pizen Bluff"/>
<link wikidata="Q44356" start="9406" end="9410" title="Czar" label="Czar"/>
<link wikidata="Q40787" start="9411" end="9432" title="Nicholas II of Russia" label="Nicholas II of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094573" start="9440" end="9472" title="The Empire-Builder from Calisota" label="The Empire-Builder from Calisota"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="9485" end="9496" title="Philology" label="philologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q153159" start="9497" end="9510" title="Elias Lönnrot" label="Elias Lönnrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623444" start="9518" end="9540" title="The Quest for Kalevala" label="The Quest for Kalevala"/>
<link wikidata="Q24829" start="9977" end="9989" title="Orson Welles" label="Orson Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q24815" start="10011" end="10023" title="Citizen Kane" label="Citizen Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q437701" start="10730" end="10747" title="A Financial Fable" label="A Financial Fable"/>
<link wikidata="Q166656" start="10891" end="10908" title="supply and demand" label="supply and demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q125576" start="11561" end="11568" title="papyrus" label="papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="11726" end="11736" title="Nile River" label="Nile River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798441" start="11828" end="11853" title="The Beagle Boys" label="Terror of the Beagle Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q12301358" start="12084" end="12093" title="money bin" label="money bin"/>
<link wikidata="Q504704" start="12450" end="12463" title="Romano Scarpa" label="Romano Scarpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744153" start="12507" end="12525" title="Western Publishing" label="Western Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4024539" start="12788" end="12807" title="Only a Poor Old Man" label="Only a Poor Old Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q907801" start="12873" end="12893" title="Back to the Klondike" label="Back to the Klondike"/>
<link wikidata="Q2710155" start="13204" end="13241" title="Walt Disney&amp;#x27;s Comics and Stories" label="Walt Disney&amp;#x27;s Comics and Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q12301358" start="13677" end="13700" title="Scrooge McDuck Universe" label="Scrooge McDuck Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q957944" start="13885" end="13901" title="Junior Woodchuck" label="Junior Woodchuck"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14265" end="14283" title="List of Donald Duck universe characters#Brigitta MacBridge" label="Brigitta MacBridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053366" start="14325" end="14338" title="Gideon McDuck" label="Gideon McDuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775579" start="14495" end="14513" title="John D. Rockerduck" label="John D. Rockerduck"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14577" end="14588" title="Duck family (Disney)#Fethry Duck" label="Fethry Duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259292" start="14757" end="14775" title="The Son of the Sun" label="The Son of the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q685270" start="14798" end="14818" title="Gladstone Publishing" label="Gladstone Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q512814" start="14839" end="14851" title="Harvey Award" label="Harvey Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442999" start="15375" end="15411" title="The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck" label="The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q842614" start="15472" end="15484" title="Eisner Award" label="Eisner Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q604754" start="15790" end="15801" title="Daan Jippes" label="Daan Jippes"/>
<link wikidata="Q28790260" start="16084" end="16098" title="Michael Peraza" label="Michael Peraza"/>
<link wikidata="Q704471" start="16100" end="16110" title="Marco Rota" label="Marco Rota"/>
<link wikidata="Q24234" start="16112" end="16128" title="William Van Horn" label="William Van Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q724557" start="16134" end="16145" title="Tony Strobl" label="Tony Strobl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476361" start="16755" end="16772" title="Scots Americans" label="Scottish-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q911554" start="16773" end="16789" title="business magnate" label="business magnate"/>
<link wikidata="Q484265" start="16791" end="16806" title="Andrew Carnegie" label="Andrew Carnegie"/>
<link wikidata="Q626756" start="16819" end="16835" title="Ebenezer Scrooge" label="Ebenezer Scrooge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="16857" end="16886" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens&amp;#x27; novella"/>
<link wikidata="Q62879" start="16893" end="16910" title="A Christmas Carol" label="A Christmas Carol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442999" start="16971" end="17007" title="The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck" label="The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="17159" end="17166" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4031687" start="17236" end="17248" title="United States Seated Liberty coinage" label="1875 US dime"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137012" start="17676" end="17693" title="Clyde Shipping Company" label="Clyde cattle ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q631489" start="17807" end="17815" title="Klondike Gold Rush" label="Klondike"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="18177" end="18195" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093017" start="18204" end="18216" title="Rough Riders" label="Rough Riders"/>
<link wikidata="Q842511" start="18567" end="18586" title="Flintheart Glomgold" label="Flintheart Glomgold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775579" start="18588" end="18606" title="John D. Rockerduck" label="John D. Rockerduck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163330" start="18634" end="18642" title="maharaja" label="maharaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145276" start="18650" end="18667" title="fictional country" label="fictional country"/>
<link wikidata="Q853968" start="18690" end="18699" title="Hindustan" label="Hindustan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3382557" start="19088" end="19112" title="Scrooge McDuck and Money" label="Scrooge McDuck and Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523818" start="19176" end="19186" title="petty cash" label="petty cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499127" start="19636" end="19644" title="Miser" label="tightwad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19755" end="19770" title="Donald Duck universe#Number One Dime" label="Number One Dime"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19805" end="19838" title="Donald Duck universe#Millionaires&amp;#x27; club" label="The Billionaires Club of Duckburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="20164" end="20180" title="Time (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Time&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4435771" start="20379" end="20396" title="Fenton Crackshell" label="Fenton Crackshell"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21110" end="21156" title="DuckTales the Movie: Treasure of the Lost Lamp" label="DuckTales the Movie: Treasure of the Lost Lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q28739895" start="21268" end="21296" title="DuckTales (2017 TV series)" label="&amp;quot;DuckTales&amp;quot; reboot"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="21470" end="21476" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469546" start="21865" end="21876" title="running gag" label="running gag"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="22086" end="22092" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="22464" end="22477" title="Archaeology" label="archaeologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="23656" end="23664" title="linguist" label="linguist"/>
<link wikidata="Q131242" start="23804" end="23810" title="Eskimo" label="Eskimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="23851" end="23862" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292307" start="24680" end="24693" title="Guido Martina" label="Guido Martina"/>
<link wikidata="Q245781" start="24747" end="24755" title="Cynicism (contemporary)" label="cynicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q48324" start="24786" end="24794" title="morality" label="morality"/>
<link wikidata="Q162244" start="25587" end="25591" title="hero" label="hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q290691" start="25600" end="25607" title="villain" label="villain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6550" start="25675" end="25681" title="Donald Duck" label="Donald"/>
<link wikidata="Q842511" start="25753" end="25772" title="Flintheart Glomgold" label="Flintheart Glomgold"/>
<link wikidata="Q699" start="26579" end="26589" title="fairy tale" label="fairy tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292195" start="27059" end="27072" title="robber baron (industrialist)" label="robber barons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="27802" end="27812" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q214107" start="27859" end="27868" title="DuckTales (1987 TV series)" label="DuckTales"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="27941" end="27948" title="US Navy" label="US Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q485446" start="28116" end="28126" title="Optimism" label="optimistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="28391" end="28399" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q200535" start="28859" end="28865" title="wealth" label="wealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544573" start="30524" end="30539" title="Dallas McKennon" label="Dallas McKennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q54860" start="30605" end="30623" title="Disneyland Records" label="Disneyland Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3382557" start="30734" end="30758" title="Scrooge McDuck and Money" label="Scrooge McDuck and Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450732" start="30791" end="30804" title="Bill Thompson (voice actor)" label="Bill Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q39035" start="30846" end="30862" title="Scottish Terrier" label="Scottish Terrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q172284" start="30872" end="30890" title="Lady and the Tramp" label="Lady and the Tramp"/>
<link wikidata="Q555246" start="30914" end="30924" title="Alan Young" label="Alan Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q11934" start="31520" end="31532" title="Mickey Mouse" label="Mickey Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q204662" start="31555" end="31577" title="The Sword in the Stone (1963 film)" label="The Sword in the Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539739" start="31663" end="31692" title="Mickey&amp;#x27;s Christmas Carol" label="Mickey&amp;#x27;s Christmas Carol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629205" start="31829" end="31838" title="Will Ryan" label="Will Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079767" start="31893" end="31919" title="Sport Goofy in Soccermania" label="Sport Goofy in Soccermania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707610" start="31930" end="31939" title="Alan Reid (musician)" label="Alan Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q489000" start="31959" end="31976" title="Tuomas Holopainen" label="Tuomas Holopainen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15636211" start="32002" end="32049" title="Music Inspired by the Life and Times of Scrooge" label="Music Inspired by the Life and Times of Scrooge"/>
<link wikidata="Q13568247" start="32120" end="32132" title="Mickey Mouse (TV series)" label="Mickey Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582689" start="32240" end="32251" title="John Kassir" label="John Kassir"/>
<link wikidata="Q101239733" start="32382" end="32417" title="The Wonderful World of Mickey Mouse" label="The Wonderful World of Mickey Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386105" start="32425" end="32435" title="Eric Bauza" label="Eric Bauza"/>
<link wikidata="Q55391875" start="32495" end="32525" title="Legend of the Three Caballeros" label="Legend of the Three Caballeros"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054443" start="32548" end="32558" title="Enn Reitel" label="Enn Reitel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3265748" start="32603" end="32621" title="Kingdom Hearts III" label="Kingdom Hearts III"/>
<link wikidata="Q111828779" start="32664" end="32688" title="Disney Dreamlight Valley" label="Disney Dreamlight Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q810794" start="32723" end="32731" title="Bathgate" label="Bathgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q214601" start="32744" end="32757" title="David Tennant" label="David Tennant"/>
<link wikidata="Q28739895" start="32802" end="32811" title="DuckTales (2017 TV series)" label="DuckTales"/>
<link wikidata="" start="32837" end="32870" title="Chip &amp;#x27;n Dale: Rescue Rangers (film)" label="Chip &amp;#x27;n Dale: Rescue Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148444" start="33534" end="33545" title="blunderbuss" label="blunderbuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491128" start="34006" end="34022" title="gold prospecting" label="gold prospecting"/>
<link wikidata="Q602965" start="34030" end="34038" title="Klondike, Yukon" label="Klondike"/>
<link wikidata="Q775332" start="35005" end="35022" title="Fountain of Youth" label="Fountain of Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q684924" start="35193" end="35203" title="rheumatism" label="rheumatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="36204" end="36210" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145358" start="36277" end="36289" title="Forbes Fictional 15" label="Fictional 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q17243" start="36602" end="36610" title="Monopoly (game)" label="Monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q298838" start="36779" end="36793" title="Billy Connolly" label="Billy Connolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q220703" start="36798" end="36823" title="Charles Rennie Mackintosh" label="Charles Rennie Mackintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790889" start="36840" end="36859" title="The Weekly Standard" label="The Weekly Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097742" start="36962" end="36966" title="Troubled Assets Relief Program" label="TARP"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452087" start="36980" end="36989" title="extortion" label="extortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q43759" start="36999" end="37009" title="Arno Funke" label="Arno Funke"/>
<link wikidata="Q182910" start="37049" end="37057" title="Karstadt" label="Karstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930" start="37191" end="37201" title="Family Guy" label="Family Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159369" start="37222" end="37235" title="Lottery Fever" label="Lottery Fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079" start="37352" end="37364" title="Breaking Bad" label="Breaking Bad"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705950" start="37378" end="37384" title="Buried (Breaking Bad)" label="Buried"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154377" start="37392" end="37404" title="Saul Goodman" label="Saul Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585983" start="37415" end="37427" title="Patrick Kuby" label="Patrick Kuby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585983" start="37456" end="37471" title="Huell Babineaux" label="Huell Babineaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q15987281" start="37644" end="37652" title="Clarence (American TV series)" label="Clarence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482901" start="38011" end="38019" title="Van Dale" label="Van Dale"/>
<link wikidata="Q24056548" start="38064" end="38082" title="The Film Theorists" label="The Film Theorists"/>
<link wikidata="Q24056548" start="38100" end="38134" title="MatPat" label="Matthew &amp;quot;MatPat&amp;quot; Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q12301358" start="38631" end="38644" title="Duck universe" label="Duck universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q12301358" start="38792" end="38800" title="Duckburg" label="Duckburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q42897" start="39025" end="39057" title="List of characters from the Scrooge McDuck universe" label="original and existing characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="39226" end="39244" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39390" end="39434" title="List of characters from the Scrooge McDuck universe#Historical figures" label="Historical Figures in Scrooge McDuck stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q24184" start="39459" end="39467" title="Don Rosa" label="Don Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442999" start="39481" end="39517" title="The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck" label="The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39682" end="39727" title="The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck#Scrooge McDuck timeline according to Rosa" label="Scrooge McDuck timeline according to Don Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q489000" start="39754" end="39771" title="Tuomas Holopainen" label="Tuomas Holopainen"/>
<link wikidata="Q43510" start="39775" end="39784" title="Nightwish" label="Nightwish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442999" start="39838" end="39874" title="The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck" label="The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q15636211" start="39908" end="39955" title="Music Inspired by the Life and Times of Scrooge" label="Music Inspired by the Life and Times of Scrooge"/>
<link wikidata="Q24184" start="39963" end="39971" title="Don Rosa" label="Don Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11941" start="40155" end="40165" title="Carl Barks" label="Carl Barks"/>
<link wikidata="Q28389" start="40248" end="40254" title="Screenwriter" label="writer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5762300" start="40255" end="40263" title="Storyboard artist" label="designer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992011" start="40368" end="40390" title="The Spirit of &amp;#x27;43" label="The Spirit of &amp;#x27;43"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544573" start="40502" end="40514" title="Dal McKennon" label="Dal McKennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070749" start="41803" end="41820" title="Mickey Mouse Club" label="Mickey Mouse Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q3382557" start="41901" end="41925" title="Scrooge McDuck and Money" label="Scrooge McDuck and Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450732" start="41943" end="41956" title="Bill Thompson (voice actor)" label="Bill Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q54860" start="42023" end="42041" title="Disneyland Records" label="Disneyland Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="42072" end="42087" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q62879" start="42100" end="42117" title="A Christmas Carol" label="A Christmas Carol"/>
<link wikidata="Q191224" start="42144" end="42164" title="Walt Disney Pictures" label="Walt Disney Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q122813195" start="42176" end="42186" title="featurette" label="featurette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539739" start="42230" end="42259" title="Mickey&amp;#x27;s Christmas Carol" label="Mickey&amp;#x27;s Christmas Carol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079767" start="42334" end="42360" title="Sport Goofy in Soccermania" label="Sport Goofy in Soccermania"/>
<link wikidata="Q581714" start="42442" end="42457" title="animated series" label="animated series"/>
<link wikidata="Q214107" start="42464" end="42473" title="DuckTales (1987 TV series)" label="DuckTales"/>
<link wikidata="Q555246" start="42543" end="42553" title="Alan Young" label="Alan Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="42774" end="42792" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="" start="43194" end="43240" title="DuckTales the Movie: Treasure of the Lost Lamp" label="DuckTales the Movie: Treasure of the Lost Lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q383914" start="43316" end="43329" title="Darkwing Duck" label="Darkwing Duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809754" start="43512" end="43523" title="Raw Toonage" label="Raw Toonage"/>
<link wikidata="Q378733" start="43551" end="43569" title="Mickey Mouse Works" label="Mickey Mouse Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q693268" start="43644" end="43658" title="House of Mouse" label="House of Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q844580" start="43681" end="43696" title="direct-to-video" label="direct-to-video"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655222" start="43709" end="43744" title="Mickey&amp;#x27;s Once Upon a Christmas" label="Mickey&amp;#x27;s Once Upon a Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203831" start="43761" end="43797" title="Mickey&amp;#x27;s Twice Upon a Christmas" label="Mickey&amp;#x27;s Twice Upon a Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q933328" start="43888" end="43897" title="DuckTales (video game)" label="DuckTales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630920" start="43911" end="43922" title="DuckTales 2" label="DuckTales 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441260" start="43962" end="43977" title="Toontown Online" label="Toontown Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282478" start="44096" end="44113" title="Disney TH!NK Fast" label="Disney TH!NK Fast"/>
<link wikidata="Q203597" start="44133" end="44145" title="Nintendo 3DS" label="Nintendo 3DS"/>
<link wikidata="" start="44157" end="44187" title="Epic Mickey: Power of Illusion" label="Epic Mickey: Power of Illusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q207784" start="44451" end="44462" title="Square Enix" label="Square Enix"/>
<link wikidata="Q626802" start="44632" end="44649" title="Kingdom Hearts II" label="Kingdom Hearts II"/>
<link wikidata="" start="44826" end="44856" title="Kingdom Hearts: Birth by Sleep" label="Kingdom Hearts: Birth by Sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q3265748" start="45054" end="45072" title="Kingdom Hearts III" label="Kingdom Hearts III"/>
<link wikidata="Q170035" start="45152" end="45163" title="Ratatouille (film)" label="Ratatouille"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054443" start="45260" end="45270" title="Enn Reitel" label="Enn Reitel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943376" start="45341" end="45354" title="Boom! Studios" label="Boom! Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q383914" start="45361" end="45374" title="Darkwing Duck" label="Darkwing Duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q214107" start="45542" end="45560" title="Dangerous Currency" label="Dangerous Currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3260246" start="45626" end="45638" title="Phantom Blot" label="Phantom Blot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647361" start="45643" end="45658" title="Magica De Spell" label="Magica De Spell"/>
<link wikidata="Q13568247" start="45741" end="45753" title="Mickey Mouse (TV series)" label="Mickey Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582689" start="46498" end="46509" title="John Kassir" label="John Kassir"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="46561" end="46568" title="Twitter" label="tweeted"/>
<link wikidata="Q55391875" start="46753" end="46783" title="Legend of the Three Caballeros" label="Legend of the Three Caballeros"/>
<link wikidata="Q28739895" start="46836" end="46864" title="DuckTales (2017 TV series)" label="&amp;quot;DuckTales&amp;quot; reboot"/>
<link wikidata="Q214601" start="46902" end="46915" title="David Tennant" label="David Tennant"/>
<link wikidata="" start="46961" end="46994" title="Chip &amp;#x27;n Dale: Rescue Rangers (film)" label="Chip &amp;#x27;n Dale: Rescue Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q113429366" start="47052" end="47062" title="Chibiverse" label="Chibiverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q119439833" start="47193" end="47211" title="Once Upon a Studio" label="Once Upon a Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053366" start="47250" end="47261" title="Clan McDuck" label="Clan McDuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q977528" start="47270" end="47281" title="Duck family (Disney)" label="Duck family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770842" start="47290" end="47303" title="Uncle Scrooge" label="Uncle Scrooge"/>
<link wikidata="Q906229" start="47325" end="47338" title="Disney comics" label="Disney comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11941" start="47341" end="47351" title="Carl Barks" label="Carl Barks"/>
<link wikidata="Q24184" start="47407" end="47415" title="Don Rosa" label="Don Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442999" start="47483" end="47519" title="The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck" label="The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q15636211" start="47547" end="47594" title="Music Inspired by the Life and Times of Scrooge" label="Music Inspired by the Life and Times of Scrooge"/>
<link wikidata="Q768889" start="47603" end="47610" title="Inducks" label="Inducks"/>
<link wikidata="Q8513" start="47627" end="47635" title="database" label="database"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240546" start="47638" end="47647" title="Donaldism" label="Donaldism"/>
<link wikidata="Q773944" start="47664" end="47670" title="fandom" label="fandom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3382557" start="47696" end="47720" title="Scrooge McDuck and Money" label="Scrooge McDuck and Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539739" start="47760" end="47789" title="Mickey&amp;#x27;s Christmas Carol" label="Mickey&amp;#x27;s Christmas Carol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079767" start="47829" end="47855" title="Sport Goofy in Soccermania" label="Sport Goofy in Soccermania"/>
<link wikidata="Q214107" start="47890" end="47899" title="DuckTales (1987 TV series)" label="DuckTales"/>
<link wikidata="" start="47933" end="47979" title="DuckTales the Movie: Treasure of the Lost Lamp" label="DuckTales the Movie: Treasure of the Lost Lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203831" start="48019" end="48055" title="Mickey&amp;#x27;s Twice Upon a Christmas" label="Mickey&amp;#x27;s Twice Upon a Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q28739895" start="48100" end="48109" title="DuckTales (2017 TV series)" label="DuckTales"/>
<link wikidata="Q104823971" start="48305" end="48327" title="The Carl Barks Library" label="The Carl Barks Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q4770328" start="48335" end="48361" title="Another Rainbow Publishing" label="Another Rainbow Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727124" start="48375" end="48413" title="The Complete Carl Barks Disney Library" label="The Complete Carl Barks Disney Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395850" start="48421" end="48434" title="Fantagraphics" label="Fantagraphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894895" start="48492" end="48523" title="University Press of Mississippi" label="University Press of Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398751" start="48600" end="48612" title="Jack Chalker" label="Jack Chalker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5918732" start="48641" end="48664" title="How to Read Donald Duck" label="How to Read Donald Duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q659027" start="48714" end="48721" title="Ariel Dorfman" label="Dorfman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519220" start="48728" end="48737" title="Armand Mattelart" label="Mattelart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352998" start="48767" end="48787" title="Communist propaganda" label="Communist propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="48906" end="48916" title="Capitalist" label="Capitalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410600" start="48917" end="48925" title="rebuttal" label="rebuttal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5918732" start="48929" end="48952" title="How to Read Donald Duck" label="How to Read Donald Duck"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29379" wikidata="Q1814631" url="?curid=29379" title="Shiva (Judaism)">
<text> () is the week-long mourning period in Judaism for first-degree relatives. The ritual is referred to as &quot;sitting&quot; in English. The period lasts for seven days following the burial. Following the initial period of despair and lamentation immediately after the death, embraces a time when individuals discuss their loss and accept the comfort of others.

Its observance is a requirement for the parents, siblings, spouses, and children of the person who has died. It is not a requirement for the family of an infant who was less than thirty days old at the time of death. At the funeral, mourners wear an outer garment that is torn before the procession in a ritual known as . In some traditions, mourners wear a black ribbon that is cut in place of an everyday garment. The torn article is worn throughout the entirety of . Typically, the seven days begin immediately after the deceased has been buried. Following burial, mourners assume the halakhic status of (). This state lasts for the entire duration of .

It is necessary for the burial spot to be entirely covered with earth in order for to commence. During the period of , mourners remain at home. Friends and family visit those in mourning in order to give their condolences and provide comfort. The process, dating back to biblical times, formalizes the natural way an individual confronts and overcomes grief. allows for the individual to express their sorrow, discuss the loss of a loved one, and slowly reenter society.

==Etymology==
The word comes from the Hebrew word (), referring to the seven-day length of this period.

==Biblical accounts similar to ==
A number of Biblical accounts describe mourning for fixed periods; in several cases, this period is seven days. For example, after the death of Jacob, his son Joseph and those accompanying Joseph observed a seven-day mourning period. The seven-day period of mourning that Joseph underwent was depicted by the sages before the revelation at Mount Sinai. In the Book of Job, it is stated that Job mourned his misfortune for seven days. During this time, he sat on the ground, with his friends surrounding him.

Biblical mourning involved refraining from feasts, songs, and Temple rituals. Amos declared to the people that God would &quot;turn your feasts into mourning, and all your songs into lamentations&quot; as a punishment for sin, describing this mourning as similar to &quot;the mourning for an only son&quot;. After two of the sons of Aaron, a High Priest, were killed, Aaron refused to eat the animal sacrifices, saying this would be inappropriate at a time when he was mourning the sons&#x27; death.

==Stages of bereavement==
The process of mourning begins with the first stage, otherwise known as &quot;Aninut&quot;. During this time, individuals experience the initial shock of their loss. Often emotions associated with the period of &quot;Aninut&quot; include anger, denial, and disbelief. During this period, which technically precedes the official mourning, the mourner is exempt from performing most positive commandments. The keriah (the rending of the garments) is performed during this period. Aninut begins the moment the individual dies and lasts until the end of the funeral service. Following &quot;Aninut&quot; is &quot;shiva&quot;, in which the mourners dedicate seven days to remembrance of the deceased person. Throughout &quot;shiva&quot;, individuals are instructed to take a break from their routines in order to focus on their loss. For these seven days the mourners&#x27; home is generally an open house for friends and family to come to offer comfort. The stage of mourning known as &quot;sheloshim&quot; (literally &quot;thirty&quot;) lasts until thirty days after the burial. The first seven days of &quot;sheloshim&quot; is the period of &quot;shiva&quot;; &quot;sheloshim&quot; continues after &quot;shiva&quot; has ended. After the intense period of &quot;shiva&quot;, which is mainly contained to the home, during the remainder of &quot;sheloshim&quot; the bereaved leave their residences and begin to interact with others again. &quot;Sheloshim&quot; encourages individuals to participate in social relations in order to slowly ease back into normal daily activities. The final stage, &quot;shenat aveilut&quot;, is a twelve-month period of mourning, during which limitations are placed on mourners in the realms of wearing newly-bought clothing, attending social gatherings and receiving gifts. During the first eleven months Kaddish is said. After the year&#x27;s conclusion, yearly remembrance ceremonies, known as yahrzeit or hilula (on the date of passing) and yizkor (on major holidays) are held for the individual who died.

==Computing the timing of &quot;shiva&quot; and &quot;sheloshim&quot;==

The &quot;shiva&quot; period commences immediately after the burial. The remainder of the day (until sundown) is considered to be the first day of shiva, even though it is only a partial day. On the seventh day (e.g., on Monday, if the first day was Tuesday), &quot;shiva&quot; ends in the morning after shacharit prayers (if no public services are held on the morning of the seventh day, a service is conducted in the home of the mourner); thus, the seventh day is again a partial day. The &quot;sheloshim&quot; (thirty-day period of mourning) continues until the end of morning services on the 30th day, 23 days after the end of &quot;shiva&quot;; as with &quot;shiva&quot;, the two partial days at the beginning and end are counted as full days.

Had the news of a close relative&#x27;s death reached them 30 days after their deceased relative had expired, the 30th-day included, the mourner is only obligated to sit in mourning for one day. However, had the news of a close relative&#x27;s death reached them within 30 days after expiration, the mourner is required to sit in mourning for seven days.

===Religious holidays during times of mourning===
Religious holidays during &quot;shiva&quot; and &quot;sheloshim&quot; change the mourning period slightly. Because Judaism embraces the holidays with joy, the sadness and grief associated with mourning are meant to be set aside until the holiday concludes. Typically, if an individual dies before the beginning of a holiday, the holiday removes the observance of &quot;shiva&quot; or &quot;sheloshim&quot;. The days of the holiday are counted towards the days of mourning, and the rules enforced during mourning are revoked in order to encourage the celebration of a holiday. If a death occurred during the holiday or unknowingly, mourning commences after the holiday ends. In other situations, if the entirety of &quot;shiva&quot; has been observed prior to the start of a holiday, the holiday will cancel the observance of &quot;sheloshim&quot;, signifying the fulfillment of this period of mourning.

The occurrence of a major Jewish holiday terminates the &quot;shiva&quot;. If the funeral occurs during a festival, the start of the mourning period is delayed to the end of the festival.

====Sabbath====
During Shabbat, private mourning continues, while public mourning is suspended. Individuals are permitted to wear shoes and leave their home to partake in public prayer services. In order to prepare for Shabbat, individuals are allowed to interrupt &quot;shiva&quot; for up to one hour and fifteen minutes in order to cook, dress, and perform other tasks. If this is not enough time to do so, in certain situations there may be two and a half hours allotted for such.

====Passover====
During Passover, any days in observance of &quot;shiva&quot; before the start will equate to seven when the holiday begins. Since Passover is celebrated for eight days, any mourning prior will total to fifteen days when holiday ends, leaving only fifteen days of observance of &quot;sheloshim&quot;.

====Shavuot====
During Shavuot, any days in observance of shiva before the start will equate to seven when the holiday begins. The first day of Shavuot equates to seven days. The second day of Shavuot is considered the fifteenth day, leaving only fifteen days left of observance of &quot;sheloshim&quot;.

====Sukkot====
During Sukkot, any days in observance of &quot;shiva&quot; before the start will equate to seven when the holiday begins. Since Sukkot is observed for seven days, any mourning prior will total to fourteen days when the holiday ends. Shemini Atzeret is considered the eighth day of Sukkot, and equates to seven days of mourning. Simchat Torah is considered the twenty-second day of mourning, leaving only eight days of observance of &quot;sheloshim&quot;.

====Rosh Hashanah====
During Rosh Hashanah, any days in observance of &quot;shiva&quot; before the start will equate to seven days when the holiday begins. Yom Kippur following Rosh Hashanah, will symbolize the end of mourning, and the end of both &quot;shiva&quot; and &quot;sheloshim&quot;.

====Yom Kippur====
During Yom Kippur, any days in observance of &quot;shiva&quot; before the start will equate to seven days when the holiday begins. Sukkot, following Yom Kippur, will symbolize the end of mourning, and the end of both &quot;shiva&quot; and &quot;sheloshim&quot;.

====Yom Tov====
If the death occurs during Yom Tov, &quot;shiva&quot; does not begin until the burial is completed. Burial may not take place on Yom Tov, but can during the intermediate days of Sukkot or Passover, otherwise known as Chol HaMoed.

====Chol HaMoed====
If a burial occurs on Chol HaMoed of Passover, &quot;shiva&quot; does not begin until after the Yom Tov is completed. In the Diaspora, where most Yamim Tovim are observed for two days, mourning does not take place on the second day, but the day is still counted as one of the days of &quot;shiva&quot;.

==Shiva customs==
There are many traditions that are upheld in order to observe &quot;shiva&quot;. Throughout this time, mourners are required to stay at home and refrain from engaging with the social world.

===Keriah===
After hearing of the death of a close relative, Jewish beliefs and traditions instruct individuals to tear their clothing as the primary expression of grief. The process of tearing the garment is known as &quot;keriah&quot;. The tearing is done while standing and is required to extend in length to a &quot;tefach&quot; (handbreadth), or what is equivalent to about . Upon tearing the clothing, the mourner recites a blessing which describes God as &quot;the true Judge&quot;. This blessing reminds mourners to acknowledge that God has taken the life of a close relative, and is seen as the first step in the acceptance of grief. The garment is torn over the heart if the individual who died was a parent, or over the chest on the right side if the individual who died was another relative. The torn article of clothing is worn throughout the period of &quot;shiva&quot;, the only exception being on Shabbat.

===Washing hands===
After being near or around the deceased, it is ancient custom to wash oneself, or at minimum wash one’s hands, as a means of purification. After a funeral, or visitation to a cemetery, individuals are required to wash hands as a mark of spiritual transition through water. During shiva, it is especially mandatory to do so before entering the home. There are many different origins of this tradition, though the act is typically associated with symbolic cleansing, the idea being that death is impure in a spiritual sense. Within Judaism, the living is thought to emphasize value of life rather than focus on death. When washing hands after visiting the deceased, it is custom to not pass the cup of water used from person to person. The reason behind this stems from the beliefs and hopes of stopping the tragedy it began, rather than allowing it to continue from person to person as symbolized by the passing of the cup.

===Meal of Condolences===

The first meal which should be eaten after the funeral is known as the &quot;seudat havra&#x27;ah&quot; (). Traditionally, mourners should be served the meal of condolences by neighbors. The act of preparing such meal is considered to be a mitzvah. Though being the tradition, if the meal of condolences is unable to be prepared by a neighbor, extended family may do so, and in the last case the mourner themselves may prepare the meal. It was seen that many times following the death of a loved one, individuals who were in mourning possessed a death wish and often attempted to undergo starvation. The meal given to them upon returning home provided warmth in order to lessen such wishes. In order to be deemed the meal of condolences, the food selections must contain several specific dishes. An example of this is bread, which is symbolic for the staff of life. Aside from this, the meal must contain hard-boiled eggs, cooked vegetables, and coffee or tea. Often wine is allowed to be served as well. The only time the meal of condolences is not served occurs when there is no public observance of mourning or if the individual died by suicide.

===Candles===

Within Judaism, candles are symbolic of special events throughout life. They are lit during major holidays, during Shabbat, and during the process of mourning candles are required to burn for the entirety of shiva. Prior to the death of Rabbi Judah HaNasi in the third century, he instructed that a light should be kept burning. During shiva, the candle represents the deceased. The light is symbolic of the human being, the wick and flame are representative of the body and soul respectively, as well as their connection with one another. Traditionally, candles are required to be made of either oil or paraffin and are not allowed to be electric. The candle is ideally burned in the home of the deceased, but exceptions can be made. Regardless, candles should be in the presence of those observing shiva. During major holidays, the candle may be moved in order to lessen the feeling of mourning and focus on the joyous occasion at hand.

===Mirrors===
Individuals who are in mourning, or in a shiva home, are required to cover mirrors from the time an individual dies until the end of shiva. There are several reasons Judaism requires this. The first reason may stem from the idea that man was created in the image of God. In doing so, man acquires the same dignity and value as God. When a creation of God dies, this lessens his image. The death of human beings disrupts the connection between the living man and living God. Since the purpose of mirrors is to reflect such image, they are covered during mourning. A second reason mirrors are covered in Judaism branches from contemplation of one&#x27;s relationship with God during the death of a loved one. At this time, individuals are instructed to focus on grief and mourning rather than themselves. In order to prevent selfish thoughts, all mirrors are covered within the homes of mourners. A third reason which depicts why mirrors should be covered comes from the law which states that an individual may not stand directly in front of an image or worship one. Therefore, mirrors and pictures are hidden during mourning.

====Pictures====
Some have an additional custom to cover all pictures of people. One reason, which is linked to the covering of mirrors (and, by some, all pictures of people too) is that prayer services are held in the house of mourning, if a quorum can be gathered, and &quot;Jewish law clearly states that one may not worship an image or standing directly in front of one .. picture .. mirror.&quot;

===Shoes===

Leather shoes are not permitted to be worn during the observance of shiva. The reasoning behind this involves a lack of luxury. Without leather shoes, an individual is able to concentrate on mourning and the deeper meaning of life. However, exceptions to this rule include pregnant women and those with ailments of the feet. Aside from those observing shiva or sheloshim, guests and individuals who are not should refrain from wearing leather shoes in the home of mourners as well.

===Personal grooming===

Similar to the idea of wearing leather shoes, hygiene and personal grooming fall under the idea of the task being done for pleasure. Such acts are prohibited during the observation of shiva or sheloshim as they are seen as actions done for physical comfort. However, there is a fine line which separates grooming for hygienic reasons and for comfort. Therefore, in order to prevent grooming for comfort individuals who are mourning are instructed to only bathe separate parts of the body, head, and face. On top of this, cold or cool water is recommended. The use of cosmetics is not allowed as this constitutes an act done for comfort and pleasure. However, the exception to this rule is a woman who is a bride, is engaged to be married, or is dating to be married.

===&quot;Sitting&quot; &quot;shiva&quot;===

&quot;Sitting&quot; &quot;shiva&quot; refers to the act of sitting on low stools during times of mourning. As mentioned in the Book of Job, upon mourning, Job&#x27;s friends &quot;sat down with him upon the ground seven days and seven nights&quot;. Therefore, originally, individuals who were observing a period of mourning were required to turn couches or beds over and sit on the ground. After time, modifications towards this rule were made. The &quot;Halakhah&quot; states that an individual is required to sit on low stools, or on the floor. The individual partakes in sitting on a low stool in order to signify their lack of concern for personal comfort during their time of mourning.

Mourning finds its expression in the sorrow and anguish of the soul and in symbolic, external actions. Different communities have practised different customs during the actual process of &quot;sitting&quot; &quot;shiva&quot;. Sephardic Jews no longer sit whilst draped in their Tallit, but Yemenite Jews still follow the ancient Jewish custom of sitting seven days whilst draped in a Tallit. The practice is alluded to in the Talmud (&quot;Mo&#x27;ed Katan&quot;), and in the writings of the early rabbinic authorities.

Among Ashkenazi and Sephardic communities the practice is now obsolete, they adhering to the adjudicators of Jewish law that have come of late (&quot;Bayit Chadash&quot;, the &quot;Ṭurei Zahav&quot;, and &quot;Siftei Cohen&quot;) and who have canceled the custom, writing thus: &quot;And at this time, there is no custom of covering up one&#x27;s head, so that it may not lead to frivolity. In any case, the hat should be pulled over one&#x27;s eyes.&quot; The only ones who continue to observe the custom are the Jews of Yemen.

===Place of observance===

The ideal place to observe shiva is in the home of the deceased individual. If this is not possible, the second best place is in the home of a relative close to the deceased. During the observance of shiva, individuals are generally not permitted to leave the premises. However, there are certain exceptions to this rule, including: not having enough room to house for every individual observing, the loss of another loved one, and the inability to conduct services in the home. If an individual mourning is allowed to leave the home, they must do so without disturbing others and never alone.

==Prayers in the &quot;shiva&quot; house==
Praying in the home of a mourner is done in order to demonstrate respect for the grieving individual as well as the deceased. Even as early as 1790, the &quot;Hebra Maarib beZemanah Oheb Shalom&quot; (חברה מעריב בזמנה אוהב שלום) organization was founded in order to provide mourners observing &quot;shiva&quot; with a &quot;minyan&quot;. During 1853 in London, the &quot;Hebrath Menachem Abelim Hesed Ve Emeth&quot; organization was founded to accomplish a similar goal. Throughout history, prayers during mourning have been important. However, during &quot;shiva&quot;, the prayers change slightly.

===Kaddish===
During the process of mourning, Kaddish is typically recited. Rather than losing faith in the religion, Jewish traditions require those who have experienced the loss of a loved one to publicly assert their faith in God. This is typically done in front of a minyan. The recitation of Kaddish is done in order to protect the dignity and merit of the individual who died within God&#x27;s eyes. Judaism believes that prior to a soul&#x27;s entry into heaven, a maximum of twelve months is required in order for even the worst soul to be purified. Though the entirety of mourning lasts for twelve months, Kaddish is only recited for eleven months so as to not imply the soul required an entire twelve months of purification.

===Mourner&#x27;s prayer===
Traditionally the true mourner&#x27;s prayer is known as &quot;El Malei Rachamim&quot; in Ashkenazi literature and &quot;Hashkavah&quot; in Sephardic literature. Often the mourner&#x27;s prayer is mistaken for Kaddish. The recitation of the mourner&#x27;s prayer is done for the soul of an individual who has died. The prayer itself is an appeal for the soul of the deceased to be given proper rest. Typically recitation of this prayer is done at the graveside during burial, during the unveiling of the tombstone, as in the Yizkor services on Jewish holidays. If the recitation is done as an individual commemoration, the prayer contains the name of the individual who died. However, if the recitation is done in the presence of a group, the prayer will contain a description of the individual who died.

===Minyan during shiva===

A minyan is traditionally a quorum of ten or more adult males. Often in Conservative, Reconstructionist, or Reform communities, a minyan is composed of a mix of ten or more adult males and females. During shiva, a minyan will gather at the home of those in mourning for services. The services are similar to those held at a synagogue. During shiva, however, certain prayers or verses are either added or omitted. During the days that the Torah is read in a synagogue, it is likewise read at the shiva home. An effort is made by the community to lend a Torah scroll to the mourner for this purpose.

===Changes in service during mourning===
The following changes are made in the Shacharit (morning) prayer, listed by order in the prayer service:
* Omission of the Priestly Blessing and &quot;Hallel&quot; on Rosh Chodesh.
* Omission of &quot;Tachanun&quot; and &quot;Nefilat Appayim&quot;; similarly, on Monday &amp; Thursday mornings (before Torah reading), &quot;Erech Apayim&quot; is omitted.
* Omission of &quot;Psalm 20&quot;
* Omission of &quot;Psalms 90&quot;
* Addition of &quot;Psalm 49&quot; - Redemption of the Soul (): twice per day: mornings, also evenings (Sfard) or Mincha (Ashkenaz).
* Substitution of &quot;Psalm 16&quot; for &quot;Psalm 49&quot; on days when Tachanun is omitted
* Omission of &quot;Pitum Haketoret&quot;

In addition, the following changes are made in other prayers:
* Omission of &quot;Tachanun&quot; and &quot;Nefilat Appayim&quot; from the Mincha service
* Omission of the six Psalms before Friday night services
* Spices are omitted from use in the home of a mourner during Havdalah (the end of shabbat).

==See also==
*Bereavement in Judaism
*Shemira

==References==
==External links==
* Judaica Guide: Sitting Shivah
* Aish.com: Shiva &amp; Mourning</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1814631" start="0" end="0" title="Shiva (Judaism)" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q2524956" start="21" end="29" title="bereavement in Judaism" label="mourning"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="40" end="47" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814631" start="111" end="118" title="Shiva (Judaism)" label="sitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q331055" start="923" end="929" title="burial" label="burial"/>
<link wikidata="Q107427" start="951" end="959" title="Halakha" label="halakhic"/>
<link wikidata="Q289957" start="1776" end="1781" title="Jacob" label="Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q471788" start="1791" end="1797" title="Joseph" label="Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q471788" start="1904" end="1910" title="Joseph" label="Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624172" start="1941" end="1946" title="sages" label="sages"/>
<link wikidata="Q377485" start="1972" end="1983" title="Mount Sinai" label="Mount Sinai"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577" start="1992" end="2003" title="Book of Job" label="Book of Job"/>
<link wikidata="Q179962" start="2023" end="2026" title="Job (biblical figure)" label="Job"/>
<link wikidata="Q213850" start="2219" end="2223" title="Amos (prophet)" label="Amos"/>
<link wikidata="Q51676" start="2474" end="2479" title="Aaron" label="Aaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524956" start="2746" end="2752" title="Aninut" label="Aninut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524956" start="3076" end="3082" title="keriah" label="keriah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524956" start="3655" end="3664" title="sheloshim" label="sheloshim"/>
<link wikidata="Q732195" start="4500" end="4507" title="Kaddish" label="Kaddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006856" start="4591" end="4599" title="yahrzeit" label="yahrzeit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916920" start="4639" end="4645" title="yizkor" label="yizkor"/>
<link wikidata="Q261050" start="5082" end="5091" title="shacharit" label="shacharit"/>
<link wikidata="Q94920" start="6864" end="6878" title="Jewish holiday" label="Jewish holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q102477" start="7050" end="7057" title="Shabbat" label="Shabbat"/>
<link wikidata="Q121393" start="7536" end="7544" title="Passover" label="Passover"/>
<link wikidata="Q201196" start="7853" end="7860" title="Shavuot" label="Shavuot"/>
<link wikidata="Q182242" start="8158" end="8164" title="Sukkot" label="Sukkot"/>
<link wikidata="Q932711" start="8384" end="8399" title="Shemini Atzeret" label="Shemini Atzeret"/>
<link wikidata="Q431678" start="8479" end="8492" title="Simchat Torah" label="Simchat Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q131028" start="8636" end="8649" title="Rosh Hashanah" label="Rosh Hashanah"/>
<link wikidata="Q132994" start="8763" end="8773" title="Yom Kippur" label="Yom Kippur"/>
<link wikidata="Q131028" start="8784" end="8797" title="Rosh Hashanah" label="Rosh Hashanah"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9226" end="9233" title="Jewish holidays#General concepts" label="Yom Tov"/>
<link wikidata="Q182242" start="9377" end="9383" title="Sukkot" label="Sukkot"/>
<link wikidata="Q383917" start="9416" end="9427" title="Chol HaMoed" label="Chol HaMoed"/>
<link wikidata="Q383917" start="9472" end="9483" title="Chol HaMoed" label="Chol HaMoed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524956" start="10187" end="10193" title="keriah" label="keriah"/>
<link wikidata="Q794587" start="10283" end="10289" title="tefach" label="tefach"/>
<link wikidata="Q265424" start="12097" end="12104" title="mitzvah" label="mitzvah"/>
<link wikidata="Q380427" start="13265" end="13277" title="Judah HaNasi" label="Judah HaNasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577" start="16966" end="16977" title="Book of Job" label="Book of Job"/>
<link wikidata="Q107427" start="17294" end="17302" title="Halakhah" label="Halakhah"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="17757" end="17771" title="Sephardic Jews" label="Sephardic Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q212950" start="17809" end="17815" title="Tallit" label="Tallit"/>
<link wikidata="Q657993" start="17821" end="17834" title="Yemenite Jews" label="Yemenite Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="17957" end="17963" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111039" start="17971" end="17987" title="Mo&amp;#x27;ed Katan" label="Mo&amp;#x27;ed Katan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="18058" end="18067" title="Ashkenazi" label="Ashkenazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q931732" start="18145" end="18157" title="Poskim" label="adjudicators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691747" start="18202" end="18215" title="Bayis Chadash" label="Bayit Chadash"/>
<link wikidata="Q913414" start="18233" end="18244" title="Turei Zahav" label="Ṭurei Zahav"/>
<link wikidata="Q472619" start="18262" end="18274" title="Shabbatai HaKohen" label="Siftei Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q950371" start="19571" end="19577" title="minyan" label="minyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q732195" start="19894" end="19901" title="Kaddish" label="Kaddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="20702" end="20711" title="Ashkenazi" label="Ashkenazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="20752" end="20761" title="Sephardic" label="Sephardic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21137" end="21143" title="Bereavement in Judaism#Yizkor" label="Yizkor"/>
<link wikidata="Q205644" start="21517" end="21529" title="Conservative Judaism" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q339284" start="21531" end="21548" title="Reconstructionist Judaism" label="Reconstructionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133485" start="21553" end="21559" title="Reform Judaism" label="Reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="21883" end="21888" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350579" start="21997" end="22009" title="Torah scroll" label="Torah scroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q261050" start="22123" end="22132" title="Shacharit" label="Shacharit"/>
<link wikidata="Q302997" start="22208" end="22225" title="Priestly Blessing" label="Priestly Blessing"/>
<link wikidata="Q913852" start="22252" end="22264" title="Rosh Chodesh" label="Rosh Chodesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q678866" start="22460" end="22468" title="Psalm 20" label="Psalm 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115607" start="22495" end="22504" title="Psalm 90" label="Psalms 90"/>
<link wikidata="Q1696393" start="22531" end="22539" title="Psalm 49" label="Psalm 49"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431602" start="22668" end="22676" title="Psalm 16" label="Psalm 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q1696393" start="22693" end="22701" title="Psalm 49" label="Psalm 49"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703118" start="22721" end="22729" title="Tachanun" label="Tachanun"/>
<link wikidata="Q259070" start="22922" end="22928" title="Mincha" label="Mincha"/>
<link wikidata="Q572515" start="23057" end="23065" title="Havdalah" label="Havdalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524956" start="23103" end="23125" title="Bereavement in Judaism" label="Bereavement in Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494086" start="23127" end="23134" title="Shemira" label="Shemira"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29381" wikidata="Q1936841" url="?curid=29381" title="Semi-trailer truck">
<text>A semi-trailer truck (also known by a wide variety of other terms – see below) is the combination of a tractor unit and one or more semi-trailers to carry freight. A semi-trailer attaches to the tractor with a type of hitch called a &quot;fifth wheel&quot;.

== Other terms ==
There are a wide variety of English-language terms for a semi-trailer truck, including:

=== American English ===
*Semi-trailer
*Semi-truck
*Truck &amp; trailer
*Semi 
*Big rig
*Tractor-trailer
*Eighteen-wheeler

=== British English ===
* Articulated lorry
* Artic (short for articulated)
* Juggernaut

=== Canadian English ===
*Transport truck
*Transfer truck

== Regional configurations ==
=== Europe ===
The main difference between tractor units in Europe and North America is that European models are cab over engine (COE, called &quot;forward control&quot; in the United Kingdom), while the majority of North American trucks are &quot;conventional&quot; (called &quot;normal control&quot; or &quot;bonneted&quot; in the UK). European trucks, whether straight trucks or fully articulated, have a sheer face on the front. This allows shorter trucks with longer trailers (with larger freight capacity) within the legal maximum total length. Furthermore, it offers greater maneuverability in confined areas, a more balanced weight-distribution, and better overall view for the driver. The major disadvantage is that for repairs on COE trucks, the entire cab has to hinge forward to allow maintenance access.

In Europe, usually only the driven tractor axle has dual wheels, while single wheels are used for every other axle on the tractor and the trailer. The most common combination used in Europe is a semi tractor with two axles and a cargo trailer with three axles, one of which is sometimes a lift axle, giving 5 axles and 12 wheels in total. This format is now common across Europe as it is able to meet the EU maximum weight limit of without overloading any axle. Individual countries have raised their own weight limit. The U.K., for example, has a limit, an increase achieved by adding an extra axle to the tractor, usually in the form of a middle unpowered lifting axle (midlift) with a total of 14 wheels. The lift axles used on both tractors and trailers allow the trucks to remain legal when fully loaded (as weight per axle remains within the legal limits); on the other hand, these axle set(s) can be raised off the roadway for increased maneuverability or for reduced fuel consumption and tire wear when carrying lighter loads. Although lift axles usually operate automatically, they can be lowered manually even while carrying light loads, in order to remain within legal (safe) limits when, for example, navigating back-road bridges with severely restricted axle loads. &quot;For greater detail, see the United Kingdom section, below.&quot;

When using a dolly, which generally has to be equipped with lights and a license plate, rigid trucks can be used to pull semi-trailers. The dolly is equipped with a fifth wheel to which the trailer is coupled. Because the dolly attaches to a pintle hitch on the truck, maneuvering a trailer hooked to a dolly is different from maneuvering a fifth wheel trailer. Backing the vehicle requires the same technique as backing an ordinary truck/full trailer combination, though the dolly/semi setup is probably longer, thus requiring more space for maneuvering. The tractor/semi-trailer configuration is rarely used on timber trucks since they use the two major advantages of having the weight of the load on the drive wheels, and the loader crane used to lift the logs from the ground can be mounted on the rear of the truck behind the load, allowing a short (lightweight) crane to reach both ends of the vehicle without uncoupling. Also, construction trucks are more often seen in a rigid + midaxle trailer configuration instead of the tractor/semi-trailer setup.

====Continental Europe====

The maximum overall length in the EU and EEA member states was with a maximum weight of if carrying an ISO container. However, rules limiting the semi-trailers to and 18.75 m are met with trucks carrying a standardized body with one additional 7.82 m body on tow as a trailer. truck combinations were developed under the branding of &quot;EcoCombi&quot; which influenced the name of &quot;EuroCombi&quot; for an ongoing standardization effort where such truck combinations shall be legal to operate in all jurisdictions of the European Economic Area. With the 50% increase in cargo weight, the fuel efficiency increases an average of 20% with a corresponding relative decrease in carbon emissions and with the added benefit of one third fewer trucks on the road. The 1996 EU regulation defines a Europe Module System (EMS) as it was implemented in Sweden. The wording of EMS combinations and EuroCombi are now used interchangeably to point to truck combinations as specified in the EU document; however, apart from Sweden and Finland, the EuroCombi is only allowed to operate on specific roads in other EU member states. Since 1996 Sweden and Finland formally won a final exemption from the European Economic Area rules with 60 tonne and combinations. From 2006, 25.25 m truck trailer combinations are to be allowed on restricted routes within Germany, following a similar (on-going) trial in The Netherlands. Similarly, Denmark has allowed 25.25 m combinations on select routes. These vehicles will run a weight limit. Two types are to be used: 1) a 26-tonne truck pulling a dolly and semi-trailer, or 2) an articulated tractor unit pulling a B-double, member states gained the ability to adopt the same rules. In Italy the maximum permitted weight (unless exceptional transport is authorized) is 44 tonnes for any kind of combination with five axles or more. Czech Republic has allowed 25.25 m combinations with a permission for a selected route.

====Nordic countries====
Denmark and Norway allow trucks (Denmark from 2008, and Norway from 2008 on selected routes). In Sweden, the allowed length has been since 1967. Before that, the maximum length was unlimited; the only limitations were on axle load. What stopped Sweden from adopting the same rules as the rest of Europe, when securing road safety, was the national importance of a competitive forestry industry. Finland, with the same road safety issues and equally important forestry industry, followed suit. The change made trucks able to carry three stacks of cut-to-length logs instead of two, as it would be in a short combination. They have one stack together with a crane on the 6×4 truck, and two additional stacks on a four axle trailer. The allowed gross weight in both countries is up to depending on the distance between the first and last axle.

In the negotiations starting in the late 1980s preceding Sweden and Finland&#x27;s entries to the European Economic Area and later the European Union, they insisted on exemptions from the EU rules citing environmental concerns and the transportation needs of the logging industry. In 1995, after their entry to the union, the rules changed again, this time to allow trucks carrying a standard CEN unit of to draw a standard semi-trailer on a dolly, a total overall length of 25.25 m. Later, B-double combinations came into use, often with one container on the B-link and a container (or two containers) on a semi-trailer bed. In allowing the longer truck combinations, what would take two semi-trailer trucks and one truck and trailer to haul on the continent now could be handled by just two 25.25 m trucks – greatly reducing overall costs and emissions. Prepared since late 2012 and effective in January 2013, Finland has changed its regulations to allow total maximum legal weight of a combination to be . At the same time the maximum allowed height would be increased by ; from current maximum of to . The effect this major maximum weight increase would cause to the roads and bridges in Finland over time is strongly debated.
However, longer and heavier combinations are regularly seen on public roads; special permits are issued for special cargo. The mining company Boliden AB have a standing special permit for combinations on select routes between mines in the inland and the processing plant in Boliden, taking a load of ore. Volvo has a special permit for a , steering B-trailer-trailer combination carrying two containers to and from Gothenburg harbour and the Volvo Trucks factory, all on the island of Hisingen. Another example is the ongoing project &quot;En Trave Till&quot; (lit. &quot;One more pile/stack&quot;) started in December 2008. It will allow even longer vehicles to further rationalize the logging transports. As the name of the project points out, it will be able to carry four stacks of timber, instead of the usual three. The test is limited to Norrbotten county and the European route E4 between the timber terminal in Överkalix and the sawmill in Munksund (outside Piteå). The vehicle is a long truck trailer combination with a gross weight exceeding . It is estimated that this will give a 20% lower cost and 20–25% emissions reduction compared to the regular truck combinations. As the combination spreads its weight over more axles, braking distance, road wear and traffic safety is believed to be either the same or improved with the truck-trailer. In the same program two types of combinations will be tested in Dalsland and Bohuslän counties in western Sweden: an enhanced truck and trailer combination for use in the forest and a b-double for plain highway transportation to the mill in Skoghall. In 2012, the Northland Mining company received permission for combinations with normal axle load (an extra dolly) for use on the Kaunisvaara-Svappavaara route, carrying iron ore.

, the longest and heaviest truck in everyday use in Finland is operated by transport company Ketosen Kuljetus as part of a pilot project studying transport efficiency in the timber industry. The combined vehicle is long, has 13 axles, and weighs a total of .

Starting from 21 January 2019 the Government of Finland changed the maximum allowed length of truck from . New types of vehicle combinations that differ from the current standards may also be used on the road. The requirements for combinations also include camera systems for side visibility, an advanced emergency braking and lane detector system, electronic driving stability system and electronically controlled brakes. Maximum length of a vehicle combination 34.5 metres Maximum length of a vehicle combination 34.5 metres

====United Kingdom====
In the United Kingdom, a semi-trailer truck is known as an &#x27;articulated lorry&#x27; (or colloquially as an &#x27;artic&#x27;). The maximum permitted gross weight of a semi-trailer truck without the use of a Special Type General Order (STGO) is . In order for a 44,000 kg semi-trailer truck to be permitted on UK roads the tractor and semi-trailer must have three or more axles each. Lower weight semi-trailer trucks can mean some tractors and trailer having fewer axles. In practice, as with double decker buses and coaches in the UK, there is no legal height limit for semi-trailer trucks; however, bridges over do not have the height marked on them. Semi-trailer trucks in continental Europe have a height limit of . Vehicles heavier than 44,000 kg are permitted on UK roads but are indivisible loads, which would be classed as abnormal (or oversize). Such vehicles are required to display an STGO (Special Types General Order) plate on the front of the tractor unit and, under certain circumstances, are required to travel by an authorized route and have an escort.

Most UK trailers are long and, dependent on the position of the fifth wheel and kingpin, a coupled tractor unit and trailer will have a combined length of between . Although the Construction and Use Regulations allow a maximum rigid length of , this, combined with a shallow kingpin and fifth wheel set close to the rear of the tractor unit, can give an overall length of around .

In January 2012, the Department for Transport began conducting a trial of longer semi-trailers. The trial involves 900 semi-trailers of in length (i.e. longer than the current maximum), and a further 900 semi-trailers of in length (i.e. longer). This will result in the total maximum length of the semi-trailer truck being for trailers in length, and for trailers long. The increase in length will not result in the weight limit being exceeded and will allow some operators to approach the weight limit which may not have been previously possible due to the previous length of trailers. The trial will run for a maximum of 10 years. Providing certain requirements are fulfilled, a Special Types General Order (STGO) allows for vehicles of any size or weight to travel on UK roads. However, in practice, any such vehicle has to travel by a route authorized by the Department of Transport and move under escort. The escort of abnormal loads in the UK is now predominantly carried out by private companies, but extremely large or heavy loads that require road closures must still be escorted by the police.

In the UK, some semi-trailer trucks have eight tyres on three axles on the tractor; these are known as six-wheelers or &quot;six leggers,&quot; with either the centre or rear axle having single wheels which normally steer as well as the front axle and can be raised when not needed (i.e. when unloaded or only a light load is being carried; an arrangement known as a TAG axle when it is the rear axle, or mid-lift when it is the center axle). Some trailers have two axles which have twin tyres on each axle; other trailers have three axles, of which one axle can be a lift axle which has super-single wheels. In the UK, two wheels bolted to the same hub are classed as a single wheel, therefore a standard six-axle articulated truck is considered to have twelve wheels, even though it has twenty tyres. The UK also allows semi-trailer truck which have six tyres on two axles; these are known as four-wheelers.

In 2009, the operator Denby Transport designed and built a B-Train (or B-Double) semi-trailer truck called the Denby Eco-Link to show the benefits of such a vehicle, which were a reduction in road accidents and result in fewer road deaths, a reduction in emissions due to the one tractor unit still being used and no further highway investment being required. Furthermore, Denby Transport asserted that two Eco-Links would replace three standard semi-trailer trucks while, if limited to the current UK weight limit of , it was claimed the Eco-Link would reduce carbon emissions by 16% and could still halve the number of trips needed for the same amount of cargo carried in conventional semi-trailer trucks. This is based on the fact that for light but bulky goods such as toilet paper, plastic bottles, cereals and aluminum cans, conventional semi-trailer trucks run out of cargo space before they reach the weight limit. At , as opposed to usually associated with B-Trains, the Eco-Link also exerts less weight per axle on the road compared to the standard six-axle semi-trailer truck.

The vehicle was built after Denby Transport believed they had found a legal-loophole in the present UK law to allow the Eco-Link to be used on the public roads. The relevant legislation concerned the 1986 Road Vehicles Construction and Use Regulations. The 1986 regulations state that &quot;certain vehicles&quot; may be permitted to draw more than one trailer and can be up to . The point of law reportedly hinged on the definition of a &quot;towing implement&quot;, with Denby prepared to argue that the second trailer on the Eco-Link was one. The Department for Transport were of the opinion that this refers to recovering a vehicle after an accident or breakdown, but the regulation does not explicitly state this.

During BTAC performance testing the Eco-Link was given an &quot;excellent&quot; rating for its performance in maneuverability, productivity, safety and emissions tests, exceeding ordinary semi-trailer trucks in many respects. Reportedly, private trials had also shown the Denby vehicle had a 20% shorter stopping distance than conventional semi-trailer trucks of the same weight, due to having extra axles. The active steer system meant that the Eco-Link had a turning circle of , the same as a conventional semi-trailer truck.

Although the Department for Transport advised that the Eco-Link was not permissible on public roads, Denby Transport gave the Police prior warning of the timing and route of the test drive on the public highway, as well as outlining their position in writing to the Eastern Traffic Area Office. On 1 December 2009 Denby Transport were preparing to drive the Eco-Link on public roads, but this was cut short because the Police pulled the semi-trailer truck over as it left the gates in order to test it for its legality &quot;to investigate any... offenses which may be found&quot;. The Police said the vehicle was unlawful due to its length and Denby Transport was served with a notice by the Vehicle and Operator Services Agency (VOSA) inspector to remove the vehicle from the road for inspection. Having returned to the yard, Denby Transport was formally notified by Police and VOSA that the semi-trailer truck could not be used. Neither the Eco-Link, nor any other B-Train, have since been permitted on UK roads. However, this prompted the Department for Transport to undertake a desk study into semi-trailer trucks, which has resulted in the longer semi-trailer trial which commenced in 2012.

===North America===

In North America, the combination vehicles made up of a powered semi-tractor and one or more semitrailers are known as &quot;semis&quot;, &quot;semitrailers&quot;, &quot;tractor-trailers&quot;, &quot;big rigs&quot;, &quot;semi-trucks&quot;, &quot;eighteen-wheelers&quot;, or &quot;semi-tractor-trailers&quot;.

The tractor unit typically has two or three axles; those built for hauling heavy-duty commercial-construction machinery may have as many as five, some often being lift axles.

The most common tractor-cab layout has a forward engine, one steering axle, and two drive axles. The fifth-wheel trailer coupling on most tractor trucks is movable fore and aft, to allow adjustment in the weight distribution over its rear axle(s).

Ubiquitous in Europe but less common in North America since the 1990s, is the cabover engine configuration, where the driver sits next to or over the engine. With changes in the US to the maximum length of the combined vehicle, the cabover was largely phased out of North American over-the-road (long-haul) service by 2007. Cabovers were difficult to service; for a long time, the cab could not be lifted on its hinges to a full 90-degree forward tilt, severely limiting access to the front of the engine.

, a truck could cost , while the diesel fuel cost could be $70,000 per year. Trucks average from , with fuel economy standards requiring better than efficiency by 2014. Power requirements in standard conditions are at or at , and somewhat different power usage in other conditions.

The cargo trailer usually has tandem axles at the rear, each of which has dual wheels, or eight tires on the trailer, four per axle. In the US it is common to refer to the number of wheel hubs, rather than the number of tires; an axle can have either single or dual tires with no legal difference. The combination of eight tires on the trailer and ten tires on the tractor is what led to the moniker &quot;eighteen wheeler&quot;, although this term is considered by some truckers to be a misnomer (the term &quot;eighteen-wheeler&quot; is a nickname for a five-axle over-the-road combination). Many trailers are equipped with movable tandem axles to allow adjusting the weight distribution.

To connect the second of a set of doubles to the first trailer, and to support the front half of the second trailer, a converter gear known as a &quot;dolly&quot; is used. This has one or two axles, a fifth-wheel coupling for the rear trailer, and a tongue with a ring-hitch coupling for the forward trailer. Individual states may further allow longer vehicles, known as &quot;longer combination vehicles&quot; (or LCVs), and may allow them to operate on roads other than Interstates.

Long combination vehicle types include:

* Doubles (officially &quot;STAA doubles&quot;, known colloquially as &quot;a set of joints&quot;): Two trailers.
* B-Doubles: Twin trailers in B-double configuration (very common in Canada but rarely used in the United States).

* Triples: Three trailers.

* Turnpike Doubles: Two – trailers.
* Rocky Mountain Doubles: One trailer (though usually no more than ) and one trailer (known as a &quot;pup&quot;).
* In Canada, a Turnpike Double is two trailers, and a Rocky Mountain Double is a trailer with a &quot;pup&quot;.

The US federal government, which only regulates the Interstate Highway System, does not set maximum length requirements (except on auto and boat transporters), only minimums. Tractors can pull two or three trailers if the combination is legal in that state. Weight maximums are on a single axle, on a tandem, and total for any vehicle or combination. There is a maximum width of and no maximum height.

Roads other than Interstates are regulated by individual states, and laws vary widely. Maximum weight varies between to , depending on the combination. Most states restrict operation of larger tandem trailer setups such as triple units, turnpike doubles, and Rocky Mountain doubles. Reasons for limiting the legal trailer configurations include safety concerns and the impracticality of designing and constructing roads that can accommodate the larger wheelbase of these vehicles and the larger minimum turning radii associated with them. In general, these configurations are restricted to the Interstates. Except for these units, double setups are not restricted to certain roads any more than a single setup. They are also not restricted by weather conditions or &quot;difficulty of operation&quot;. The Canadian province of Ontario, however, does have weather-related operating restrictions for larger tandem trailer setups.

===Oceania===
====Australia====
Australian road transport has a reputation for using very large trucks and road trains. This is reflected in the most popular configurations of trucks generally having dual drive axles and three axles on the trailers, with four tyres on each axle. This means that Australian single semi-trailer trucks will usually have 22 tyres, which is generally more than their counterparts in other countries. Super single tyres are sometimes used on tri-axle trailers. The suspension is designed with travel limiting, which will hold the rim off the road for one blown or deflated tyre for each side of the trailer, so a trailer can be driven at reduced speed to a safe place for repair. Super singles are also often used on the steer axle in Australia to allow greater loading over the steer axle. The increase in loading of steer tyres requires a permit.

Long haul transport usually operates as B-doubles with two trailers (each with three axles), for a total of nine axles (including steering). In some lighter duty applications, only one of the rear axles of the truck is driven, and the trailer may have only two axles. From July 2007, the Australian Federal and State Governments allowed the introduction of B-triple trucks on a specified network of roads. B-Triples are set up differently from conventional road trains. The front of their first trailer is supported by the turntable on the prime mover. The second and third trailers are supported by turntables on the trailers in front of them. As a result, B-Triples are much more stable than road trains and handle exceptionally well. True road trains only operate in remote areas, regulated by each state or territory government.

In total, the maximum length that any articulated vehicle may be (without a special permit and escort) is , its maximum load may be up to 164 tonnes gross, and may have up to four trailers. However, heavy restrictions apply to the areas where such a vehicle may travel in most states. In remote areas such as the Northern Territory great care must be taken when sharing the road with longer articulated vehicles that often travel during the daytime, especially four-trailer road trains.

Articulated trucks towing a single trailer or two trailers (commonly known as &quot;short doubles&quot;) with a maximum overall length of are referred to as &quot;General access heavy vehicles&quot; and are permitted in all areas, including metropolitan. B-doubles are limited to a maximum total weight of 62.5 tonnes and overall length of , or if they are fitted with approved FUPS (Front Underrun Protection System) devices. B-doubles may only operate on designated roads, which includes most highways and some major metropolitan roads. B-doubles are very common in all parts of Australia including state capitals and on major routes they outnumber single trailer configurations.

Maximum width of any vehicle is and a height of . In the past few years, allowance has been made by several states to allow certain designs of heavy vehicles up to high but they are also restricted to designated routes. In effect, a 4.6 meter high B-double will have to follow two sets of rules: they may access only those roads that are permitted for B-doubles &quot;and&quot; for 4.6 meter high vehicles.

In Australia, both conventional prime movers and cabovers are common, however, cabovers are most often seen on B-doubles on the eastern seaboard where the reduction in total length allows the vehicle to pull longer trailers and thus more cargo than it would otherwise.

====New Zealand====
New Zealand legislation governing truck dimensions falls under the Vehicle Dimensions and Mass Rules, published by NZ Transport Agency. New rules were introduced effective 1 February 2017, which increased the maximum height, width and weight of loads and vehicles, to simplify regulations, increase the amount of freight carried by road, and to improve the range of vehicles and trailers available to transport operators.

Common combinations in New Zealand are a standard semi-trailer, a B-double, or a rigid towing vehicle pulling a trailer with a drawbar, with a maximum of nine axles. Standard maximum vehicle lengths for trailers with one axle set are:
* Semi-trailer: 
* Simple: 
* Pole: 
Trailers with two axle sets can be long, including heavy rigid vehicles towing two trailers.
Oversized loads require, at minimum, a permit, and may require one or more pilot vehicles.

High-productivity motor vehicle (HPMV) permits are issued for vehicles exceeding 44 tonnes, or the above dimensions. Trucks up to 62 tonnes were allowed, with an initial bridge strengthening program costing $12.5m.

==Construction ==
===Types of trailers===

There are many types of semi-trailers in use, designed to haul a wide range of products.

* Box, or dry van
* Bus
* Car hauler
* Intermodal chassis
* Dry bulk
* Dump
* Flatbed
* Hopper-Bottom
* Lowboy
* Refrigerator 
** Reefer
* Tanker
===Coupling and uncoupling===
The cargo trailer is, by means of a king pin, hooked to a horseshoe-shaped quick-release coupling device called a fifth wheel or a turntable hitch at the rear of the towing engine that allows easy hook up and release. The truck trailer cannot move by itself because it only has wheels at the rear end: it requires a forward axle, provided by the towing engine, to carry half the load weight. When braking hard at high speeds, the vehicle has a tendency to fold at the pivot point between the towing vehicle and the trailer. Such a truck accident is called a &quot;trailer swing&quot;, although it is also commonly described as a &quot;jackknife.&quot; Jackknifing is a condition where the tractive unit swings round against the trailer, and not vice versa.

===Braking===

Semi trucks use air pressure, rather than hydraulic fluid, to actuate the brake. The use of air hoses allows for ease of coupling and uncoupling of trailers from the tractor unit. The most common failure is &quot;brake fade&quot;, usually caused when the drums or discs and the linings of the brakes overheat from excessive use.

The parking brake of the tractor unit and the emergency brake of the trailer are spring brakes that require air pressure in order to be released. They are applied when air pressure is released from the system, and disengaged when air pressure is supplied. This is a fail-safe design feature which ensures that if air pressure to either unit is lost, the vehicle will stop to a grinding halt, instead of continuing without brakes and becoming uncontrollable. The trailer controls are coupled to the tractor through two &quot;gladhand connectors&quot;, which provide air pressure, and an electrical cable, which provides power to the lights and any specialized features of the trailer.

&quot;Glad-hand connectors&quot; (also known as &quot;palm couplings&quot;) are air hose connectors, each of which has a flat engaging face and retaining tabs. The faces are placed together, and the units are rotated so that the tabs engage each other to hold the connectors together. This arrangement provides a secure connection but allows the couplers to break away without damaging the equipment if they are pulled, as may happen when the tractor and trailer are separated without first uncoupling the air lines. These connectors are similar in design to the ones used for a similar purpose between railroad cars. Two air lines typically connect to the trailer unit. An &quot;emergency&quot; or &quot;main&quot; air supply line pressurizes the trailer&#x27;s air tank and disengages the emergency brake, and a second &quot;service&quot; line controls the brake application during normal operation.

In the UK, male/female quick release connectors (&quot;red line&quot; or emergency), have a female on the truck and male on the trailer, but a &quot;yellow line&quot; or service has a male on the truck and female on the trailer. This avoids coupling errors (causing no brakes) plus the connections will not come apart if pulled by accident. The three electrical lines will fit one way around a primary black, a secondary green, and an ABS lead, all of which are collectively known as &quot;suzies&quot; or &quot;suzie coils&quot;.

In New Zealand all trucks and trailers use a DUOMATIC air coupler which has female receivers mounted on the truck/tractor and on the trailer, and male on both ends of the suzie lines (they can be completely removed and stored in the cab to prevent theft). Connecting the red and blue lines is one operation at each end. The red and blue lines are always on the same side of every fitting so they can never hook up in reverse or the wrong way around. The same system is used in Europe.

Another braking feature of semi-trucks is engine braking, which could be either a compression brake (usually shortened to &quot;Jake brake&quot;) or exhaust brake or combination of both. However, the use of compression brake alone produces a loud and distinctive noise, and to control noise pollution, some local municipalities have prohibited or restricted the use of engine brake systems inside their jurisdictions, particularly in residential areas. The advantage to using engine braking instead of conventional brakes is that a truck can descend a long grade without overheating its wheel brakes. Some vehicles can also be equipped with hydraulic or electric retarders which have an advantage of near silent operation.

===Transmission===

Because of the wide variety of loads the semi may carry, they usually have a manual transmission to allow the driver to have as much control as possible. However, all truck manufacturers now offer automated manual transmissions (manual gearboxes with automated gear change), as well as conventional hydraulic automatic transmissions.

Semi-truck transmissions can have as few as three forward speeds or as many as 18 forward speeds (plus 2 reverse speeds). A large number of transmission ratios means the driver can operate the engine more efficiently. Modern on-highway diesel engines are designed to provide maximum torque in a narrow RPM range (usually 1200–1500 RPM); having more gear ratios means the driver can hold the engine in its optimum range regardless of road speed (drive axle ratio must also be considered).

A ten-speed manual transmission, for example, is controlled via a six-slot H-box pattern, similar to that in five-speed cars — five forward and one reverse gear. Gears six to ten (and high-speed reverse) are accessed by a Lo/High range splitter; gears one to five are Lo range; gears six to ten are High range using the same shift pattern. A Super-10 transmission, by contrast, has no range splitter; it uses alternating &quot;stick and button&quot; shifting (stick shifts 1-3-5-7-9, button shifts 2-4-6-8-10). The 13-, 15-, and 18-speed transmissions have the same basic shift pattern but include a splitter button to enable additional ratios found in each range. Some transmissions may have 12 speeds.

Another difference between semi-trucks and cars is the way the clutch is set up. On an automobile, the clutch pedal is depressed full stroke to the floor for every gear shift, to ensure the gearbox is disengaged from the engine. On a semi-truck with constant-mesh transmission (non-synchronized), such as by the Eaton Roadranger series, not only is double-clutching required, but a clutch brake is required as well. The clutch brake stops the rotation of the gears and allows the truck to be put into gear without grinding when stationary. The clutch is pressed to the floor only to allow a smooth engagement of low gears when starting from a full stop; when the truck is moving, the clutch pedal is pressed only far enough to break torque for gear changes.

Theoretically, semi-trucks could have diesel-electric transmission, as electric motors have better torque at 0 RPM than diesel engines, but this would significantly increase the weight of the truck itself, above the maximum legal weight for road vehicles.

===Lights===
An electrical connection is made between the tractor and the trailer through a cable often referred to as a &quot;pigtail&quot;. This cable is a bundle of wires in a single casing. Each wire controls one of the electrical circuits on the trailer, such as running lights, brake lights, turn signals, etc. A coiled cable is used which retracts these coils when not under tension, such as when not cornering. It is these coils that cause the cable to look like a pigtail.

In most countries, a trailer or semi-trailer must have minimum
* 2 rear lights (red)
* 2 stop lights (red)
* 2 turning lights; one for right and one for left, flashing (amber; red optional in North America. May be combined with a brake light in North America)
* 2 marking lights behind if wider than certain specifications (red; plus a group of 3 red lights in the middle in North America)
* 2 marking lights front if wider than the truck or wider than certain specifications (white; amber in North America)

===Wheels and tires===
Although dual wheels are the most common, use of two single, wider tires, known as &quot;super singles&quot;, on each axle is becoming popular among bulk cargo carriers and other weight-sensitive operators. With increased efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, the use of the super-single tire is gaining popularity. There are several advantages to this configuration. The first of these is that super singles reduce fuel consumption. In 1999, tests on an oval track showed a 10% fuel savings when super singles were used. These savings are realized because less energy is wasted flexing fewer tire sidewalls. Second, the lighter overall tire weight allows a truck to be loaded with more freight. The third advantage is that the single wheel encloses less of the brake unit, which allows faster cooling and reduces brake fade.

In Europe, super singles became popular when the allowed weight of semitrailer rigs was increased from 38 to 40 tonnes. In this reform the trailer industry replaced two axles with dual wheels, with three axles on wide-base single wheels. The significantly lower axle weight on super singles must be considered when comparing road wear from single versus dual wheels. The majority of super singles sold in Europe have a width of . The standard 385 tires have a legal load limit of . (Note that expensive, specially reinforced 385 tires approved for do exist. Their market share is tiny, except for mounting on the steer axle.)

===Skirted trailers===

An innovation rapidly growing in popularity is the skirted trailer. The space between the road and the bottom of the trailer frame was traditionally left open until it was realized that the turbulent air swirling under the trailer is a major source of aerodynamic drag. Three split skirt concepts were verified by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to provide fuel savings greater than 5%, and four split skirt concepts had EPA-verified fuel savings between 4% and 5%.

Skirted trailers are often combined with Underrun Protection Systems (&quot;underride guards&quot;), greatly improving safety for passenger vehicles sharing the road.

===Underride guard===
Underride protection systems can be installed at the rear, front and sides of a truck and the rear and sides of a trailer. A Rear Underrun Protection System (RUPS) is a rigid assembly hanging down from trailer&#x27;s chassis, which is intended to provide some protection for passenger cars which collide with the rear of the trailer. Public awareness of this safeguard was increased in the aftermath of the accident that killed actress Jayne Mansfield on 29 June 1967, when the car she was in hit the rear of a tractor-trailer, causing fatal head trauma. After her death, the NHTSA proposed requiring a rear underride guard, also known as a &quot;Mansfield bar&quot;, an &quot;ICC bar&quot;, or a &quot;DOT bumper&quot;. The proposal to mandate rear underride guards was withdrawn in 1971 after strong lobbying and opposition by the trucking industry, and so they were not federally-mandated until 1996; that mandate did not go into effect until 1998.

The bottom rear of the trailer is near head level for an adult seated in a car, and without the underride guard, the only protection for such an adult&#x27;s head in a rear-end collision would be the car&#x27;s windshield and A pillars. The front of the car goes under the platform of the trailer rather than making contact via the passenger car bumper, so the car&#x27;s protective crush zone becomes irrelevant and air bags are ineffective in protecting the passengers. If installed, the underride guard can provide a rigid area for the car to contact that is lower than the lip of the bonnet/hood, thus preventing the vehicle from squatting and running under the truck, instead ensuring that the vehicle&#x27;s crush zones and engine block can absorb the force of the collision.

In addition to rear underride guards, truck tractor cabs may be equipped with a Front Underrun Protection System (FUPS) at the front bumper of the truck, if the front end is not low enough for the bumper to provide the adequate protection on its own. The safest tractor-trailers are also equipped with side underride guards, also called Side Underrun Protection System (SUPS). These additional barriers prevent passenger cars from skidding underneath the trailer from the side, such as in an oblique or side collision, or if the trailer jackknifes across the road, and this also helps protect cyclists, pedestrians, and other vulnerable road users. In the 1969 proposal for rear underride guards, the Federal Highway Administration indicated that, &quot;It is anticipated that the proposed [rear underride guard] standard will be amended, after technical studies have been completed, to extend the requirement for underride protection to the sides of large vehicles&quot;. However, to date, a side underride guard mandate has yet to ever be proposed by the USDOT or NHTSA. In fact, for side underride guards, NHTSA has disregarded successful crash tests that stop a passenger vehicle from underriding a semitrailer, ignored recommendations, disregarded administrative petitions, and denied petitions.  In fact, for decades NHTSA has ignored credible scientific research on side underride guards and failed to take simple steps to stop these crashes.

In Europe, side and rear underrun protection are mandated on all lorries and trailers with a gross weight of or more. Several US states and cities have adopted or are in the process of adopting truck side guards, including New York City, Philadelphia, and Washington DC. The NTSB has recommended that the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) develop standards for side underride protection systems for trucks, and for newly manufactured trucks to be equipped with technology meeting the standards.

In addition to safety benefits, these underride guards may improve fuel mileage by reducing air turbulence under the trailer at highway speeds. Another benefit of having a sturdy rear underride guard is that it may be secured to a loading dock with a hook to prevent &quot;trailer creep&quot;, a movement of the trailer away from the dock, which opens up a dangerous gap during loading or unloading operations.

==Semi-truck manufacturers ==
Current semi-truck manufacturers include:

===Asia-Pacific===

* Ashok Leyland (India)
* BharatBenz (India)
* C&amp;C Trucks (China)
* CAMC Hanma (China)
* China National Heavy Duty Truck Group (China)
* Dongfeng Trucks (China)
* Eicher Motors (India)
* FAW Group (China)
* Foton Motor (China)
* Fuso (Japan)
* Hino (Japan)
* Hyundai (South Korea)
* Isuzu (Japan)
* JAC Motors (China)
* Mahindra Truck and Bus Division (India)
* SAIC Hongyan (China)
* Shacman (China)
* Tata Daewoo (South Korea-India)
* Tata Motors (India)
* UD Trucks (Japan)
* XCMG Hanvan (China)
=== Canada and United States ===

* Freightliner
* Hino (Canadian plant)
* Hyundai Translead
* Kenworth
* Mack
* Navistar
* Nikola Corporation
* Oshkosh
* Peterbilt
* Tesla
* Volvo
* Western Star
===Europe===

* DAF Trucks
* Foden
* Iveco
* MAN
* Mercedes-Benz
* Renault Trucks
* Scania
* Sisu
* Volvo
===Other locations===

* BMC (Turkey)
* Ford Otosan (Turkey)
* Kamaz (Russia)
* MAZ (Belarus)
* Volkswagen (Latin America, South Africa)
Former semi-truck manufacturers include:

* Asia MotorWorks
* Caterpillar
* Crane Carrier Company
* Jelcz
* KrAZ
* Roman
* Tatra
* ZiL
==Driver&#x27;s license==

A special driver&#x27;s license is required to operate various commercial vehicles.

===Australia===
Truck drivers in Australia require an endorsed license. These endorsements are gained through training and experience. The minimum age to hold an endorsed license is 18 years, and/or must have held open (full) driver&#x27;s license for minimum 12 months.

The following are the heavy vehicle license classes in Australia:

* LR (Light Rigid) – Class LR covers a rigid vehicle with a GVM (gross vehicle mass) of more than 4.5 tonnes but not more than 8 tonnes. Any towed trailer must not weigh more than 9 tonnes GVM. Also includes vehicles with a GVM up to 8 tonnes which carry more than 12 adults including the driver and vehicles in Class C.
* MR (Medium Rigid) – Class MR covers a rigid vehicle with two axles and a GVM of more than 8 tonnes. Any towed trailer must not weigh more than 9 tonnes GVM. Also includes vehicles in Class LR.
* HR (Heavy Rigid) – Class HR covers a rigid vehicle with three or more axles and a GVM of more than 15 tonnes. Any towed trailer must not weigh more than 9 tonnes GVM. Also includes articulated buses and vehicles in Class MR.
* HC (Heavy Combination) – Class HC covers heavy combination vehicles like a prime mover towing a semi-trailer, or rigid vehicles towing a trailer with a GVM of more than 9 tonnes. Also includes vehicles in Class HR.
* MC (Multi Combination) – Class MC covers multi-combination vehicles like road trains and B-double vehicles. Also includes vehicles in Class HC.

In order to obtain an HC License the driver must have held an MR or HR license for at least 12 months. To upgrade to an MC License the driver must have held a HR or HC license for at least 12 months. From licenses MR and upward there is also a B Condition which may apply to the license if testing in a synchromesh or automatic transmission vehicle. The B Condition may be removed upon the driver proving the ability to drive a constant mesh transmission using the clutch. &quot;Constant mesh transmission refers to &quot;crash box&quot; transmissions, predominantly Road Ranger eighteen-speed transmissions in Australia.&quot;

===Canada===
Regulations vary by province. A license to operate a vehicle with air brakes is required (i.e., normally a Class I, II, or III commercial license with an &quot;A&quot; or &quot;S&quot; endorsement in provinces other than Ontario). In Ontario, a &quot;Z&quot; endorsement is required to drive any vehicle using air brakes; in provinces other than Ontario, the &quot;A&quot; endorsement is for air brake operation only, and an &quot;S&quot; endorsement is for both operation and adjustment of air brakes. Anyone holding a valid Ontario driver&#x27;s license (i.e., excluding a motorcycle license) with a &quot;Z&quot; endorsement can legally drive any air-brake-equipped truck-trailer combination with a registered- or actual-gross-vehicle-weight (i.e., including towing- and towed-vehicle) up to 11 tonnes, that includes one trailer weighing no more than 4.6 tonnes if the license falls under the following three classes: Class E (school bus—maximum 24-passenger capacity or ambulance), F (regular bus—maximum 24-passenger capacity or ambulance) or G (car, van, or small-truck).

A Class B (any school bus), C (any urban-transit-vehicle or highway-coach), or D (heavy trucks other than tractor-trailers) license enables its holder to drive any truck-trailer combination with a registered- or actual-gross-vehicle-weight (i.e., including towing- and towed-vehicle) greater than 11 tonnes, that includes one trailer weighing no more than 4.6 tonnes. Anyone holding an Ontario Class A license (or its equivalent) can drive any truck-trailer combination with a registered- or actual-gross-vehicle-weight (i.e., including towing- and towed-vehicles) greater than 11 tonnes, that includes one or more trailers weighing more than 4.6 tonnes.

===Europe===
A category CE driving licence is required to drive a tractor-trailer in Europe. Category C (Γ in Greece) is required for vehicles over , while category E is for heavy trailers, which in the case of trucks and buses means any trailer over . Vehicles over —which is the maximum limit of B license—but under can be driven with a C1 license. Buses require a D (Δ in Greece) license. A bus that is registered for no more than 16 passengers, excluding the driver, can be driven with a D1 license.

===New Zealand===
In New Zealand, drivers of heavy vehicles require specific licenses, termed as classes. A Class 1 license (&quot;car license&quot;) will allow the driving of any vehicle with Gross Laden Weight (GLW) or Gross Combination Weight (GCW) of or less. For other types of vehicles the classes are separately licensed as follows:

* Class 2 – Medium Rigid Vehicle: Any rigid vehicle with GLW or less with light trailer of or less, any combination vehicle with GCW or less, any rigid vehicle of any weight with no more than two axles, or any Class 1 vehicle.
* Class 3 – Medium Combination Vehicle: Any combination vehicle of GCW or less, or any Class 2 vehicle.
* Class 4 – Heavy Rigid Vehicle: Any rigid vehicle of any weight, any combination vehicle which consists of a heavy vehicle and a light trailer, or any vehicle of Class 1 or 2 (but not 3).
* Class 5 – Heavy Combination Vehicle: Any combination vehicle of any weight, and any vehicle covered by previous classes.
* Class 6 – Motorcycle.

Further information on the New Zealand licensing system for heavy vehicles can be found at the New Zealand Transport Agency.

===Taiwan===

The Road Traffic Security Rules (道路交通安全規則) require a combination vehicle driver license () to drive a combination vehicle (). These rules define a combination vehicle as a motor vehicle towing a heavy trailer, i.e., a trailer with a gross weight of more than .

===United States===
Drivers of semi-trailer trucks generally require a Class A commercial driver&#x27;s license (CDL) to operate any combination vehicles with a gross combination weight rating (or GCWR) in excess of if the gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of the towed vehicle(s) is in excess of . Some states (such as North Dakota) provide exemptions for farmers, allowing non-commercial license holders to operate semis within a certain air-mile radius of their reporting location. State exemptions, however, are only applicable in intrastate commerce; stipulations of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) may be applied in interstate commerce. Also a person under the age of 21 cannot operate a commercial vehicle outside the state where the commercial license was issued. This restriction may also be mirrored by certain states in their intrastate regulations. A person must be at least 18 in order to be issued a commercial license.

In addition, &quot;endorsements&quot; are necessary for certain cargo and vehicle arrangements and types;

* H – Hazardous Materials (HazMat or HM) – necessary if materials require HM placards.
* N – Tankers – the driver is acquainted with the unique handling characteristics of liquids tankers.
* X – Signifies Hazardous Materials and Tanker endorsements, combined.
* T – Doubles &amp; Triples – the licensee may pull more than one trailer.
* P – Buses – Any Vehicle designed to transport 16 or more passengers (including the driver).
* S – School Buses – Any school bus designed to transport 11 or more passengers (including the driver).
* W – Tow Truck

==Role in trade ==
Modern day semi-trailer trucks often operate as a part of a domestic or international transport infrastructure to support containerized cargo shipment.

Various types of rail flat bed train cars are modified to hold the cargo trailer or container with wheels or without. This is called &quot;Intermodal&quot; or &quot;piggyback&quot;. The system allows the cargo to switch from highway to railway or vice versa with relative ease by using gantry cranes.

The large trailers pulled by a tractor unit come in many styles, lengths, and shapes. Some common types are: vans, reefers, flatbeds, sidelifts and tankers. These trailers may be refrigerated, heated, ventilated, or pressurized, depending on climate and cargo. Some trailers have movable wheel axles that can be adjusted by moving them on a track underneath the trailer body and securing them in place with large pins. The purpose of this is to help adjust weight distribution over the various axles, to comply with local laws.

==Media==

===Television===
* 1960s TV series &quot;Cannonball&quot;
* NBC ran two popular TV series about truck drivers in the 1970s featuring actor Claude Akins in major roles:
** &quot;Movin&#x27; On&quot; (1974–1976)
** &quot;B. J. and the Bear&quot; (1978–1981)
* &quot;The Highwayman&quot; (1987–1988), a semi-futuristic action-adventure series starring Sam Jones, featuring hi-tech, multi-function trucks.
* &quot;Knight Rider&quot;, an American television show featured a semi-trailer truck called The Semi, operated by the Foundation for Law &amp; Government (F.L.A.G.) as a mobile support facility for KITT. Also, in two episodes KITT faced off against an armored semi called Goliath.
* &quot;The Transformers&quot;, a 1980s cartoon featuring tractor-trailers as the Autobots&#x27; leader Optimus Prime (&quot;Convoy&quot; in Japanese version), their second-in-command Ultra Magnus, and as the Stunticons&#x27; leader Motormaster. Optimus Prime returned in the 2007 film.
* &quot;Trick My Truck&quot;, a CMT show features trucks getting &#x27;tricked out&#x27; (heavily customized).
* &quot;Ice Road Truckers&quot;, a History Channel show charts the lives of drivers who haul supplies to remote towns and work sites over frozen lakes that double as roads.
* &quot;18 Wheels of Justice&quot;, featuring Federal Agent Michael Cates (Lucky Vanous) as a crown witness for the mafia who goes undercover, when forced into it, to fight crime.
* &quot;Eddie Stobart: Trucks &amp; Trailers&quot;, a UK television show showing the trucking company Eddie Stobart and its drivers.
* &quot;Highway Thru Hell&quot;, a Canadian reality TV show that follows the operations of Jamie Davis Motor Trucking, a heavy vehicle rescue and recovery towing company based in Hope, British Columbia.

===Films===

* &quot;Duel&quot;, Steven Spielberg&#x27;s 1971 film, features a Peterbilt 281 tanker truck as the villain
* &quot;White Line Fever&quot;, a 1975 Columbia Pictures film, starring Jan-Michael Vincent
* &quot;Smokey and the Bandit&quot;, a 1977 film featuring a number of trucks on the side of the bandit
* &quot;Convoy&quot;, a 1978 film directed by Sam Peckinpah, starring Kris Kristofferson
* &quot;Mad Max 2&quot;, George Miller&#x27;s 1981 film, features the titular character driving a Mack R series truck
* &quot;Maximum Overdrive&quot;, Stephen King&#x27;s 1986 film, featured big rigs as its primary homicidal villains
* &quot;Over the Top (1987 film)&quot;, a 1987 film directed by Menahem Golan, starring Sylvester Stallone
* &quot;Black Dog&quot;, a 1998 film directed by Kevin Hooks, starring Patrick Swayze
* &quot;Prime Mover&quot;, a 2008 film directed by David Caesar
* &quot;Joy Ride&quot;, a 2001 film directed by John Dahl, starring Paul Walker and Steve Zahn
* &quot;Big Rig&quot;, a 2008 documentary film directed by Doug Pray

===Music===

* &quot;Convoy&quot;, a pop song by C. W. McCall, spurred sales of CB radios with an imaginary trucking story.
* The eighteen-wheeled truck was immortalized in numerous country music songs, such as the Red Sovine titles &quot;Giddyup Go&quot;, &quot;Teddy Bear&quot; and &quot;Phantom 309&quot;, and Dave Dudley&#x27;s &quot;Six Days on the Road&quot;.
* The thrash metal band, BigRig, was named after these trucks.
* Country song &quot;Eighteen Wheels and a Dozen Roses&quot;, made popular in 1987 by singer-songwriter Kathy Mattea.
* &quot;Roll On (Eighteen Wheeler)&quot; by Alabama tells the story of a trucker who calls home to his family every night while out on the road.
* &quot;Papa Loved Mama&quot; by Garth Brooks is about a trucker and his wife.
* &quot;Truck Drivin&#x27; Song&quot; by &quot;Weird Al&quot; Yankovic tells the story of a female trucker, sung by a male with a deep voice.
* &quot;Cold Shoulder&quot; by Garth Brooks is about a trucker stuck on the side of the highway during a blizzard, fantasizing about being home with his wife.
* &quot;Drivin&#x27; My Life Away&quot; by Eddie Rabbitt, a former trucker, co-written with Even Stevens and David Malloy, sings of the life on the road.

===Video games and truck simulators===
* &quot;18 Wheels of Steel&quot; series
* &quot;American Truck Simulator&quot;
* &quot;Big Rigs: Over the Road Racing&quot; (2003)
* &quot;Euro Truck Simulator&quot;
* &quot;Euro Truck Simulator 2&quot;
* &quot;Hard Truck&quot; (1998)
* &quot;MotorStorm&quot; and &quot;&quot;
* &quot;Rig &#x27;n&#x27; Roll&quot; (2009)
* &quot;Rigs of Rods&quot;
=== Podcasts ===

* Over the Road, a podcast series by Radiotopia on truck driving the North America / US

==See also==
* Air brake (road vehicle)
* Articulated lorries
* Articulated vehicle
* Brake
* Bus
* Cab over
* Containerization
* DAT Solutions (a.k.a. Dial-a-truck)
* Dolly (trailer)
* Drayage
* Dump truck
* Gladhand connector
* Hybrid vehicle
* Jackknifing
* List of trucks
* Loader crane
* Loading dock
* Lockrod
* Logging truck
* Long combination vehicle
* Oversize load
* Progressive shifting
* Refrigerator truck (&quot;reefer&quot;)
* Road train
* Roll trailer
* Semi-trailer
* Terminal tractor
* Tank truck
* Tractor unit
* Trailer (vehicle)
* Trailer bus
* Train
* Truck
* Truck driver
* Truck sleeper
==References==
==Notes==
==External links==

* TruckNetUK.com, dedicated to trucking information in UK and Europe
* Ol&#x27; Blue, USA, safety and education in and around trucking in the US
* natm.com/ Promote trailer safety and the success of the trailer manufacturing industry through education and advocacy.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1936841" start="2" end="20" title="Semi-trailer truck" label="semi-trailer truck"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="72" end="77" title="#Other terms" label="below"/>
<link wikidata="Q59569" start="103" end="115" title="tractor unit" label="tractor unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q944315" start="132" end="144" title="semi-trailer" label="semi-trailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q319224" start="155" end="162" title="freight" label="freight"/>
<link wikidata="Q545837" start="218" end="223" title="Tow hitch" label="hitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291617" start="239" end="250" title="fifth-wheel coupling" label="fifth wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="370" end="386" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979" start="494" end="509" title="British English" label="British English"/>
<link wikidata="Q44676" start="584" end="600" title="Canadian English" label="Canadian English"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="729" end="735" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="740" end="753" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q370704" start="782" end="797" title="cab over engine" label="cab over engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="846" end="860" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q43193" start="1032" end="1047" title="rigid truck" label="straight trucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411533" start="1057" end="1068" title="articulated" label="articulated"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1776" end="1785" title="axle#Lift axle" label="lift axle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2800" end="2822" title="#United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom section"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235792" start="2851" end="2856" title="dolly (trailer)" label="dolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q22706" start="2911" end="2924" title="Vehicle registration plate" label="license plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q43193" start="2926" end="2937" title="rigid truck" label="rigid truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291617" start="3003" end="3014" title="Fifth-wheel coupling" label="fifth wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196531" start="3080" end="3092" title="pintle" label="pintle hitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318308" start="3200" end="3207" title="Backing up" label="Backing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579259" start="3451" end="3463" title="timber truck" label="timber truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q178692" start="3567" end="3579" title="loader crane" label="loader crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="3961" end="3963" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q8932" start="3968" end="3971" title="European Economic Area" label="EEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q187956" start="4030" end="4043" title="ISO container" label="ISO container"/>
<link wikidata="Q58878" start="5571" end="5579" title="B-double" label="B-double"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="5999" end="6005" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196608" start="6448" end="6461" title="Cut-to-length logging" label="cut-to-length"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540065" start="7137" end="7145" title="Swap body" label="CEN unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q58878" start="7235" end="7243" title="B-double" label="B-double"/>
<link wikidata="Q891345" start="8117" end="8127" title="Boliden AB" label="Boliden AB"/>
<link wikidata="Q891347" start="8249" end="8256" title="Boliden" label="Boliden"/>
<link wikidata="Q163810" start="8280" end="8285" title="Volvo Group" label="Volvo"/>
<link wikidata="Q25287" start="8390" end="8408" title="Gothenburg" label="Gothenburg harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033642" start="8417" end="8429" title="Volvo Trucks" label="Volvo Trucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q851977" start="8460" end="8468" title="Hisingen" label="Hisingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q211649" start="8820" end="8830" title="Norrbotten" label="Norrbotten"/>
<link wikidata="Q782249" start="8846" end="8863" title="European route E4" label="European route E4"/>
<link wikidata="Q307541" start="8895" end="8904" title="Överkalix" label="Överkalix"/>
<link wikidata="Q21169" start="8942" end="8947" title="Piteå" label="Piteå"/>
<link wikidata="Q214806" start="9394" end="9402" title="Dalsland" label="Dalsland"/>
<link wikidata="Q209523" start="9407" end="9415" title="Bohuslän" label="Bohuslän"/>
<link wikidata="Q576644" start="9571" end="9579" title="Skoghall" label="Skoghall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794751" start="9710" end="9721" title="Kaunisvaara" label="Kaunisvaara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060689" start="9722" end="9733" title="Svappavaara" label="Svappavaara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203526" start="9884" end="9897" title="pilot project" label="pilot project"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="10579" end="10593" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q25288" start="10726" end="10738" title="gross weight" label="gross weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796537" start="11727" end="11734" title="kingpin (automotive part)" label="kingpin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982287" start="12050" end="12074" title="Department for Transport" label="Department for Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q58878" start="14104" end="14111" title="B-Train" label="B-Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256639" start="14156" end="14170" title="Denby Eco-Link" label="Denby Eco-Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918423" start="17076" end="17112" title="Vehicle and Operator Services Agency" label="Vehicle and Operator Services Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982287" start="17426" end="17450" title="Department for Transport" label="Department for Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="17605" end="17618" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q59569" start="17917" end="17929" title="tractor unit" label="tractor unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q188209" start="17957" end="17961" title="axle" label="axle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18076" end="18086" title="Axle#Lift axle" label="lift axles"/>
<link wikidata="Q188209" start="18173" end="18183" title="drive axle" label="drive axle"/>
<link wikidata="Q370704" start="18416" end="18430" title="Cab over" label="cabover engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q944315" start="19132" end="19145" title="semi-trailer" label="cargo trailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752317" start="19158" end="19164" title="tandem" label="tandem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19202" end="19213" title="Glossary of trucking industry terms in the United States#Dual wheels" label="dual wheels"/>
<link wikidata="Q49614" start="19520" end="19527" title="moniker" label="moniker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6875856" start="19616" end="19624" title="misnomer" label="misnomer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19762" end="19774" title="Tandem#Trucks" label="tandem axles"/>
<link wikidata="Q58878" start="20235" end="20239" title="road train" label="LCVs"/>
<link wikidata="Q58878" start="20306" end="20330" title="Long combination vehicle" label="Long combination vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25348944" start="20375" end="20387" title="STAA doubles" label="STAA doubles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20744" end="20747" title="road train#Dog-trailer (dog trailer)" label="pup"/>
<link wikidata="Q800459" start="20922" end="20947" title="National Highway System (United States)" label="Interstate Highway System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128004" start="21725" end="21734" title="wheelbase" label="wheelbase"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="22234" end="22243" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q58878" start="22309" end="22319" title="road train" label="road train"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291617" start="23604" end="23613" title="Fifth wheel coupling" label="turntable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235" start="24228" end="24246" title="Northern Territory" label="Northern Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q370704" start="25543" end="25550" title="cabover" label="cabover"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015807" start="25899" end="25918" title="NZ Transport Agency" label="NZ Transport Agency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26273" end="26281" title="Road train#B-double" label="B-double"/>
<link wikidata="Q784738" start="27015" end="27018" title="Box truck" label="Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q193468" start="27023" end="27030" title="dry van" label="dry van"/>
<link wikidata="Q453152" start="27033" end="27036" title="Trailer bus" label="Bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q475479" start="27039" end="27049" title="Car carrier trailer" label="Car hauler"/>
<link wikidata="Q105038891" start="27052" end="27070" title="Container chassis" label="Intermodal chassis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359395" start="27073" end="27081" title="Bulk cargo" label="Dry bulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246458" start="27084" end="27088" title="Dump truck" label="Dump"/>
<link wikidata="Q650927" start="27091" end="27098" title="Flatbed truck" label="Flatbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q19597368" start="27101" end="27114" title="Grain hopper trailer" label="Hopper-Bottom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416602" start="27117" end="27123" title="Lowboy (trailer)" label="Lowboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q492013" start="27126" end="27138" title="Refrigerator truck" label="Refrigerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665159" start="27143" end="27149" title="Refrigerated container" label="Reefer"/>
<link wikidata="Q20465" start="27152" end="27158" title="Tank truck" label="Tanker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796537" start="27225" end="27233" title="kingpin (automotive part)" label="king pin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291617" start="27303" end="27314" title="Fifth wheel coupling" label="fifth wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q59569" start="27355" end="27368" title="Tractor unit" label="towing engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q944315" start="27411" end="27424" title="truck trailer" label="truck trailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q188209" start="27513" end="27517" title="axle" label="axle"/>
<link wikidata="Q937178" start="27841" end="27852" title="Jackknifing" label="Jackknifing"/>
<link wikidata="Q177784" start="28004" end="28013" title="Hydraulics" label="hydraulic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534839" start="28036" end="28041" title="brake" label="brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391904" start="28175" end="28185" title="brake fade" label="brake fade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392940" start="28558" end="28567" title="fail-safe" label="fail-safe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16935371" start="28816" end="28834" title="gladhand connector" label="gladhand connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q208502" start="29580" end="29592" title="railroad car" label="railroad car"/>
<link wikidata="Q190660" start="30315" end="30318" title="Anti-lock braking system" label="ABS"/>
<link wikidata="Q176705" start="30940" end="30954" title="engine braking" label="engine braking"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386790" start="31026" end="31036" title="Jake brake" label="Jake brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501824" start="31047" end="31060" title="exhaust brake" label="exhaust brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q92251" start="31183" end="31198" title="noise pollution" label="noise pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779780" start="31561" end="31570" title="Retarder (mechanical engineering)" label="retarders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208529" start="31719" end="31738" title="manual transmission" label="manual transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q11217551" start="31839" end="31868" title="automated manual transmission" label="automated manual transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q84115" start="31941" end="31950" title="torque converter" label="hydraulic"/>
<link wikidata="Q843592" start="31951" end="31974" title="automatic transmissions" label="automatic transmissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q16259746" start="31988" end="32001" title="transmission (mechanics)" label="transmissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q206037" start="32279" end="32282" title="revolutions per minute" label="RPM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644088" start="32422" end="32432" title="Gear ratio" label="drive axle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="33258" end="33268" title="automobile" label="automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537733" start="33421" end="33447" title="non-synchronous transmission" label="constant-mesh transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q48872" start="33483" end="33488" title="Eaton Corporation" label="Eaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q244960" start="33520" end="33536" title="Double clutch (technique)" label="double-clutching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163778" start="33968" end="33996" title="Diesel–electric transmission" label="diesel-electric transmission"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35211" end="35222" title="Glossary of the American trucking industry#Dual wheels" label="dual wheels"/>
<link wikidata="Q169545" start="35269" end="35273" title="tire" label="tire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35291" end="35304" title="Glossary of the American trucking industry#Super single" label="super singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q106358009" start="35442" end="35466" title="greenhouse gas emissions" label="greenhouse gas emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391904" start="36022" end="36032" title="brake fade" label="brake fade"/>
<link wikidata="Q190132" start="36876" end="36885" title="turbulence" label="turbulent"/>
<link wikidata="Q206621" start="36938" end="36954" title="aerodynamic drag" label="aerodynamic drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="37004" end="37049" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="United States Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q229507" start="37803" end="37818" title="Jayne Mansfield" label="Jayne Mansfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920572" start="37909" end="37920" title="head trauma" label="head trauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967350" start="37943" end="37948" title="National Highway Traffic Safety Administration" label="NHTSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647715" start="38044" end="38047" title="Interstate Commerce Commission" label="ICC"/>
<link wikidata="Q852211" start="38070" end="38073" title="United States Department of Transportation" label="DOT"/>
<link wikidata="Q375102" start="38488" end="38506" title="rear-end collision" label="rear-end collision"/>
<link wikidata="Q13693" start="38531" end="38541" title="windshield" label="windshield"/>
<link wikidata="Q13697" start="38662" end="38672" title="car bumper" label="car bumper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776962" start="38703" end="38713" title="crush zone" label="crush zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q99905" start="38737" end="38744" title="air bag" label="air bag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427114" start="39606" end="39620" title="side collision" label="side collision"/>
<link wikidata="Q937178" start="39640" end="39650" title="jackknifing" label="jackknifes"/>
<link wikidata="Q931507" start="41138" end="41150" title="fuel mileage" label="fuel mileage"/>
<link wikidata="Q190132" start="41167" end="41177" title="turbulence" label="turbulence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799919" start="41302" end="41314" title="loading dock" label="loading dock"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41344" end="41357" title="Loading dock#Dangers" label="trailer creep"/>
<link wikidata="Q726193" start="41578" end="41591" title="Ashok Leyland" label="Ashok Leyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107991" start="41602" end="41612" title="BharatBenz" label="BharatBenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073291" start="41623" end="41637" title="China International Marine Containers" label="C&amp;amp;C Trucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q16831878" start="41648" end="41658" title="Hanma Technology" label="CAMC Hanma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3952867" start="41669" end="41706" title="China National Heavy Duty Truck Group" label="China National Heavy Duty Truck Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138452" start="41717" end="41732" title="Dongfeng Motor Corporation" label="Dongfeng Trucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301821" start="41743" end="41756" title="Eicher Motors" label="Eicher Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124351" start="41767" end="41776" title="FAW Group" label="FAW Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q814825" start="41787" end="41798" title="Foton Motor" label="Foton Motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190247" start="41809" end="41813" title="Fuso (company)" label="Fuso"/>
<link wikidata="Q867667" start="41824" end="41828" title="Hino Motors" label="Hino"/>
<link wikidata="Q55931" start="41839" end="41846" title="Hyundai Motor Company" label="Hyundai"/>
<link wikidata="Q29803" start="41863" end="41868" title="Isuzu" label="Isuzu"/>
<link wikidata="Q545579" start="41879" end="41889" title="JAC Motors" label="JAC Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6734057" start="41900" end="41931" title="Mahindra Truck and Bus Division" label="Mahindra Truck and Bus Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140119" start="41942" end="41954" title="SAIC Hongyan" label="SAIC Hongyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276149" start="41965" end="41972" title="Shaanxi Automobile Group" label="Shacman"/>
<link wikidata="Q498917" start="41983" end="41994" title="Tata Daewoo" label="Tata Daewoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q188514" start="42017" end="42028" title="Tata Motors" label="Tata Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241339" start="42039" end="42048" title="UD Trucks" label="UD Trucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353472" start="42059" end="42070" title="XCMG" label="XCMG Hanvan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420724" start="42115" end="42127" title="Freightliner Trucks" label="Freightliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q867667" start="42130" end="42134" title="Hino Motors" label="Hino"/>
<link wikidata="Q55931" start="42154" end="42171" title="Hyundai Translead" label="Hyundai Translead"/>
<link wikidata="Q774830" start="42174" end="42182" title="Kenworth" label="Kenworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q950650" start="42185" end="42189" title="Mack Trucks" label="Mack"/>
<link wikidata="Q29739" start="42192" end="42200" title="Navistar" label="Navistar"/>
<link wikidata="Q24887050" start="42203" end="42221" title="Nikola Corporation" label="Nikola Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969091" start="42224" end="42231" title="Oshkosh Corporation" label="Oshkosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q944640" start="42234" end="42243" title="Peterbilt" label="Peterbilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q478214" start="42246" end="42251" title="Tesla Inc" label="Tesla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033642" start="42254" end="42259" title="Volvo Trucks" label="Volvo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370660" start="42262" end="42274" title="Western Star Trucks" label="Western Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q27489" start="42291" end="42301" title="DAF Trucks" label="DAF Trucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435112" start="42304" end="42309" title="Foden Trucks" label="Foden"/>
<link wikidata="Q29913" start="42312" end="42317" title="Iveco" label="Iveco"/>
<link wikidata="Q708667" start="42320" end="42323" title="MAN Truck &amp;amp; Bus" label="MAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q36008" start="42326" end="42339" title="Mercedes-Benz" label="Mercedes-Benz"/>
<link wikidata="Q840045" start="42342" end="42356" title="Renault Trucks" label="Renault Trucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q219960" start="42359" end="42365" title="Scania AB" label="Scania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388470" start="42368" end="42372" title="Sisu Auto" label="Sisu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033642" start="42375" end="42380" title="Volvo Trucks" label="Volvo"/>
<link wikidata="Q796295" start="42406" end="42409" title="BMC (Turkey)" label="BMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790346" start="42421" end="42432" title="Ford Otosan" label="Ford Otosan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30378" start="42444" end="42449" title="Kamaz" label="Kamaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251215" start="42461" end="42464" title="Minsk Automobile Plant" label="MAZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622651" start="42477" end="42487" title="Volkswagen Truck &amp;amp; Bus" label="Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806394" start="42562" end="42577" title="Asia MotorWorks" label="Asia MotorWorks"/>
<link wikidata="Q459965" start="42580" end="42591" title="Caterpillar Inc" label="Caterpillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181998" start="42594" end="42615" title="Crane Carrier Company" label="Crane Carrier Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q605071" start="42618" end="42623" title="Jelcz" label="Jelcz"/>
<link wikidata="Q783036" start="42626" end="42630" title="KrAZ" label="KrAZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260840" start="42633" end="42638" title="Roman (vehicle manufacturer)" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q45464" start="42641" end="42646" title="Tatra (company)" label="Tatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q638156" start="42649" end="42652" title="ZiL" label="ZiL"/>
<link wikidata="Q205647" start="42690" end="42711" title="driver&amp;#x27;s license" label="driver&amp;#x27;s license"/>
<link wikidata="Q25288" start="43169" end="43174" title="gross weight" label="gross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="45087" end="45094" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46603" end="46614" title="European driving licence#Categories valid in all EEA countries" label="category CE"/>
<link wikidata="" start="48275" end="48283" title=":zh:道路交通安全規則" label="道路交通安全規則"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152556" start="48583" end="48615" title="commercial driver&amp;#x27;s license" label="commercial driver&amp;#x27;s license"/>
<link wikidata="Q104870826" start="48665" end="48696" title="gross combined weight rating" label="gross combination weight rating"/>
<link wikidata="Q104870826" start="48727" end="48754" title="gross vehicle weight rating" label="gross vehicle weight rating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207" start="48825" end="48837" title="North Dakota" label="North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q757138" start="49559" end="49578" title="hazardous materials" label="Hazardous Materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590" start="50208" end="50217" title="transport" label="transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q428072" start="50244" end="50257" title="Containerization" label="containerized"/>
<link wikidata="Q319224" start="50258" end="50263" title="cargo" label="cargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q651658" start="50264" end="50272" title="Shipping" label="shipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426316" start="50297" end="50316" title="Flatcar" label="flat bed train cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675313" start="50414" end="50424" title="Intermodal freight transport" label="Intermodal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50440" end="50449" title="Piggy-back (transportation)#Rail" label="piggyback"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50561" end="50574" title="Crane (machine)#Gantry" label="gantry cranes"/>
<link wikidata="Q59569" start="50608" end="50620" title="tractor unit" label="tractor unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q750385" start="50711" end="50719" title="sidelift" label="sidelift"/>
<link wikidata="Q838312" start="50990" end="50994" title="pin (device)" label="pins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032811" start="51158" end="51168" title="Cannonball (TV series)" label="Cannonball"/>
<link wikidata="Q739542" start="51256" end="51268" title="Claude Akins" label="Claude Akins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248566" start="51294" end="51308" title="Movin&amp;#x27; On (TV series)" label="Movin&amp;#x27; On"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987517" start="51336" end="51354" title="B. J. and the Bear" label="B. J. and the Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q131902" start="51381" end="51395" title="The Highwayman (TV series)" label="The Highwayman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498498" start="51466" end="51475" title="Sam J. Jones" label="Sam Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q464009" start="51527" end="51539" title="Knight Rider (1982 TV series)" label="Knight Rider"/>
<link wikidata="Q464009" start="51792" end="51799" title="Garthe Knight" label="Goliath"/>
<link wikidata="Q602883" start="51809" end="51825" title="The Transformers (TV series)" label="The Transformers"/>
<link wikidata="Q126351" start="51883" end="51890" title="Autobot" label="Autobot"/>
<link wikidata="Q151583" start="51905" end="51918" title="Optimus Prime" label="Optimus Prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365975" start="51985" end="51997" title="Ultra Magnus" label="Ultra Magnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3900420" start="52010" end="52020" title="Stunticons" label="Stunticons"/>
<link wikidata="Q171453" start="52073" end="52086" title="Transformers (film)" label="the 2007 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q16169832" start="52096" end="52110" title="Trick My Truck" label="Trick My Truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q702432" start="52207" end="52224" title="Ice Road Truckers" label="Ice Road Truckers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3210107" start="52380" end="52400" title="18 Wheels of Justice" label="18 Wheels of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6698055" start="52447" end="52459" title="Lucky Vanous" label="Lucky Vanous"/>
<link wikidata="" start="52560" end="52596" title="Eddie Stobart: Trucks &amp;amp; Trailers" label="Eddie Stobart: Trucks &amp;amp; Trailers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5759935" start="52693" end="52710" title="Highway Thru Hell" label="Highway Thru Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q583407" start="52910" end="52914" title="Duel (1971 film)" label="Duel"/>
<link wikidata="Q944640" start="52968" end="52977" title="Peterbilt" label="Peterbilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277693" start="53018" end="53034" title="White Line Fever (film)" label="White Line Fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q710128" start="53082" end="53101" title="Jan-Michael Vincent" label="Jan-Michael Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q521948" start="53110" end="53131" title="Smokey and the Bandit" label="Smokey and the Bandit"/>
<link wikidata="Q510388" start="53214" end="53220" title="Convoy (1978 film)" label="Convoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q51461" start="53252" end="53265" title="Sam Peckinpah" label="Sam Peckinpah"/>
<link wikidata="Q208681" start="53276" end="53294" title="Kris Kristofferson" label="Kris Kristofferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125262" start="53303" end="53312" title="Mad Max 2" label="Mad Max 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q6724242" start="53393" end="53406" title="Mack R series" label="Mack R series"/>
<link wikidata="Q46637" start="53421" end="53438" title="Maximum Overdrive" label="Maximum Overdrive"/>
<link wikidata="Q901148" start="53537" end="53561" title="Over the Top (1987 film)" label="Over the Top (1987 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q542003" start="53593" end="53606" title="Menahem Golan" label="Menahem Golan"/>
<link wikidata="Q40026" start="53617" end="53635" title="Sylvester Stallone" label="Sylvester Stallone"/>
<link wikidata="Q880226" start="53644" end="53653" title="Black Dog (1998 film)" label="Black Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453153" start="53685" end="53696" title="Kevin Hooks" label="Kevin Hooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q49004" start="53707" end="53721" title="Patrick Swayze" label="Patrick Swayze"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243324" start="53730" end="53741" title="Prime Mover (film)" label="Prime Mover"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232078" start="53773" end="53785" title="David Caesar" label="David Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q26970" start="53794" end="53802" title="Joy Ride (2001 film)" label="Joy Ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699742" start="53834" end="53843" title="John Dahl" label="John Dahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q213864" start="53854" end="53865" title="Paul Walker" label="Paul Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q491775" start="53870" end="53880" title="Steve Zahn" label="Steve Zahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906187" start="53889" end="53896" title="Big Rig (film)" label="Big Rig"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300830" start="53940" end="53949" title="Doug Pray" label="Doug Pray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3689909" start="53972" end="53978" title="Convoy (song)" label="Convoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022574" start="54000" end="54012" title="C. W. McCall" label="C. W. McCall"/>
<link wikidata="Q770588" start="54031" end="54039" title="CB radio" label="CB radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="54133" end="54146" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136093" start="54166" end="54176" title="Red Sovine" label="Red Sovine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559520" start="54190" end="54200" title="Giddyup Go" label="Giddyup Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693983" start="54214" end="54224" title="Teddy Bear (Red Sovine song)" label="Teddy Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q7180543" start="54241" end="54252" title="Phantom 309 (Red Sovine song)" label="Phantom 309"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173181" start="54264" end="54275" title="Dave Dudley" label="Dave Dudley"/>
<link wikidata="Q483352" start="54323" end="54335" title="thrash metal" label="thrash metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3639829" start="54342" end="54348" title="Big Rig (band)" label="BigRig"/>
<link wikidata="Q442892" start="54484" end="54496" title="Kathy Mattea" label="Kathy Mattea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360880" start="54506" end="54532" title="Roll On (Eighteen Wheeler)" label="Roll On (Eighteen Wheeler)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140332" start="54542" end="54549" title="Alabama (American band)" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132346" start="54651" end="54666" title="Papa Loved Mama" label="Papa Loved Mama"/>
<link wikidata="Q216288" start="54676" end="54688" title="Garth Brooks" label="Garth Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q8349" start="54763" end="54792" title="&amp;quot;Weird Al&amp;quot; Yankovic" label="&amp;quot;Weird Al&amp;quot; Yankovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q216288" start="54895" end="54907" title="Garth Brooks" label="Garth Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308041" start="55031" end="55056" title="Drivin&amp;#x27; My Life Away" label="Drivin&amp;#x27; My Life Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282956" start="55066" end="55079" title="Eddie Rabbitt" label="Eddie Rabbitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237077" start="55132" end="55144" title="David Malloy" label="David Malloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q204533" start="55225" end="55243" title="18 Wheels of Steel" label="18 Wheels of Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970796" start="55265" end="55289" title="American Truck Simulator" label="American Truck Simulator"/>
<link wikidata="" start="55304" end="55334" title="Big Rigs: Over the Road Racing" label="Big Rigs: Over the Road Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648331" start="55356" end="55376" title="Euro Truck Simulator" label="Euro Truck Simulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632206" start="55391" end="55413" title="Euro Truck Simulator 2" label="Euro Truck Simulator 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071391" start="55428" end="55438" title="Hard Truck" label="Hard Truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q766090" start="55460" end="55470" title="MotorStorm (video game)" label="MotorStorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507129" start="55502" end="55524" title="Rig &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Roll" label="Rig &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501239" start="55546" end="55558" title="Rigs of Rods" label="Rigs of Rods"/>
<link wikidata="Q22039329" start="55620" end="55630" title="Radiotopia" label="Radiotopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="55652" end="55665" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="55668" end="55670" title="United States" label="US"/>
<link wikidata="Q3169624" start="55687" end="55711" title="Air brake (road vehicle)" label="Air brake (road vehicle)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55714" end="55733" title="Bogie#Articulated lorries (tractor-trailers)" label="Articulated lorries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411533" start="55736" end="55755" title="Articulated vehicle" label="Articulated vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534839" start="55758" end="55763" title="Brake" label="Brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638" start="55766" end="55769" title="Bus" label="Bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q370704" start="55772" end="55780" title="Cab over" label="Cab over"/>
<link wikidata="Q428072" start="55783" end="55799" title="Containerization" label="Containerization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270428" start="55802" end="55815" title="DAT Solutions" label="DAT Solutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235792" start="55840" end="55855" title="Dolly (trailer)" label="Dolly (trailer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164137" start="55858" end="55865" title="Drayage" label="Drayage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246458" start="55868" end="55878" title="Dump truck" label="Dump truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q16935371" start="55881" end="55899" title="Gladhand connector" label="Gladhand connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q193075" start="55902" end="55916" title="Hybrid vehicle" label="Hybrid vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q937178" start="55919" end="55930" title="Jackknifing" label="Jackknifing"/>
<link wikidata="Q17165845" start="55933" end="55947" title="List of trucks" label="List of trucks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55950" end="55962" title="crane (machine)#Loader crane" label="Loader crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799919" start="55965" end="55977" title="Loading dock" label="Loading dock"/>
<link wikidata="Q25043493" start="55980" end="55987" title="Lockrod" label="Lockrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579259" start="55990" end="56003" title="Logging truck" label="Logging truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q58878" start="56006" end="56030" title="Long combination vehicle" label="Long combination vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q680421" start="56033" end="56046" title="Oversize load" label="Oversize load"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248870" start="56049" end="56069" title="Progressive shifting" label="Progressive shifting"/>
<link wikidata="Q492013" start="56072" end="56090" title="Refrigerator truck" label="Refrigerator truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q58878" start="56114" end="56124" title="Road train" label="Road train"/>
<link wikidata="Q85797753" start="56127" end="56139" title="Roll trailer" label="Roll trailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q944315" start="56142" end="56154" title="Semi-trailer" label="Semi-trailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7505149" start="56157" end="56173" title="Terminal tractor" label="Terminal tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q20465" start="56176" end="56186" title="Tank truck" label="Tank truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q59569" start="56189" end="56201" title="Tractor unit" label="Tractor unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q216146" start="56204" end="56221" title="Trailer (vehicle)" label="Trailer (vehicle)"/>
<link wikidata="Q453152" start="56224" end="56235" title="Trailer bus" label="Trailer bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q870" start="56238" end="56243" title="Train" label="Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q43193" start="56246" end="56251" title="Truck" label="Truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q508846" start="56254" end="56266" title="Truck driver" label="Truck driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q17140344" start="56269" end="56282" title="Truck sleeper" label="Truck sleeper"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29383" wikidata="Q51402" url="?curid=29383" title="Stonewall riots">
<text>The Stonewall riots (also known as the Stonewall uprising, Stonewall rebellion, Stonewall revolution, or simply Stonewall) were a series of spontaneous riots and demonstrations against a police raid that took place in the early morning hours of June 28, 1969, at the Stonewall Inn, in the Greenwich Village neighborhood of Lower Manhattan in New York City. Although the demonstrations were not the first time American homosexuals fought back against government-sponsored persecution of sexual minorities, the Stonewall riots marked a new beginning for the gay rights movement in the United States and around the world.

American gays and lesbians in the 1950s and 1960s faced a legal system more anti-homosexual than those of some other Western and Eastern Bloc countries. Early homophile groups in the U.S. sought to prove that gay people could be assimilated into society, and they favored non-confrontational education for homosexuals and heterosexuals alike. The last years of the 1960s, however, were very contentious, as many social movements were active, including the African American Civil Rights Movement, the Counterculture of the 1960s, and antiwar demonstrations. These influences, along with the liberal environment of Greenwich Village, served as catalysts for the Stonewall riots.

Very few establishments welcomed openly gay people in the 1950s and 1960s. Those that did were often bars, although bar owners and managers were rarely gay. The Stonewall Inn was owned by the Mafia and catered to an assortment of patrons, popular among the poorest and most marginalized people in the gay community: drag queens, representatives of a newly self-aware transgender community, effeminate young men, hustlers, and homeless youth. Police raids on gay bars were routine in the 1960s, but officers quickly lost control of the situation at the Stonewall Inn and attracted a crowd that was incited to riot. Tensions between New York City police and gay residents of Greenwich Village erupted into more protests the next evening and again several nights later. Within weeks, Village residents quickly organized into activist groups to concentrate efforts on establishing places for gays and lesbians to be open about their sexual orientation without fear of being arrested.

Following the Stonewall riots, sexual minorities in New York City faced gender, class, and generational obstacles to becoming a cohesive community. Over the following weeks and months, they initiated politically active social organizations and launched publications that spoke openly about rights for gay and trans people. The first anniversary of the riots was marked by peaceful demonstrations in several American cities that have since grown to become pride parades. The Stonewall National Monument was established at the site in 2016. Today, pride events are held annually throughout the world toward the end of June to mark the Stonewall riots.

==Background==
===Homosexuality in 20th-century United States===
Following the social upheaval of World War II, many people in the United States felt a fervent desire to &quot;restore the prewar social order and hold off the forces of change&quot;, according to historian Barry Adam. Spurred by the national emphasis on anti-communism, Senator Joseph McCarthy conducted hearings searching for communists in the U.S. government, the U.S. Army, and other government-funded agencies and institutions, leading to a national paranoia. Anarchists, communists, and other people deemed un-American and subversive were considered security risks. Gay men and lesbians were included in this list by the U.S. State Department on the theory that they were susceptible to blackmail. In 1950, a Senate investigation chaired by Clyde R. Hoey noted in a report, &quot;It is generally believed that those who engage in overt acts of perversion lack the emotional stability of normal persons&quot;, and said all of the government&#x27;s intelligence agencies &quot;are in complete agreement that sex perverts in Government constitute security risks&quot;. Between 1947 and 1950, 1,700 federal job applications were denied, 4,380 people were discharged from the military, and 420 were fired from their government jobs for being suspected homosexuals.

Throughout the 1950s and 1960s, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and police departments kept lists of known homosexuals and their favored establishments and friends; the U.S. Post Office kept track of addresses where material pertaining to homosexuality was mailed. State and local governments followed suit: bars catering to gay men and lesbians were shut down and their customers were arrested and exposed in newspapers. Cities performed &quot;sweeps&quot; to rid neighborhoods, parks, bars, and beaches of gay people. They outlawed the wearing of opposite-gender clothes and universities expelled instructors suspected of being homosexual.

In 1952, the American Psychiatric Association listed homosexuality in the &quot;Diagnostic and Statistical Manual&quot; (&quot;DSM&quot;) as a mental disorder. A large-scale study of homosexuality in 1962 was used to justify the inclusion of the &quot;disorder&quot; as a supposed pathological hidden fear of the opposite sex caused by traumatic parent–child relationships. This view was widely influential in the medical profession. In 1956, the psychologist Evelyn Hooker performed a study that compared the happiness and well-adjusted nature of self-identified homosexual men with heterosexual men and found no difference. Her study stunned the medical community and made her a hero to many gay men and lesbians, but homosexuality remained in the &quot;DSM&quot; until 1974.

===Homophile activism===

In response to this trend, two organizations formed independently of each other to advance the cause of gay men and lesbians and provide opportunities where they could socialize without fear of being arrested. Los Angeles area homosexuals created the Mattachine Society in 1950, in the home of communist activist Harry Hay. Their objectives were to unify homosexuals, educate them, provide leadership, and assist &quot;sexual deviants&quot; with legal troubles. Facing enormous opposition to their radical approach, in 1953 the Mattachine shifted their focus to assimilation and respectability. They reasoned that they would change more minds about homosexuality by proving that gay men and lesbians were normal people, no different from heterosexuals. Soon after, several women in San Francisco met in their living rooms to form the Daughters of Bilitis (DOB) for lesbians. Although the eight women who created the DOB initially came together to be able to have a safe place to dance, as the DOB grew they developed similar goals to the Mattachine and urged their members to assimilate into general society.

One of the first challenges to government repression came in 1953. An organization named ONE, Inc. published a magazine called &quot;ONE&quot;. The U.S. Postal Service refused to mail its August issue, which concerned homosexual people in heterosexual marriages, on the grounds that the material was obscene despite it being covered in brown paper wrapping. The case eventually went to the Supreme Court, which in 1958 ruled that ONE, Inc. could mail its materials through the Postal Service.

Homophile organizations—as homosexual groups self-identified in this era—grew in number and spread to the East Coast. Gradually, members of these organizations grew bolder. Frank Kameny founded the Mattachine of Washington, D.C. He had been fired from the U.S. Army Map Service for being a homosexual and sued unsuccessfully to be reinstated. Kameny wrote that homosexuals were no different from heterosexuals, often aiming his efforts at mental health professionals, some of whom attended Mattachine and DOB meetings telling members they were abnormal.

In 1965, news on Cuban prison work camps for homosexuals inspired Mattachine New York and D.C. to organize protests at the United Nations and the White House. Similar demonstrations were then held also at other government buildings. The purpose was to protest the treatment of gay people in Cuba and U.S. employment discrimination. These pickets shocked many gay people and upset some of the leadership of Mattachine and the DOB. At the same time, demonstrations in the civil rights movement and opposition to the Vietnam War all grew in prominence, frequency, and severity throughout the 1960s, as did their confrontations with police forces.

===Earlier resistance and riots===
On the outer fringes of the few small gay communities were people who challenged gender expectations. They were effeminate men and masculine women, or people who dressed and lived in contrast to their sex assigned at birth, either part or full-time. Contemporaneous nomenclature classified them as transvestites and they were the most visible representatives of sexual minorities. They belied the carefully crafted image portrayed by the Mattachine Society and DOB asserted homosexuals were respectable, normal people. The Mattachine and DOB considered the trials of being arrested for wearing clothing of the opposite gender as a parallel to the struggles of homophile organizations: similar but distinctly separate.

Gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender people staged a small riot at the Cooper Do-nuts café in Los Angeles in 1959 in response to police harassment. In a larger 1966 event in San Francisco, drag queens, hustlers, and trans women were sitting in Compton&#x27;s Cafeteria when the police arrived to arrest people appearing to be physically male who were presenting as women. A riot ensued, with the cafeteria patrons slinging cups, plates, and saucers and breaking the plexiglass windows in the front of the restaurant and returning several days later to smash the windows again after they were replaced. Professor Susan Stryker classifies the Compton&#x27;s Cafeteria riot as an &quot;act of anti-transgender discrimination, rather than an act of discrimination against sexual orientation&quot; and connects the uprising to the issues of gender, race, and class that were being downplayed by homophile organizations. It marked the beginning of transgender activism in San Francisco.

===Greenwich Village===
The Manhattan neighborhoods of Greenwich Village and Harlem were home to sizable gay and lesbian populations after World War I, when people who had served in the military took advantage of the opportunity to settle in larger cities. The enclaves of gay men and lesbians, described by a newspaper story as &quot;short-haired women and long-haired men&quot;, developed a distinct subculture through the following two decades. Prohibition inadvertently benefited gay establishments, as drinking alcohol was pushed underground along with other behaviors considered immoral. New York City passed laws against homosexuality in public and private businesses, but because alcohol was in high demand, speakeasies and impromptu drinking establishments were so numerous and temporary that authorities were unable to police them all. However, police raids continued, resulting in the closure of iconic establishments such as Eve&#x27;s Hangout in 1926.

The social repression of the 1950s resulted in a cultural revolution in Greenwich Village. A cohort of poets, later named the Beat poets, wrote about the evils of the social organization at the time, glorifying anarchy, drugs, and hedonistic pleasures over unquestioning social compliance, consumerism, and closed-mindedness. Of them, Allen Ginsberg and William S. Burroughs—both Greenwich Village residents—also wrote bluntly and honestly about homosexuality. Their writings attracted sympathetic liberal-minded people, as well as homosexuals looking for a community.

By the early 1960s, a campaign to rid New York City of gay bars was in full effect by order of Mayor Robert F. Wagner Jr., who was concerned about the image of the city in preparation for the 1964 World&#x27;s Fair. The city revoked the liquor licenses of the bars and undercover police officers worked to entrap as many homosexual men as possible. Entrapment usually consisted of an undercover officer who found a man in a bar or public park, engaged him in conversation; if the conversation headed toward the possibility that they might leave together—or the officer bought the man a drink—he was arrested for solicitation. One story in the &quot;New York Post&quot; described an arrest in a gym locker room, where the officer grabbed his crotch, moaning, and a man who asked him if he was all right was arrested. Few lawyers would defend cases as undesirable as these and some of those lawyers kicked back their fees to the arresting officer.

The Mattachine Society succeeded in getting newly elected mayor John Lindsay to end the campaign of police entrapment in New York City. They had a more difficult time with the New York State Liquor Authority (SLA). While no laws prohibited serving homosexuals, courts allowed the SLA discretion in approving and revoking liquor licenses for businesses that might become &quot;disorderly&quot;. Despite the high population of gay men and lesbians who called Greenwich Village home, very few places existed, other than bars, where they were able to congregate openly without being harassed or arrested. In 1966 the New York Mattachine held a &quot;sip-in&quot; at a Greenwich Village bar named Julius, which was frequented by gay men, to illustrate the discrimination homosexuals faced.

None of the bars frequented by gay men and lesbians were owned by gay people. Almost all of them were owned and controlled by organized crime, who treated the regulars poorly, watered down the liquor, and overcharged for drinks. However, they also paid off police to prevent frequent raids.

===Stonewall Inn===
The Stonewall Inn, located at 51 and 53 Christopher Street, along with several other establishments in the city, was owned by the Genovese crime family. In 1966, three members of the Mafia invested $3,500 to turn the Stonewall Inn into a gay bar, after it had been a restaurant and a nightclub for heterosexuals. Once a week a police officer would collect envelopes of cash as a payoff known as a gayola, as the Stonewall Inn had no liquor license. It had no running water behind the bar—dirty glasses were run through tubs of water and immediately reused. There were no fire exits, and the toilets overran consistently. Though the bar was not used for prostitution, drug sales and other black market activities took place. It was the only bar for gay men in New York City where dancing was allowed; dancing was its main draw since its re-opening as a gay club.

Visitors to the Stonewall Inn in 1969 were greeted by a bouncer who inspected them through a peephole in the door. The legal drinking age was 18 and to avoid unwittingly letting in undercover police (who were called &quot;Lily Law&quot;, &quot;Alice Blue Gown&quot;, or &quot;Betty Badge&quot;), visitors would have to be known by the doorman or &#x27;look gay&#x27;. Patrons were required to sign their names in a book to prove that the bar was a private &quot;bottle club&quot;, but they rarely signed their real names. There were two dance floors in the Stonewall. The interior was painted black, making it very dark inside, with pulsing gel lights or black lights. If police were spotted, regular white lights were turned on, signaling that everyone should stop dancing or touching. In the rear of the bar was a smaller room frequented by &quot;queens&quot;; it was one of two bars where effeminate men who wore makeup and teased their hair (though dressed in men&#x27;s clothing) could go. Only a few people in full drag were allowed in by the bouncers. The customers were &quot;98 percent male&quot; but a few lesbians sometimes came to the bar. Younger homeless adolescent males, who slept in nearby Christopher Park, would often try to get in so customers would buy them drinks. The age of the clientele ranged between the upper teens and early thirties and the racial mix was distributed among mainly white, with Black, and Hispanic patrons. Because of its mix of people, its location, and the attraction of dancing, the Stonewall Inn was known by many as &quot;&quot;the&quot; gay bar in the city&quot;.

Police raids on gay bars were frequent, occurring on average once a month for each bar. Many bars kept extra liquor in a secret panel behind the bar, or in a car down the block, to facilitate resuming business as quickly as possible if alcohol was seized. Bar management usually knew about raids beforehand due to police tip-offs, and raids occurred early enough in the evening that business could commence after the police had finished. During a typical raid, the lights were turned on and customers were lined up and their identification cards checked. Those without identification or dressed in full drag were arrested; others were allowed to leave. Some of the men, including those in drag, used their draft cards as identification. Women were required to wear three pieces of feminine clothing and would be arrested if found not wearing them. Typically, employees and management of the bars were also arrested. The period immediately before June 28, 1969, was marked by frequent raids of local bars—including a raid at the Stonewall Inn on the Tuesday before the riots—and the closing of the Checkerboard, the Tele-Star, and two other clubs in Greenwich Village.

==Riots==

===Police raid===


At 1:20 a.m. on Saturday, June 28, 1969, four plainclothes policemen in dark suits, two patrol officers in uniform, Detective Charles Smythe, and Deputy Inspector Seymour Pine arrived at the Stonewall Inn&#x27;s double doors and announced &quot;Police! We&#x27;re taking the place!&quot; Two undercover policewomen and two undercover policemen entered the bar early that evening to gather visual evidence, as the Public Morals Squad waited outside for the signal. Once ready, the undercover officers called for backup from the Sixth Precinct using the bar&#x27;s pay telephone. Stonewall employees do not recall being tipped off that a raid was to occur that night, as was the custom. The music was turned off and the main lights were turned on. Approximately 200 people were in the bar that night. Patrons who had never experienced a police raid were confused. A few who realized what was happening began to run for doors and windows in the bathrooms, but police barred the doors. Michael Fader remembered, &quot;Things happened so fast you kind of got caught not knowing. All of a sudden there were police there and we were told to all get in lines and to have our identification ready to be led out of the bar.&quot;

The raid did not go as planned. Standard procedure was to line up the patrons, check their identification and have female police officers take patrons they perceived to be women to the bathroom to verify their sex. The officers would then arrest any trans women or drag queens. The women refused to go with the officers and the men in line refused to produce their identification. The police decided to take everyone present to the police station, after separating those suspected of cross-dressing in a room in the back of the bar. All parties involved recall that a sense of discomfort spread very quickly, started by police who assaulted some of the lesbians by &quot;feeling some of them up inappropriately&quot; while frisking them.

The police were to transport the bar&#x27;s alcohol in patrol wagons. Twenty-eight cases of beer and nineteen bottles of hard liquor were seized, but the patrol wagons had not yet arrived, so patrons were required to wait in line for about 15 minutes. Those who were not arrested were released from the front door, but they did not leave quickly as usual. Instead, they stopped outside and a crowd began to grow and watch. Within minutes, between 100 and 150 people had congregated outside, some after they were released from inside the Stonewall and some after noticing the police cars and the crowd. Although the police forcefully pushed or kicked some patrons out of the bar, some customers released by the police performed for the crowd by posing and saluting the police in an exaggerated fashion. The crowd&#x27;s applause encouraged them further.

When the first patrol wagon arrived, Inspector Pine recalled that the crowd—most of whom were homosexual—had grown to at least ten times the number of people who were arrested and they all became very quiet. Confusion over radio communication delayed the arrival of a second wagon. The police began escorting Mafia members into the first wagon, to the cheers of the bystanders. Next, regular employees were loaded into the wagon. A bystander shouted, &quot;Gay power!&quot;, someone began singing &quot;We Shall Overcome&quot; and the crowd reacted with amusement and general good humor mixed with &quot;growing and intensive hostility&quot;. An officer shoved a person in drag, who responded by hitting him on the head with her purse. The cop clubbed her over the head, as the crowd began to boo. Author Edmund White, who had been passing by, recalled, &quot;Everyone&#x27;s restless, angry, and high-spirited. No one has a slogan, no one even has an attitude, but something&#x27;s brewing.&quot; Pennies, then beer bottles, were thrown at the wagon as a rumor spread through the crowd that patrons still inside the bar were being beaten.

A scuffle broke out when a woman in handcuffs was escorted from the door of the bar to the waiting police wagon several times. She escaped repeatedly and fought with four of the police, swearing and shouting, for about ten minutes. Described as &quot;a typical New York butch&quot; and &quot;a dyke–stone butch&quot;, she had been hit on the head by an officer with a baton for, as one witness claimed, complaining that her handcuffs were too tight. Bystanders recalled that the woman, whose identity remains unknown (Stormé DeLarverie has been identified by some, including herself, as the woman, but accounts vary), sparked the crowd to fight when she looked at bystanders and shouted, &quot;Why don&#x27;t you guys do something?&quot; After an officer picked her up and heaved her into the back of the wagon, the crowd became a mob and became violent.

===Violence breaks out===
The police tried to restrain some of the crowd, knocking a few people down, which incited bystanders even more. Some of those handcuffed in the wagon escaped when police left them unattended (deliberately, according to some witnesses). As the crowd tried to overturn the police wagon, two police cars and the wagon—with a few slashed tires—left immediately, with Inspector Pine urging them to return as soon as possible. The commotion attracted more people who learned what was happening. Someone in the crowd declared that the bar had been raided because &quot;they didn&#x27;t pay off the cops&quot;, to which someone else yelled, &quot;Let&#x27;s pay them off!&quot; Coins sailed through the air towards the police as the crowd shouted &quot;Pigs!&quot; and &quot;Faggot cops!&quot; Beer cans were thrown and the police lashed out, dispersing some of the crowd who found a construction site nearby with stacks of bricks. The police, outnumbered by between 500 and 600 people, grabbed several people, including activist folk singer (and mentor of Bob Dylan) Dave Van Ronk—who had been attracted to the revolt from a bar two doors away from the Stonewall. Though Van Ronk was not gay, he had experienced police violence when he participated in antiwar demonstrations: &quot;As far as I was concerned, anybody who&#x27;d stand against the cops was all right with me and that&#x27;s why I stayed in... Every time you turned around the cops were pulling some outrage or another.&quot; Van Ronk was the first of thirteen arrested that night. Ten police officers—including two policewomen—barricaded themselves, Van Ronk, Howard Smith (a column writer for &quot;The Village Voice&quot;), and several handcuffed detainees inside the Stonewall Inn for their own safety.

Multiple accounts of the riot assert that there was no pre-existing organization or apparent cause for the demonstration; what ensued was spontaneous. Michael Fader explained:

We all had a collective feeling like we&#x27;d had enough of this kind of shit. It wasn&#x27;t anything tangible anybody said to anyone else, it was just kind of like everything over the years had come to a head on that one particular night in the one particular place and it was not an organized demonstration...

The only known photograph from the first night of the riots, taken by freelance photographer Joseph Ambrosini, shows the homeless gay youth who slept in nearby Christopher Park, scuffling with police. Jackie Hormona and Tommy Lanigan-Schmidt are on the far left.

The Mattachine Society newsletter a month later offered its explanation of why the riots occurred: &quot;It catered largely to a group of people who are not welcome in, or cannot afford, other places of homosexual social gathering... The Stonewall became home to these kids. When it was raided, they fought for it. That and the fact that they had nothing to lose other than the most tolerant and broadminded gay place in town, explains why.&quot;

Garbage cans, garbage, bottles, rocks, and bricks were hurled at the building, breaking the windows. Witnesses attest that &quot;flame queens&quot;, hustlers, and gay &quot;street kids&quot;—the most outcast people in the gay community—were responsible for the first volley of projectiles, as well as the uprooting of a parking meter used as a battering ram on the doors of the Stonewall Inn.

The mob lit garbage on fire and stuffed it through the broken windows as the police grabbed a fire hose. Because it had no water pressure, the hose was ineffective in dispersing the crowd and seemed only to encourage them. Marsha P. Johnson later said that it was the police that had started the fire in the bar. When demonstrators broke through the windows—which had been covered by plywood by the bar owners to deter the police from raiding the bar—the police inside unholstered their pistols. The doors flew open and officers pointed their weapons at the angry crowd, threatening to shoot. Howard Smith, in the bar with the police, took a wrench from the bar and stuffed it in his pants, unsure if he might have to use it against the mob or the police. He watched someone squirt lighter fluid into the bar; as it was lit and the police took aim, sirens were heard and fire trucks arrived. The onslaught had lasted 45 minutes.

When the violence broke out, the women and transmasculine people being held down the street at The Women&#x27;s House of Detention joined in by chanting, setting fire to their belongings and tossing them into the street below. The historian Hugh Ryan says, &quot;When I would talk to people about Stonewall, they would tell me, that night on Stonewall, we looked to the prison because we saw the women rioting and chanting, &#x27;Gay rights, gay rights, gay rights.&#x27;&quot;

===Escalation===
The Tactical Patrol Force (TPF) of the New York City Police Department arrived to free the police trapped inside the Stonewall. One officer&#x27;s eye was cut and a few others were bruised from being struck by flying debris. Bob Kohler, who was walking his dog by the Stonewall that night, saw the TPF arrive:

I had been in enough riots to know the fun was over... The cops were totally humiliated. This never, ever happened. They were angrier than I guess they had ever been because everybody else had rioted... but the fairies were not supposed to riot... no group had ever forced cops to retreat before, so the anger was just enormous. I mean, they wanted to kill.

With larger numbers, police detained anyone they could and put them in patrol wagons to go to jail, though Inspector Pine recalled, &quot;Fights erupted with the transvestites, who wouldn&#x27;t go into the patrol wagon.&quot; His recollection was corroborated by another witness across the street who said, &quot;All I could see about who was fighting was that it was transvestites and they were fighting furiously.&quot;

The TPF formed a phalanx and attempted to clear the streets by marching slowly and pushing the crowd back. The mob openly mocked the police. The crowd cheered, started impromptu kick lines and sang to the tune of &quot;Ta-ra-ra Boom-de-ay&quot;: &quot;We are the Stonewall girls/ We wear our hair in curls/ We don&#x27;t wear underwear/ We show our pubic hair.&quot; Lucian Truscott reported in &quot;The Village Voice&quot;: &quot;A stagnant situation there brought on some gay tomfoolery in the form of a chorus line facing the line of helmeted and club-carrying cops. Just as the line got into a full kick routine, the TPF advanced again and cleared the crowd of screaming gay power[-]ites down Christopher to Seventh Avenue.&quot; One participant who had been in the Stonewall during the raid recalled, &quot;The police rushed us and that&#x27;s when I realized this is not a good thing to do, because they got me in the back with a nightstick.&quot; Another account stated, &quot;I just can&#x27;t ever get that one sight out of my mind. The cops with the [nightsticks] and the kick line on the other side. It was the most amazing thing... And all the sudden that kick line, which I guess was a spoof on the machismo... I think that&#x27;s when I felt rage. Because people were getting smashed with bats. And for what? A kick line.&quot;

Marsha P. Johnson, an African-American street queen, recalled arriving at the bar around &quot;2:00 [am]&quot;, and that at that point the riots were well underway, with the building in flames. As the riots went on into the early hours of the morning, Johnson, along with Zazu Nova and Jackie Hormona, were noted as &quot;three individuals known to have been in the vanguard&quot; of the pushback against the police.

Craig Rodwell, owner of the Oscar Wilde Memorial Bookshop, reported watching police chase participants through the crooked streets, only to see them appear around the next corner behind the police. Members of the mob stopped cars, overturning one of them to block Christopher Street. Jack Nichols and Lige Clarke, in their column printed in &quot;Screw&quot;, declared that &quot;massive crowds of angry protesters chased [the police] for blocks screaming, &#x27;Catch them!
By 4:00 am, the streets had nearly been cleared. Many people sat on stoops or gathered nearby in Christopher Park throughout the morning, dazed in disbelief at what had transpired. Many witnesses remembered the surreal and eerie quiet that descended upon Christopher Street, though there continued to be &quot;electricity in the air&quot;. One commented: &quot;There was a certain beauty in the aftermath of the riot... It was obvious, at least to me, that a lot of people really were gay and, you know, this was our street.&quot; Thirteen people had been arrested. Some in the crowd were hospitalized, and four police officers were injured. Almost everything in the Stonewall Inn was broken. Inspector Pine had intended to close and dismantle the Stonewall Inn that night. Pay phones, toilets, mirrors, jukeboxes, and cigarette machines were all smashed, possibly in the riot and possibly by the police.

===Second night of rioting===
During the siege of the Stonewall, Craig Rodwell called &quot;The New York Times&quot;, the &quot;New York Post&quot;, and the &quot;Daily News&quot; to tell them what was happening. All three papers covered the riots; the &quot;Daily News&quot; placed coverage on the front page. News of the riot spread quickly throughout Greenwich Village, fueled by rumors that it had been organized by the Students for a Democratic Society, the Black Panthers, or triggered by &quot;a homosexual police officer whose roommate went dancing at the Stonewall against the officer&#x27;s wishes&quot;. All day Saturday, June 28, people came to stare at the burned and blackened Stonewall Inn. Graffiti appeared on the walls of the bar, declaring &quot;Drag power&quot;, &quot;They invaded our rights&quot;, &quot;Support gay power&quot; and &quot;Legalize gay bars&quot;, along with accusations of police looting and—regarding the status of the bar—&quot;We are open.&quot;

The next night, rioting again surrounded Christopher Street; participants remember differently which night was more frantic or violent. Many of the same people returned from the previous evening—hustlers, street youths, and &quot;queens&quot;—but they were joined by &quot;police provocateurs&quot;, curious bystanders, and even tourists. Remarkable to many was the sudden exhibition of homosexual affection in public, as described by one witness: &quot;From going to places where you had to knock on a door and speak to someone through a peephole in order to get in. We were just out. We were in the streets.&quot;

Thousands of people had gathered in front of the Stonewall, which had opened again, choking Christopher Street until the crowd spilled into adjoining blocks. The throng surrounded buses and cars, harassing the occupants unless they either admitted they were gay or indicated their support for the demonstrators. Marsha P. Johnson was seen climbing a lamppost and dropping a heavy bag onto the hood of a police car, shattering the windshield.

As on the previous evening, fires were started in garbage cans throughout the neighborhood. More than a hundred police were present from the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth and Ninth Precincts, but after 2:00 a.m. the TPF arrived again. Kick lines and police chases waxed and waned; when police captured demonstrators, whom the majority of witnesses described as &quot;sissies&quot; or &quot;swishes&quot;, the crowd surged to recapture them. Again, street battling ensued until 4:00 am.

Beat poet and longtime Greenwich Village resident Allen Ginsberg lived on Christopher Street and happened upon the jubilant chaos. After he learned of the riot that had occurred the previous evening, he stated, &quot;Gay power! Isn&#x27;t that great!... It&#x27;s about time we did something to assert ourselves&quot; and visited the open Stonewall Inn for the first time. While walking home, he declared to Lucian Truscott, &quot;You know, the guys there were so beautiful—they&#x27;ve lost that wounded look that fags all had 10 years ago.&quot;

Activist Mark Segal recounts that Martha Shelley and Marty Robinson stood and made speeches from the front door of the Stonewall on June 29, 1969, the second night of the riot.

===Leaflets, press coverage, and more violence===

Activity in Greenwich Village was sporadic on Monday, June 30, and Tuesday, July 1, partly due to rain. Police and Village residents had a few altercations, as both groups antagonized each other. Craig Rodwell and his partner Fred Sargeant took the opportunity the morning after the first riot to print and distribute 5,000 leaflets, one of them reading: &quot;Get the Mafia and the Cops out of Gay Bars.&quot; The leaflets called for gay people to own their own establishments, for a boycott of the Stonewall and other Mafia-owned bars, and for public pressure on the mayor&#x27;s office to investigate the &quot;intolerable situation&quot;.

Not everyone in the gay community considered the revolt a positive development. To many older homosexuals and many members of the Mattachine Society who had worked throughout the 1960s to promote homosexuals as no different from heterosexuals, the display of violence and effeminate behavior was embarrassing. Randy Wicker, who had marched in the first gay picket lines before the White House in 1965, said the &quot;screaming queens forming chorus lines and kicking went against everything that I wanted people to think about homosexuals... that we were a bunch of drag queens in the Village acting disorderly and tacky and cheap.&quot; Others found the closing of the Stonewall Inn, termed a &quot;sleaze joint&quot;, as advantageous to the Village.

On Wednesday, however, &quot;The Village Voice&quot; ran reports of the riots, written by Howard Smith and Lucian Truscott, that included unflattering descriptions of the events and its participants: &quot;forces of faggotry&quot;, &quot;limp wrists&quot; and &quot;Sunday fag follies&quot;. A mob descended upon Christopher Street once again and threatened to burn down the offices of &quot;The Village Voice,&quot; which at the time was headquartered several buildings west of the Stonewall Inn on Christopher Street; that proximity gave Truscott and other writers for the newspaper first hand observations of the uprising. Also in the mob of between 500 and 1,000 were other groups that had had unsuccessful confrontations with the police and were curious how the police were defeated in this situation. Another explosive street battle took place, with injuries to demonstrators and police alike, local shops getting looted, and arrests of five people. The incidents on Wednesday night lasted about an hour and were summarized by one witness: &quot;The word is out. Christopher Street shall be liberated. The fags have had it with oppression.&quot;

==Aftermath==

The feeling of urgency spread throughout Greenwich Village, even to people who had not witnessed the riots. Many who were moved by the rebellion attended organizational meetings, sensing an opportunity to take action. On July 4, 1969, the Mattachine Society performed its annual picket in front of Independence Hall in Philadelphia, called the Annual Reminder. Organizers Craig Rodwell, Frank Kameny, Randy Wicker, Barbara Gittings, and Kay Lahusen, who had all participated for several years, took a bus along with other picketers from New York City to Philadelphia. Since 1965, the pickets had been very controlled: women wore skirts and men wore suits and ties and all marched quietly in organized lines. This year Rodwell remembered feeling restricted by the rules Kameny had set. When two women spontaneously held hands, Kameny broke them apart, saying, &quot;None of that! None of that!&quot; Rodwell, however, convinced about ten couples to hold hands. The hand-holding couples made Kameny furious, but they earned more press attention than all of the previous marches. Participant Lilli Vincenz remembered, &quot;It was clear that things were changing. People who had felt oppressed now felt empowered.&quot; Rodwell returned to New York City determined to change the established quiet, meek ways of trying to get attention. One of his first priorities was planning Christopher Street Liberation Day.

===Gay Liberation Front===
Although the Mattachine Society had existed since the 1950s, many of their methods now seemed too mild for people who had witnessed or been inspired by the riots. Mattachine recognized the shift in attitudes in a story from their newsletter entitled, &quot;The Hairpin Drop Heard Around the World.&quot; When a Mattachine officer suggested an &quot;amicable and sweet&quot; candlelight vigil demonstration, a man in the audience fumed and shouted, &quot;Sweet! &quot;Bullshit!&quot; That&#x27;s the role society has been forcing these queens to play.&quot; With a flyer announcing: &quot;Do You Think Homosexuals Are Revolting? You Bet Your Sweet Ass We Are!&quot;, the Gay Liberation Front (GLF) was soon formed, the first gay organization to use &quot;gay&quot; in its name. Previous organizations such as the Mattachine Society, the Daughters of Bilitis (DOB), and various homophile groups had masked their purpose by deliberately choosing obscure names.

The rise of militancy became apparent to Frank Kameny and Barbara Gittings—who had worked in homophile organizations for years and were both very public about their roles—when they attended a GLF meeting to see the new group. A young GLF member demanded to know who they were and what their credentials were. Gittings, nonplussed, stammered, &quot;I&#x27;m gay. That&#x27;s why I&#x27;m here.&quot; The GLF borrowed tactics from and aligned themselves with black and antiwar demonstrators with the ideal that they &quot;could work to restructure American society&quot;. They took on causes of the Black Panthers, marching to the Women&#x27;s House of Detention in support of Afeni Shakur and other radical New Left causes. Four months after the group formed, however, it disbanded when members were unable to agree on operating procedure.

===Gay Activists Alliance===
Within six months of the Stonewall riots, activists started a citywide newspaper called &quot;Gay&quot;; they considered it necessary because the most liberal publication in the city—&quot;The Village Voice&quot;—refused to print the word &quot;gay&quot; in GLF advertisements seeking new members and volunteers. Two other newspapers were initiated within a six-week period: &quot;Come Out!&quot; and &quot;Gay Power&quot;; the readership of these three periodicals quickly climbed to between 20,000 and 25,000.

GLF members organized several same-sex dances, but GLF meetings were chaotic. When Bob Kohler asked for clothes and money to help the homeless youth who had participated in the riots, many of whom slept in Christopher Park or Sheridan Square, the response was a discussion on the downfall of capitalism. In late December 1969, several people who had visited GLF meetings and left out of frustration formed the Gay Activists Alliance (GAA). The GAA was to be more orderly and entirely focused on gay issues. Their constitution began, &quot;We as liberated homosexual activists demand the freedom for expression of our dignity and value as human beings.&quot; The GAA developed and perfected a confrontational tactic called a zap: they would catch a politician off guard during a public relations opportunity and force him or her to acknowledge gay and lesbian rights. City councilmen were zapped and mayor John Lindsay was zapped several times—once on television when GAA members made up the majority of the audience.

Police raids on gay bars did not stop after the Stonewall riots. In March 1970, deputy inspector Seymour Pine raided the Zodiac and 17 Barrow Street. An after-hours gay club with no liquor or occupancy licenses called The Snake Pit was soon raided and 167 people were arrested. One of them was Diego Viñales, an Argentinian national so frightened that he might be deported as a homosexual that he tried to escape the police precinct by jumping out of a two-story window, impaling himself on a spike fence. The &quot;New York Daily News&quot; printed a graphic photo of the young man&#x27;s impalement on the front page. GAA members organized a march from Christopher Park to the Sixth Precinct in which hundreds of gay men, lesbians, and liberal sympathizers peacefully confronted the TPF. They also sponsored a letter-writing campaign to Mayor Lindsay in which the Greenwich Village Democratic Party and congressman Ed Koch sent pleas to end raids on gay bars in the city.

The Stonewall Inn lasted only a few weeks after the riot. By October 1969 it was up for rent. Village residents surmised it was too notorious a location and Rodwell&#x27;s boycott discouraged business.

===Gay Pride===
Christopher Street Liberation Day, on June 28, 1970, marked the first anniversary of the Stonewall riots with an assembly on Christopher Street; with simultaneous Gay Pride marches in Los Angeles and Chicago, these were the first Gay Pride marches in US history. The next year, Gay Pride marches took place in Boston, Dallas, Milwaukee, London, Paris, West Berlin and Stockholm. The march in New York covered 51 blocks, from Christopher Street to Central Park. The march took less than half the scheduled time due to excitement, but also due to wariness about walking through the city with gay banners and signs. Although the parade permit was delivered only two hours before the start of the march, the marchers encountered little resistance from onlookers. &quot;The New York Times&quot; reported (on the front page) that the marchers took up the entire street for about 15 city blocks. Reporting by &quot;The Village Voice&quot; was positive, describing &quot;the out-front resistance that grew out of the police raid on the Stonewall Inn one year ago&quot;.

By 1972, the participating cities included Atlanta, Buffalo, Detroit, Washington, D.C., Miami, Minneapolis, and Philadelphia, as well as San Francisco.

Frank Kameny soon realized the pivotal change brought by the Stonewall riots. An organizer of gay activism in the 1950s, he was used to persuasion, trying to convince heterosexuals that gay people were no different from them. When he and other people marched in front of the White House, the State Department, and Independence Hall only five years earlier, their objective was to look as if they could work for the US government. Ten people marched with Kameny then and they alerted no press to their intentions. Although he was stunned by the upheaval by participants in the Annual Reminder in 1969, he later observed, &quot;By the time of Stonewall, we had fifty to sixty gay groups in the country. A year later there were at least fifteen hundred. By two years later, to the extent that a count could be made, it was twenty-five hundred.&quot;

Similar to Kameny&#x27;s regret at his own reaction to the shift in attitudes after the riots, Randy Wicker came to describe his embarrassment as &quot;one of the greatest mistakes of his life&quot;. The image of gay people retaliating against police, after so many years of allowing such treatment to go unchallenged, &quot;stirred an unexpected spirit among many homosexuals&quot;. Kay Lahusen, who photographed the marches in 1965, stated, &quot;Up to 1969, this movement was generally called the homosexual or homophile movement... Many new activists consider the Stonewall uprising the birth of the gay liberation movement. Certainly, it was the birth of gay pride on a massive scale.&quot; David Carter explained that even though there were several uprisings before Stonewall, the reason Stonewall was so significant was that thousands of people were involved, the riot lasted a long time (six days), it was the first to get major media coverage, and it sparked the formation of many gay rights groups.

=== Trans organizations ===
According to Susan Stryker&#x27;s book, &quot;Transgender History&quot;, the Stonewall riots had significant effects on trans rights activism. Sylvia Rivera and Marsha P. Johnson established the Street Transvestite Action Revolutionaries (STAR) organization, as they believed that trans people weren&#x27;t being adequately represented in the Gay Activists Alliance and Gay Liberation Front. They established politicized versions of &quot;houses&quot;, which came from Black and Latino queer communities, and were places that marginalized trans youth could seek shelter.

Besides STAR, organizations such as Transvestites and Transsexuals (TAT) and Queens&#x27; Liberation Front (QLF) were also established. QLF, which was established by drag queen Lee Brewster and heterosexual transvestite Bunny Eisenhower, marched on Christopher Street Liberation Day and fought against drag erasure and for trans visibility.

==Legacy==
The Stonewall riots are often considered to be the origin or impetus of the gay liberation movement, and many studies of LGBTQ history in the U.S. are divided into pre- and post-Stonewall analyses. This has been criticized by historians of sexuality. Calls for the rights of gender and sexual minorities predate the Stonewall riots. The first homosexual movement began one hundred years earlier, in Germany. West Germany had abolished criminal liability for homosexual acts among adults over 21 years of age through a change of Section 175 of the German Criminal Code on June 25, 1969 − just three days before the Stonewall riots began. There was already the emergence of a gay liberation movement in New York at the time of the riots. The Stonewall riots were not the only time LGBTQ people organized politically amid attacks on LGBTQ establishments. The event has been said to occupy a unique place in the collective memory of many LGBTQ people, including those outside of the United States, as it &quot;is marked by an international commemorative ritual – an annual gay pride parade&quot;, according to sociologist Elizabeth A. Armstrong.

===Community===
Within two years of the Stonewall riots, there were gay rights groups in every major American city, as well as in Canada, Australia, and Western Europe. People who joined activist organizations after the riots had very little in common other than their same-sex attraction. Many who arrived at GLF or GAA meetings were taken aback by the number of gay people in one place. Race, class, ideology, and gender became frequent obstacles in the years after the riots. This was illustrated during the 1973 Stonewall rally when, moments after Barbara Gittings exuberantly praised the diversity of the crowd, feminist activist Jean O&#x27;Leary protested what she perceived as the mocking of women by cross-dressers and drag queens in attendance. During a speech by O&#x27;Leary, in which she claimed that drag queens made fun of women for entertainment value and profit, Sylvia Rivera and Lee Brewster jumped on the stage and shouted &quot;You go to bars because of what drag queens did for you and &quot;these bitches&quot; tell us to quit being ourselves!&quot; Both the drag queens and lesbian feminists in attendance left in disgust.
O&#x27;Leary also worked in the early 1970s to exclude transgender people from gay rights issues because she felt that rights for transgender people would be too difficult to attain. Sylvia Rivera left New York City in the mid-1970s, relocating to upstate New York. She later returned to the city in the mid-1990s, after the 1992 death of friend Marsha P. Johnson. Rivera lived on the &quot;gay pier&quot; at the end of Christopher street and advocated for homeless members of the gay community. The initial disagreements among participants in the movements often evolved after further reflection. O&#x27;Leary later regretted her stance against the drag queens attending in 1973: &quot;Looking back, I find this so embarrassing because my views have changed so much since then. I would never pick on a transvestite now.&quot; &quot;It was horrible. How could I work to exclude transvestites and at the same time criticize the feminists who were doing their best back in those days to exclude lesbians?&quot;

O&#x27;Leary was referring to the Lavender Menace, an appellation by second-wave feminist Betty Friedan based on attempts by members of the National Organization for Women (NOW) to distance themselves from the perception of NOW as a haven for lesbians. As part of this process, Rita Mae Brown and other lesbians who had been active in NOW were forced out. They staged a protest in 1970 at the Second Congress to Unite Women and earned the support of many NOW members, finally gaining full acceptance in 1971.

The growth of lesbian feminism in the 1970s at times so conflicted with the gay liberation movement that some lesbians refused to work with gay men. Many lesbians found men&#x27;s attitudes patriarchal and chauvinistic and saw in gay men the same misguided notions about women that they saw in heterosexual men. The issues most important to gay men—entrapment and public solicitation—were not shared by lesbians. In 1977, a Lesbian Pride Rally was organized as an alternative to sharing gay men&#x27;s issues, especially what Adrienne Rich termed &quot;the violent, self-destructive world of the gay bars&quot;. Veteran gay activist Barbara Gittings chose to work in the gay rights movement, explaining, &quot;It&#x27;s a matter of where does it hurt the most? For me it hurts the most not in the female arena, but the gay arena.&quot;

Throughout the 1970s, gay activism had significant successes. One of the first and most important was the &quot;zap&quot; in May 1970 by the Los Angeles GLF at a convention of the American Psychiatric Association (APA). At a conference on behavior modification, during a film demonstrating the use of electroshock therapy to decrease same-sex attraction, Morris Kight and GLF members in the audience interrupted the film with shouts of &quot;Torture!&quot; and &quot;Barbarism!&quot; They took over the microphone to announce that medical professionals who prescribed such therapy for their homosexual patients were complicit in torturing them. Although 20 psychiatrists in attendance left, the GLF spent the hour following the zap with those remaining, trying to convince them that homosexual people were not mentally ill. When the APA invited gay activists to speak to the group in 1972, activists brought John E. Fryer, a gay psychiatrist who wore a mask, because he felt his practice was in danger. In December 1973—in large part due to the efforts of gay activists—the APA voted unanimously to remove homosexuality from the &quot;Diagnostic and Statistical Manual&quot;.

Gay men and lesbians came together to work in grassroots political organizations responding to organized resistance in 1977. A coalition of conservatives named Save Our Children staged a campaign to repeal a civil rights ordinance in Miami-Dade County. Save Our Children was successful enough to influence similar repeals in several American cities in 1978. However, that same year, a campaign in California called the Briggs Initiative, designed to force the dismissal of homosexual public school employees, was defeated. Reaction to the influence of Save Our Children and the Briggs Initiative in the gay community was so significant that it has been called the second Stonewall for many activists, marking their initiation into political participation. The subsequent 1979 National March on Washington for Lesbian and Gay Rights was timed to coincide with the tenth anniversary of the Stonewall riots.

===Rejection of prior gay subculture===

The Stonewall riots marked such a significant turning point that many aspects of prior gay and lesbian culture, such as bar culture formed from decades of shame and secrecy, were forcefully ignored and denied. Historian Martin Duberman writes, &quot;The decades preceding Stonewall... continue to be regarded by most gay men and lesbians as some vast neolithic wasteland.&quot; Sociologist Barry Adam notes, &quot;Every social movement must choose at some point what to retain and what to reject out of its past. What traits are the results of oppression and what are healthy and authentic?&quot; In conjunction with the growing feminist movement of the early 1970s, roles of butch and femme that developed in lesbian bars in the 1950s and 1960s were rejected, because as one writer put it: &quot;all role playing is sick.&quot; Lesbian feminists considered the butch roles as archaic imitations of masculine behavior. Some women, according to Lillian Faderman, were eager to shed the roles they felt forced into playing. The roles returned for some women in the 1980s, although they allowed for more flexibility than before Stonewall.

Author Michael Bronski highlights the &quot;attack on pre-Stonewall culture&quot;, particularly gay pulp fiction for men, where the themes often reflected self-hatred or ambivalence about being gay. Many books ended unsatisfactorily and drastically, often with suicide, and writers portrayed their gay characters as alcoholics or deeply unhappy. These books, which he describes as &quot;an enormous and cohesive literature by and for gay men&quot;, have not been reissued and are lost to later generations. Dismissing the notion that the rejection was motivated by political correctness, Bronski writes, &quot;gay liberation was a youth movement whose sense of history was defined to a large degree by rejection of the past.&quot;

===Impact and recognition===
The riots spawned from a bar raid became a literal example of gay men and lesbians fighting back and a symbolic call to arms for many people. Historian David Carter remarks in his book about the Stonewall riots that the bar itself was a complex business that represented a community center, an opportunity for the Mafia to blackmail its own customers, a home, and a place of &quot;exploitation and degradation&quot;. The true legacy of the Stonewall riots, Carter insists, is the &quot;ongoing struggle for lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender equality&quot;. Historian Nicholas Edsall writes:

Stonewall has been compared to any number of acts of radical protest and defiance in American history from the Boston Tea Party on. But the best and certainly a more nearly contemporary analogy is Rosa Parks&#x27; refusal to move to the back of the bus in Montgomery, Alabama, in December 1955, which sparked the modern civil rights movement. Within months after Stonewall, radical gay liberation groups and newsletters sprang up in cities and on college campuses across America and then across all of northern Europe as well.

Before the rebellion at the Stonewall Inn, homosexuals were, as historians Dudley Clendinen and Adam Nagourney write:

a secret legion of people, known of but discounted, ignored, laughed at or despised. And like the holders of a secret, they had an advantage which was a disadvantage too, and which was true of no other minority group in the United States. They were invisible. Unlike African Americans, women, Native Americans, Jews, the Irish, Italians, Asians, Hispanics, or any other cultural group which struggled for respect and equal rights, homosexuals had no physical or cultural markings, no language or dialect which could identify them to each other, or to anyone else... But that night, for the first time, the usual acquiescence turned into violent resistance... From that night the lives of millions of gay men and lesbians and the attitude toward them of the larger culture in which they lived, began to change rapidly. People began to appear in public as homosexuals, demanding respect.

Historian Lillian Faderman calls the riots the &quot;shot heard round the world&quot;, explaining, &quot;The Stonewall Rebellion was crucial because it sounded the rally for that movement. It became an emblem of gay and lesbian power. By calling on the dramatic tactic of violent protest that was being used by other oppressed groups, the events at the Stonewall implied that homosexuals had as much reason to be disaffected as they.&quot;

Joan Nestle co-founded the Lesbian Herstory Archives in 1974 and credits &quot;its creation to that night and the courage that found its voice in the streets.&quot; Cautious, however, not to attribute the start of gay activism to the Stonewall riots, Nestle writes:

I certainly don&#x27;t see gay and lesbian history starting with Stonewall... and I don&#x27;t see resistance starting with Stonewall. What I do see is a historical coming together of forces, and the sixties changed how human beings endured things in this society and what they refused to endure... Certainly, something special happened on that night in 1969 and we&#x27;ve made it more special in our need to have what I call a point of origin... it&#x27;s more complex than saying that it all started with Stonewall.

The events of the early morning of June 28, 1969, were not the first instances of gay men and lesbians fighting back against police in New York City and elsewhere. Not only had the Mattachine Society been active in major cities such as Los Angeles and Chicago, but similarly marginalized people started the riot at Compton&#x27;s Cafeteria in 1966 and another riot responded to a raid on Los Angeles&#x27; Black Cat Tavern in 1967. However, several circumstances were in play that made the Stonewall riots memorable. The location of the Lower Manhattan raid was a factor: it was across the street from &quot;The Village Voice&quot; offices, and the narrow crooked streets gave the rioters an advantage over the police. Many of the participants and residents of Greenwich Village were involved in political organizations that were effectively able to mobilize a large and cohesive gay community in the weeks and months after the rebellion. The most significant facet of the Stonewall riots, however, was the commemoration of them in Christopher Street Liberation Day, which grew into the annual Gay Pride events around the world.

Stonewall (officially Stonewall Equality Limited) is an LGBTQ rights charity in the United Kingdom, founded in 1989 and named after the Stonewall Inn because of the Stonewall riots. The Stonewall Awards is an annual event the charity has held since 2006 to recognize people who have affected the lives of British lesbian, gay, and bisexual people.

The middle of the 1990s was marked by the inclusion of bisexuals as a represented group within the gay community, when they successfully sought to be included on the platform of the 1993 March on Washington for Lesbian, Gay and Bi Equal Rights and Liberation. Transgender people also asked to be included but were not, though trans-inclusive language was added to the march&#x27;s list of demands. The transgender community continued to find itself simultaneously welcome and at odds with the gay community as attitudes about non-binary gender discrimination and pansexual orientation developed and came increasingly into conflict. In 1994, New York City celebrated &quot;Stonewall 25&quot; with a march that went past the United Nations Headquarters and into Central Park. Estimates put the attendance at 1.1 million people. Sylvia Rivera led an alternate march in New York City in 1994 to protest the exclusion of transgender people from the events.

Attendance at LGBTQ Pride events has grown substantially over the decades. Most large cities around the world now have some kind of Pride demonstration; Pride events in some cities mark the largest annual celebration of any kind. The growing trend towards commercializing marches into parades—with events receiving corporate sponsorship—has caused concern about taking away the autonomy of the original grassroots demonstrations.

President Barack Obama declared June 2009 Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Pride Month, citing the riots as a reason to &quot;commit to achieving equal justice under law for LGBT Americans&quot;. The year marked the 40th anniversary of the riots. An editorial in the &quot;Washington Blade&quot; compared the scruffy, violent activism during and following the Stonewall riots to the lackluster response to failed promises given by President Obama; for being ignored, wealthy LGBTQ activists reacted by promising to give less money to Democratic causes. Two years later, the Stonewall Inn served as a rallying point for celebrations after the New York State Senate voted to pass same-sex marriage. The act was signed into law by Governor Andrew Cuomo on June 24, 2011.

Obama also referenced the Stonewall riots in a call for full equality during his second inaugural address on January 21, 2013:

We, the people, declare today that the most evident of truths—that all of us are created equal—is the star that guides us still; just as it guided our forebears through Seneca Falls and Selma and Stonewall... Our journey is not complete until our gay brothers and sisters are treated like anyone else under the law—for if we are truly created equal, then surely the love we commit to one another must be equal as well.

This was a historic moment: the first time that a president mentioned gay rights or the word &quot;gay&quot; in an inaugural address.

Throughout June 2019, Stonewall 50 – WorldPride NYC 2019, produced by Heritage of Pride in partnership with the I Love New York program&#x27;s LGBTQ division, took place in New York to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the Stonewall uprising. The final official estimate included 5  million visitors attending in Manhattan alone, making it the largest LGBTQ celebration in history. June is traditionally Pride month in New York City and worldwide, and the events were held under the auspices of the annual NYC Pride March. On June 6, 2019, coinciding with WorldPride being celebrated in New York City, Police Commissioner James P. O&#x27;Neill apologized on behalf of the NYPD for the actions of its officers at the Stonewall uprising.

The official 50th-anniversary commemoration of the Stonewall Uprising occurred on June 28 on Christopher Street in front of Stonewall Inn. The official commemoration was themed as a rally, in reference to the original rallies in front of Stonewall Inn in 1969. Speakers at this event included mayor Bill De Blasio, senator Kirsten Gillibrand, congressman Jerry Nadler, American activist X González, and global activist Rémy Bonny.

In 2019, Paris, France, officially named a square in the Marais district as Place des Émeutes-de-Stonewall (Stonewall Riots Place).

====Stonewall Day====
In 2018, 49 years after the uprising, Stonewall Day was announced as a commemoration day by Pride Live, a social advocacy and community engagement organization. The second Stonewall Day was held on Friday, June 28, 2019, outside the Stonewall Inn. During this event, Pride Live introduced their Stonewall Ambassadors program, to raise awareness for the 50th anniversary of the Stonewall Riots.

=== Historic landmark and monument ===

In June 1999, the US Department of the Interior included 51 and 53 Christopher Street and the surrounding area in Greenwich Village into the National Register of Historic Places, the first of significance to the LGBTQ community. In a dedication ceremony, Assistant Secretary of the Department of the Interior John Berry stated, &quot;Let it forever be remembered that here—on this spot—men and women stood proud, they stood fast, so that we may be who we are, we may work where we will, live where we choose, and love whom our hearts desire.&quot; The Stonewall Inn was also named a National Historic Landmark in February 2000. On June 23, 2015, the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission designated Stonewall as a city landmark, the first to be designated based on its LGBTQ cultural significance alone.

On June 24, 2016, President Barack Obama announced the establishment of the Stonewall National Monument, administered by the National Park Service. The designation protects Christopher Park and adjacent areas totaling more than seven acres; the Stonewall Inn is within the boundaries of the monument but remains privately owned. The National Park Foundation formed a new nonprofit organization to raise funds for a ranger station and interpretive exhibits for the monument, including the first official national visitor center dedicated to the LGBTQ+ experience, which was inaugurated on June 28, 2024. The New York City Subway&#x27;s Christopher Street–Sheridan Square station was renamed the Christopher Street–Stonewall station on the same day. 

=== Removal of references to transgender people ===
In 2025, references to transgender and queer people were removed from the monument&#x27;s official website, prompting protests.

==Media representations==
No newsreel or TV footage was taken of the riots and few home movies and photographs exist, but those that do have been used in documentaries.

===Film===
* &quot;Before Stonewall: The Making of a Gay and Lesbian Community&quot; (1984), a documentary on the decades leading up to the Stonewall Rebellion
* &quot;Stonewall&quot; (1995), a dramatic presentation of the events leading up to the riots
* &quot;After Stonewall&quot; (1999), a documentary of the years from Stonewall to the century&#x27;s end
* &quot;Stonewall Uprising&quot; (2010), a documentary using archival footage, photographs, documents, and witness statements
* &quot;Stonewall&quot; (2015), a drama about a fictional protagonist who interacts with fictionalized versions of some of the people in and around the riots
* &quot;Happy Birthday, Marsha!&quot; (2016), a short, experimental drama, inspired by some of the legends surrounding gay and transgender rights activists Marsha P. Johnson and Sylvia Rivera, set on the night of the riots

=== Music ===
* Activist Madeline Davis wrote the folk song &quot;Stonewall Nation&quot; in 1971 after attending her first gay civil rights march. Released on Mark Custom Recording Service, it is widely regarded as the first gay liberation record, with lyrics that &quot;celebrate the resiliency and potential power of radical gay activism&quot;.
* The song 69: Judy Garland&quot;, written by Stephin Merritt and appearing on &quot;50 Song Memoir&quot; by The Magnetic Fields, centers on the Stonewall Riots and the idea that they were caused by the death of Judy Garland six days earlier, on June 22, 1969.
* New York City Opera commissioned the English composer Iain Bell and American librettist Mark Campbell in 2018 to write the opera &quot;Stonewall&quot; to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the riots, to be premiered on June 19, 2019 and directed by Leonard Foglia.
* The Stonewall Celebration Concert is the debut studio album by Renato Russo, released in 1994. The album was a tribute to twenty-five years of the Stonewall riots in New York. Part of the royalties was donated to Ação da Cidadania Contra a Fome, a Miséria e Pela Vida (Citizen Action Against Hunger and Poverty and for Life) campaign.

=== Theatre ===
* &quot;Street Theatre&quot; (1982) by Doric Wilson

==See also==

* Christopher Street Day
* LGBTQ culture in New York City
* LGBTQ history in New York
* LGBTQ rights in New York
* Queer Liberation March
* Transgender culture of New York City
Analogous events
* Dance of the Forty-One (1901), Mexico
* Ariston Bathhouse raid (1903), the first anti-gay police raid in New York City
* Huanchaca street scandal (June 15, 1969), Chile
* Operation Soap (1981), Toronto, Canada
* Sex Garage raid (1990), Montreal, Canada
* Tasty nightclub raid (1994), dubbed &quot;Australia&#x27;s Stonewall&quot;
* Bar Abanicos police raid (1997), Ecuador
* Rainbow Night (2020), dubbed &quot;Polish Stonewall&quot;

==Notes==
== Citations ==
== Sources ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* .
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==

* &quot;Police Records Document Start of Stonewall Uprising&quot;, &quot;The New York Times&quot;, June 22, 2009
* &quot;Village Voice&quot; Articles that Sparked a Final Night of Rioting: &quot;Full Moon Over the Stonewall&quot; by Howard Smith and &quot;Gay Power Comes to Sheridan Square&quot; by Lucian Truscott
* &quot;The Night They Raided Stonewall&quot; by Martin Duberman, &quot;Grand Street&quot; (1993, No. 44)
* Newspaper reports of the event
* &quot;Media Could Use a Stonewall Uprising of Their Own&quot; by Karl Frisch, &quot;The Huffington Post&quot;
* &quot;A Look Back at the Uprising that Launched the Modern Gay Rights Movement&quot; – video report by &quot;Democracy Now!&quot;, begins at 12:40 in the archived June 26 2009 episode at the Internet Archive; incorporates portions of &quot;Remembering Stonewall&quot;, a 1989 radio retrospective narrated and produced by David Isay (subsequent founder of StoryCorps) and an interview with historian David Carter, author of the &quot;Stonewall: The Riots that Sparked the Gay Revolution&quot;
* &quot;Stonewall Uprising&quot; on PBS&#x27; &quot;American Experience&quot;
* National Park Service: Stonewall National Monument
* &quot;Who Threw the First Brick at Stonewall?&quot; – 2019 &quot;New York Times&quot; video featuring interviews with participants in the Stonewall uprising, historians and early members of the Gay Liberation movement
* Stonewall Uprising Interview Collection from the American Archive of Public Broadcasting
* Stonewall Forever a Monument to 50 Years of Pride Stonewall National Monument
* Stonewall Veterans&#x27; Association Official site of the Stonewall Rebellion Veterans&#x27; Association</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q51402" start="4" end="19" title="Stonewall riots" label="Stonewall riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q51402" start="39" end="57" title="Stonewall riots" label="Stonewall uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q51402" start="59" end="78" title="Stonewall riots" label="Stonewall rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q51402" start="80" end="100" title="Stonewall riots" label="Stonewall revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q51402" start="112" end="121" title="Stonewall riots" label="Stonewall"/>
<link wikidata="Q97368680" start="187" end="198" title="police raid" label="police raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261362" start="267" end="280" title="Stonewall Inn" label="Stonewall Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q205380" start="289" end="306" title="Greenwich Village" label="Greenwich Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q11253" start="323" end="338" title="Lower Manhattan" label="Lower Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817570" start="390" end="441" title="List of LGBTQ actions in the United States prior to the Stonewall riots" label="not the first time American homosexuals fought back"/>
<link wikidata="Q589656" start="486" end="503" title="sexual minorities" label="sexual minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q4612907" start="556" end="575" title="gay rights movement" label="gay rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q853495" start="779" end="788" title="homophile" label="homophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="1076" end="1114" title="African American Civil Rights Movement" label="African American Civil Rights Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995893" start="1120" end="1147" title="Counterculture of the 1960s" label="Counterculture of the 1960s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254589" start="1153" end="1175" title="Opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War" label="antiwar demonstrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q125752" start="1490" end="1495" title="American Mafia" label="Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q337084" start="1614" end="1624" title="drag queen" label="drag queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q189125" start="1665" end="1676" title="transgender" label="transgender"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261491" start="1710" end="1718" title="Male prostitution" label="hustlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q328473" start="1929" end="1949" title="New York City police" label="New York City police"/>
<link wikidata="Q17888" start="2227" end="2245" title="sexual orientation" label="sexual orientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q51404" start="2734" end="2746" title="pride parade" label="pride parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q24799699" start="2753" end="2780" title="Stonewall National Monument" label="Stonewall National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3028" end="3040" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q16001719" start="3202" end="3212" title="Barry Adam" label="Barry Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="3250" end="3264" title="anti-communism" label="anti-communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q189197" start="3274" end="3289" title="Joseph McCarthy" label="Joseph McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="3362" end="3371" title="U.S. Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="3472" end="3481" title="communist" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896360" start="3593" end="3601" title="lavender scare" label="included"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="3622" end="3643" title="U.S. State Department" label="U.S. State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q34284" start="3688" end="3697" title="blackmail" label="blackmail"/>
<link wikidata="Q743567" start="3742" end="3755" title="Clyde R. Hoey" label="Clyde R. Hoey"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="4298" end="4329" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="4441" end="4457" title="U.S. Post Office" label="U.S. Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q466524" start="4928" end="4960" title="American Psychiatric Association" label="American Psychiatric Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q201561" start="4995" end="5028" title="Diagnostic and Statistical Manual" label="Diagnostic and Statistical Manual"/>
<link wikidata="Q524142" start="5375" end="5388" title="Evelyn Hooker" label="Evelyn Hooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637438" start="5971" end="5989" title="Mattachine Society" label="Mattachine Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285538" start="6033" end="6042" title="Harry Hay" label="Harry Hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145872" start="6554" end="6574" title="Daughters of Bilitis" label="Daughters of Bilitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899269" start="6861" end="6882" title="political repression" label="government repression"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817375" start="6919" end="6928" title="ONE, Inc." label="ONE, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q3325543" start="7208" end="7233" title="One, Inc. v. Olesen" label="went to the Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891541" start="7324" end="7333" title="Homophile movement" label="Homophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396975" start="7497" end="7509" title="Frank Kameny" label="Frank Kameny"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817473" start="7763" end="7789" title="mental health professional" label="mental health professional"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="8025" end="8036" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254589" start="8375" end="8404" title="opposition to the Vietnam War" label="opposition to the Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458483" start="8760" end="8781" title="sex assigned at birth" label="sex assigned at birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q486680" start="8857" end="8869" title="transvestite" label="transvestite"/>
<link wikidata="Q39086083" start="9340" end="9366" title="Cooper Do-nuts Riot" label="riot at the Cooper Do-nuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539788" start="9525" end="9549" title="Compton&amp;#x27;s Cafeteria" label="Compton&amp;#x27;s Cafeteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q146123" start="9747" end="9757" title="plexiglass" label="plexiglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7648438" start="9893" end="9906" title="Susan Stryker" label="Susan Stryker"/>
<link wikidata="Q189125" start="10223" end="10234" title="transgender" label="transgender"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="10291" end="10300" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q189074" start="10340" end="10346" title="Harlem" label="Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10402" end="10413" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q399999" start="10711" end="10722" title="Prohibition in the United States" label="Prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q616100" start="10979" end="10990" title="speakeasies" label="speakeasies"/>
<link wikidata="Q87732338" start="11200" end="11218" title="Eve&amp;#x27;s Hangout" label="Eve&amp;#x27;s Hangout"/>
<link wikidata="Q213457" start="11355" end="11359" title="Beat Generation" label="Beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6711" start="11564" end="11578" title="Allen Ginsberg" label="Allen Ginsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q188176" start="11583" end="11603" title="William S. Burroughs" label="William S. Burroughs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11900" end="11920" title="Robert F. Wagner Jr." label="Robert F. Wagner Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1189910" start="11991" end="12013" title="1964 World&amp;#x27;s Fair" label="1964 World&amp;#x27;s Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066302" start="12148" end="12158" title="Entrapment" label="Entrapment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2785824" start="12411" end="12423" title="solicitation" label="solicitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q211374" start="12448" end="12461" title="New York Post" label="New York Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q666931" start="12810" end="12822" title="John Lindsay" label="John Lindsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713291" start="12922" end="12953" title="Alcohol laws of New York" label="New York State Liquor Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q6309626" start="13438" end="13444" title="Julius (New York City)" label="Julius"/>
<link wikidata="Q125752" start="13658" end="13673" title="American Mafia" label="organized crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086990" start="13884" end="13902" title="Christopher Street" label="Christopher Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348502" start="13974" end="13995" title="Genovese crime family" label="Genovese crime family"/>
<link wikidata="Q96379127" start="14241" end="14247" title="gayola" label="gayola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431927" start="14277" end="14291" title="liquor license" label="liquor license"/>
<link wikidata="Q10860242" start="14763" end="14770" title="bouncer" label="bouncer"/>
<link wikidata="Q961734" start="15362" end="15373" title="black light" label="black light"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410369" start="15728" end="15732" title="Drag (clothing)" label="drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q24799699" start="15914" end="15930" title="Christopher Park" label="Christopher Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="17028" end="17038" title="draft card" label="draft card"/>
<link wikidata="Q7459213" start="17685" end="17697" title="Seymour Pine" label="Seymour Pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314091" start="20839" end="20856" title="We Shall Overcome" label="We Shall Overcome"/>
<link wikidata="Q729117" start="21141" end="21153" title="Edmund White" label="Edmund White"/>
<link wikidata="Q121650" start="21845" end="21850" title="baton (law enforcement)" label="baton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620310" start="21995" end="22012" title="Stormé DeLarverie" label="Stormé DeLarverie"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="23408" end="23417" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173376" start="23419" end="23432" title="Dave Van Ronk" label="Dave Van Ronk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5920891" start="23977" end="23989" title="Howard Smith (director)" label="Howard Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q876158" start="24017" end="24034" title="The Village Voice" label="The Village Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791711" start="24836" end="24857" title="Tommy Lanigan-Schmidt" label="Tommy Lanigan-Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q953960" start="25648" end="25661" title="parking meter" label="parking meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q208129" start="25672" end="25685" title="battering ram" label="battering ram"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773400" start="25945" end="25962" title="Marsha P. Johnson" label="Marsha P. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q219803" start="26106" end="26113" title="plywood" label="plywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429600" start="26504" end="26517" title="Charcoal lighter fluid" label="lighter fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q205234" start="26571" end="26577" title="siren (alarm)" label="sirens"/>
<link wikidata="Q12811135" start="26747" end="26782" title="New York Women&amp;#x27;s House of Detention" label="The Women&amp;#x27;s House of Detention"/>
<link wikidata="Q160146" start="27152" end="27173" title="Riot control" label="Tactical Patrol Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933052" start="27373" end="27383" title="Bob Kohler" label="Bob Kohler"/>
<link wikidata="Q180335" start="28259" end="28266" title="phalanx" label="phalanx"/>
<link wikidata="Q110486213" start="28420" end="28429" title="kick line" label="kick line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672741" start="28461" end="28480" title="Ta-ra-ra Boom-de-ay" label="Ta-ra-ra Boom-de-ay"/>
<link wikidata="Q16116980" start="28609" end="28624" title="Lucian Truscott IV" label="Lucian Truscott"/>
<link wikidata="Q3917621" start="28749" end="28760" title="chorus line" label="chorus line"/>
<link wikidata="Q121650" start="29179" end="29189" title="Baton (law enforcement)" label="nightstick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773400" start="29586" end="29603" title="Marsha P. Johnson" label="Marsha P. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q337084" start="29625" end="29637" title="Drag queen" label="street queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181392" start="30004" end="30017" title="Craig Rodwell" label="Craig Rodwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915475" start="30032" end="30061" title="Oscar Wilde Memorial Bookshop" label="Oscar Wilde Memorial Bookshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q354723" start="30288" end="30300" title="Jack Nichols (activist)" label="Jack Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545890" start="30305" end="30316" title="Lige Clarke" label="Lige Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358461" start="30351" end="30356" title="Screw (magazine)" label="Screw"/>
<link wikidata="Q815249" start="31283" end="31290" title="jukebox" label="jukebox"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="31477" end="31495" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q627827" start="31548" end="31558" title="Daily News (New York)" label="Daily News"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250103" start="31809" end="31842" title="Students for a Democratic Society" label="Students for a Democratic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q189150" start="31848" end="31862" title="Black Panthers" label="Black Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q17514" start="32091" end="32099" title="Graffiti" label="Graffiti"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33605" end="33613" title="Organization of the New York City Police Department#Police precincts" label="Precinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769665" start="34469" end="34479" title="Mark Segal" label="Mark Segal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774562" start="34494" end="34508" title="Martha Shelley" label="Martha Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090572" start="34513" end="34527" title="Marty Robinson (gay activist)" label="Marty Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q96039138" start="34915" end="34928" title="Fred Sargeant" label="Fred Sargeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7292517" start="35643" end="35655" title="Randy Wicker" label="Randy Wicker"/>
<link wikidata="Q390028" start="37552" end="37569" title="Independence Hall" label="Independence Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="37573" end="37585" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769666" start="37598" end="37613" title="Annual Reminder" label="Annual Reminder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181392" start="37626" end="37639" title="Craig Rodwell" label="Craig Rodwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396975" start="37641" end="37653" title="Frank Kameny" label="Frank Kameny"/>
<link wikidata="Q7292517" start="37655" end="37667" title="Randy Wicker" label="Randy Wicker"/>
<link wikidata="Q468860" start="37669" end="37685" title="Barbara Gittings" label="Barbara Gittings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817465" start="37691" end="37702" title="Kay Lahusen" label="Kay Lahusen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16104788" start="38343" end="38356" title="Lilli Vincenz" label="Lilli Vincenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q920919" start="39361" end="39381" title="Gay Liberation Front" label="Gay Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637438" start="39503" end="39521" title="Mattachine Society" label="Mattachine Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145872" start="39527" end="39547" title="Daughters of Bilitis" label="Daughters of Bilitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254589" start="40117" end="40124" title="Opposition to the Vietnam War" label="antiwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12811135" start="40279" end="40310" title="New York Women&amp;#x27;s House of Detention" label="Women&amp;#x27;s House of Detention"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273636" start="40325" end="40337" title="Afeni Shakur" label="Afeni Shakur"/>
<link wikidata="Q160637" start="40356" end="40364" title="New Left" label="New Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="41324" end="41334" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q30501" start="41442" end="41464" title="Gay Activists Alliance" label="Gay Activists Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4525941" start="41756" end="41759" title="Zap (action)" label="zap"/>
<link wikidata="Q42417920" start="42344" end="42357" title="Diego Viñales" label="Diego Viñales"/>
<link wikidata="Q379693" start="42414" end="42422" title="deported" label="deported"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="42934" end="42950" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q467122" start="42967" end="42974" title="Ed Koch" label="Ed Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q51404" start="43474" end="43491" title="Pride parade" label="Gay Pride marches"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="43554" end="43560" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="43562" end="43568" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="43570" end="43579" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q56036" start="43596" end="43607" title="West Berlin" label="West Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="43612" end="43621" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6457810" start="43627" end="43644" title="NYC Pride March" label="march in New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q160409" start="43691" end="43703" title="Central Park" label="Central Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="44350" end="44357" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q40435" start="44359" end="44366" title="Buffalo, New York" label="Buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="44402" end="44413" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7648438" start="46359" end="46372" title="Susan Stryker" label="Susan Stryker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278761" start="46489" end="46502" title="Sylvia Rivera" label="Sylvia Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773400" start="46507" end="46524" title="Marsha P. Johnson" label="Marsha P. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46954" end="46984" title="Transvestites and Transsexuals" label="Transvestites and Transsexuals"/>
<link wikidata="Q20628703" start="46995" end="47024" title="Queens Liberation Front" label="Queens&amp;#x27; Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q11076311" start="47347" end="47361" title="gay liberation" label="gay liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17897" start="47392" end="47405" title="LGBTQ history" label="LGBTQ history"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003131" start="47497" end="47520" title="History of human sexuality" label="historians of sexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q589656" start="47546" end="47574" title="Sexual minorities" label="gender and sexual minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882725" start="47608" end="47633" title="first homosexual movement" label="first homosexual movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="47679" end="47691" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q249348" start="47799" end="47810" title="Section 175" label="Section 175"/>
<link wikidata="Q254217" start="48179" end="48196" title="collective memory" label="collective memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="48683" end="48702" title="Homosexuality" label="same-sex attraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q468860" start="48966" end="48982" title="Barbara Gittings" label="Barbara Gittings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817397" start="49049" end="49066" title="Jean O&amp;#x27;Leary" label="Jean O&amp;#x27;Leary"/>
<link wikidata="Q431604" start="49123" end="49137" title="cross-dressers" label="cross-dressers"/>
<link wikidata="Q337084" start="49142" end="49152" title="drag queen" label="drag queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278761" start="49294" end="49307" title="Sylvia Rivera" label="Sylvia Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q20558210" start="49312" end="49324" title="Lee Brewster" label="Lee Brewster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020341" start="49809" end="49825" title="Tarrytown, New York" label="upstate New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773400" start="49907" end="49924" title="Marsha P. Johnson" label="Marsha P. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q583992" start="50605" end="50620" title="Lavender Menace" label="Lavender Menace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977453" start="50640" end="50660" title="second-wave feminist" label="second-wave feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q234604" start="50661" end="50674" title="Betty Friedan" label="Betty Friedan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967556" start="50711" end="50742" title="National Organization for Women" label="National Organization for Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q242956" start="50849" end="50863" title="Rita Mae Brown" label="Rita Mae Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q18299" start="51095" end="51111" title="lesbian feminism" label="lesbian feminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066302" start="51430" end="51440" title="entrapment" label="entrapment"/>
<link wikidata="Q270705" start="51607" end="51620" title="Adrienne Rich" label="Adrienne Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q466524" start="52098" end="52130" title="American Psychiatric Association" label="American Psychiatric Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883473" start="52157" end="52178" title="behavior modification" label="behavior modification"/>
<link wikidata="Q131543" start="52219" end="52239" title="electroshock therapy" label="electroshock therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913771" start="52273" end="52285" title="Morris Kight" label="Morris Kight"/>
<link wikidata="Q348528" start="52826" end="52839" title="John E. Fryer" label="John E. Fryer"/>
<link wikidata="Q201561" start="53053" end="53086" title="Diagnostic and Statistical Manual" label="Diagnostic and Statistical Manual"/>
<link wikidata="Q929651" start="53141" end="53151" title="grassroots" label="grassroots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291875" start="53255" end="53272" title="Save Our Children" label="Save Our Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q468557" start="53329" end="53346" title="Miami-Dade County" label="Miami-Dade County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914801" start="53514" end="53531" title="Briggs Initiative" label="Briggs Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974232" start="53871" end="53926" title="National March on Washington for Lesbian and Gay Rights" label="National March on Washington for Lesbian and Gay Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q51389" start="54129" end="54152" title="gay and lesbian culture" label="gay and lesbian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372878" start="54262" end="54277" title="Martin Duberman" label="Martin Duberman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16001719" start="54432" end="54442" title="Barry Adam" label="Barry Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q852338" start="54718" end="54733" title="butch and femme" label="butch and femme"/>
<link wikidata="Q452159" start="54986" end="55002" title="Lillian Faderman" label="Lillian Faderman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808454" start="55275" end="55291" title="gay pulp fiction" label="gay pulp fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4679542" start="57162" end="57176" title="Adam Nagourney" label="Adam Nagourney"/>
<link wikidata="Q452159" start="58082" end="58098" title="Lillian Faderman" label="Lillian Faderman"/>
<link wikidata="Q545322" start="58513" end="58524" title="Joan Nestle" label="Joan Nestle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6530249" start="58540" end="58565" title="Lesbian Herstory Archives" label="Lesbian Herstory Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817695" start="59706" end="59722" title="Black Cat Tavern" label="Black Cat Tavern"/>
<link wikidata="Q11253" start="59837" end="59852" title="Lower Manhattan" label="Lower Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q876158" start="59908" end="59925" title="The Village Voice" label="The Village Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q51406" start="60394" end="60403" title="Gay Pride" label="Gay Pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q681943" start="60430" end="60439" title="Stonewall (charity)" label="Stonewall"/>
<link wikidata="Q17898" start="60486" end="60498" title="LGBTQ rights" label="LGBTQ rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261362" start="60566" end="60579" title="Stonewall Inn" label="Stonewall Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619353" start="60616" end="60632" title="Stonewall Awards" label="Stonewall Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q43200" start="60834" end="60842" title="bisexual" label="bisexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q4105542" start="60966" end="61037" title="March on Washington for Lesbian, Gay and Bi Equal Rights and Liberation" label="March on Washington for Lesbian, Gay and Bi Equal Rights and Liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q48270" start="61305" end="61337" title="non-binary gender" label="non-binary gender discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q271534" start="61342" end="61363" title="pansexuality" label="pansexual orientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11297" start="61502" end="61529" title="United Nations Headquarters" label="United Nations Headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q160409" start="61539" end="61551" title="Central Park" label="Central Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278761" start="61605" end="61618" title="Sylvia Rivera" label="Sylvia Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="62163" end="62185" title="President Barack Obama" label="President Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q742091" start="62443" end="62459" title="Washington Blade" label="Washington Blade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722258" start="62812" end="62833" title="New York State Senate" label="New York State Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17483" start="62848" end="62865" title="Same-sex marriage in New York" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q11673" start="62907" end="62919" title="Andrew Cuomo" label="Andrew Cuomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526570" start="63020" end="63044" title="Second inauguration of Barack Obama" label="second inaugural address"/>
<link wikidata="Q65035049" start="63644" end="63678" title="Stonewall 50 – WorldPride NYC 2019" label="Stonewall 50 – WorldPride NYC 2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q564478" start="63692" end="63709" title="Heritage of Pride" label="Heritage of Pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353042" start="63734" end="63749" title="I Love New York" label="I Love New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q17150778" start="63968" end="63993" title="list of largest LGBTQ events" label="largest LGBTQ celebration"/>
<link wikidata="Q6457810" start="64130" end="64145" title="NYC Pride March" label="NYC Pride March"/>
<link wikidata="Q4127414" start="64180" end="64190" title="WorldPride" label="WorldPride"/>
<link wikidata="Q19665268" start="64246" end="64267" title="James P. O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="James P. O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261362" start="64485" end="64498" title="Stonewall Inn" label="Stonewall Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911497" start="64660" end="64674" title="Bill De Blasio" label="Bill De Blasio"/>
<link wikidata="Q22222" start="64684" end="64702" title="Kirsten Gillibrand" label="Kirsten Gillibrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q505598" start="64716" end="64728" title="Jerry Nadler" label="Jerry Nadler"/>
<link wikidata="Q49560460" start="64748" end="64758" title="X González" label="X González"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64780" end="64790" title="Rémy Bonny" label="Rémy Bonny"/>
<link wikidata="Q749573" start="64850" end="64856" title="The Marais" label="Marais"/>
<link wikidata="Q84090571" start="64869" end="64899" title="Place des Émeutes-de-Stonewall" label="Place des Émeutes-de-Stonewall"/>
<link wikidata="Q85794474" start="65040" end="65050" title="Pride Live" label="Pride Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q608427" start="65401" end="65430" title="US Department of the Interior" label="US Department of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086990" start="65450" end="65468" title="Christopher Street" label="Christopher Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q6976729" start="65524" end="65560" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Manhattan below 14th Street" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221698" start="65692" end="65702" title="John Berry (administrator)" label="John Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="65966" end="65992" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q967276" start="66033" end="66080" title="New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission" label="New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="66226" end="66238" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q24799699" start="66274" end="66301" title="Stonewall National Monument" label="Stonewall National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="66323" end="66344" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974737" start="66531" end="66555" title="National Park Foundation" label="National Park Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733" start="66805" end="66825" title="New York City Subway" label="New York City Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q638007" start="66892" end="66928" title="Christopher Street–Stonewall station" label="Christopher Street–Stonewall station"/>
<link wikidata="Q189125" start="67023" end="67034" title="transgender" label="transgender"/>
<link wikidata="Q51415" start="67039" end="67044" title="queer" label="queer"/>
<link wikidata="" start="67318" end="67377" title="Before Stonewall: The Making of a Gay and Lesbian Community" label="Before Stonewall: The Making of a Gay and Lesbian Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738970" start="67467" end="67476" title="Stonewall (1995 film)" label="Stonewall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270632" start="67561" end="67576" title="After Stonewall" label="After Stonewall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4443197" start="67667" end="67685" title="Stonewall Uprising" label="Stonewall Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q17639520" start="67793" end="67802" title="Stonewall (2015 film)" label="Stonewall"/>
<link wikidata="Q21450459" start="67951" end="67974" title="Happy Birthday, Marsha!" label="Happy Birthday, Marsha!"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773400" start="68099" end="68116" title="Marsha P. Johnson" label="Marsha P. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278761" start="68121" end="68134" title="Sylvia Rivera" label="Sylvia Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q6727005" start="68192" end="68206" title="Madeline Davis" label="Madeline Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767228" start="68326" end="68355" title="Mark Custom Recording Service" label="Mark Custom Recording Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395308" start="68560" end="68575" title="Stephin Merritt" label="Stephin Merritt"/>
<link wikidata="Q28127555" start="68599" end="68613" title="50 Song Memoir" label="50 Song Memoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q32542" start="68623" end="68642" title="The Magnetic Fields" label="The Magnetic Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q11637" start="68726" end="68738" title="Judy Garland" label="Judy Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q181813" start="68777" end="68796" title="New York City Opera" label="New York City Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q15101007" start="68831" end="68840" title="Iain Bell" label="Iain Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q85783916" start="68865" end="68878" title="Mark Campbell (librettist)" label="Mark Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q65041285" start="68912" end="68921" title="Stonewall (opera)" label="Stonewall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6525292" start="69027" end="69041" title="Leonard Foglia" label="Leonard Foglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10381829" start="69045" end="69078" title="The Stonewall Celebration Concert" label="The Stonewall Celebration Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q982366" start="69108" end="69120" title="Renato Russo" label="Renato Russo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297813" start="69436" end="69448" title="Doric Wilson" label="Doric Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630631" start="69466" end="69488" title="Christopher Street Day" label="Christopher Street Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q18148561" start="69491" end="69521" title="LGBTQ culture in New York City" label="LGBTQ culture in New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6457883" start="69524" end="69549" title="LGBTQ history in New York" label="LGBTQ history in New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6458109" start="69552" end="69576" title="LGBTQ rights in New York" label="LGBTQ rights in New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q64987238" start="69579" end="69601" title="Queer Liberation March" label="Queer Liberation March"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="69604" end="69640" title="Transgender culture of New York City" label="Transgender culture of New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q924917" start="69660" end="69682" title="Dance of the Forty-One" label="Dance of the Forty-One"/>
<link wikidata="Q54953800" start="69700" end="69722" title="Ariston Bathhouse raid" label="Ariston Bathhouse raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q110663777" start="69781" end="69805" title="Huanchaca street scandal" label="Huanchaca street scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120079" start="69831" end="69845" title="Operation Soap" label="Operation Soap"/>
<link wikidata="Q20006913" start="69872" end="69887" title="Sex Garage" label="Sex Garage raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687755" start="69915" end="69935" title="Tasty nightclub raid" label="Tasty nightclub raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q106600478" start="69992" end="70016" title="Bar Abanicos police raid" label="Bar Abanicos police raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q98711169" start="70035" end="70048" title="Rainbow Night" label="Rainbow Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="70257" end="70275" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595117" start="70572" end="70584" title="Grand Street (magazine)" label="Grand Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q18049522" start="70725" end="70744" title="The Huffington Post" label="The Huffington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185824" start="70862" end="70876" title="Democracy Now!" label="Democracy Now!"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="70944" end="70960" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q15437070" start="71074" end="71084" title="David Isay" label="David Isay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499893" start="71108" end="71118" title="StoryCorps" label="StoryCorps"/>
<link wikidata="Q28403064" start="71647" end="71686" title="American Archive of Public Broadcasting" label="American Archive of Public Broadcasting"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29388" wikidata="Q3874243" url="?curid=29388" title="Sheffer stroke">
<text>In Boolean functions and propositional calculus, the Sheffer stroke denotes a logical operation that is equivalent to the negation of the conjunction operation, expressed in ordinary language as &quot;not both&quot;. It is also called non-conjunction, or alternative denial (since it says in effect that at least one of its operands is false), or NAND (&quot;not and&quot;). In digital electronics, it corresponds to the NAND gate. It is named after Henry Maurice Sheffer and written as formula_1 or as formula_2 or as formula_3 or as formula_4 in Polish notation by Łukasiewicz (but not as ||, often used to represent disjunction).

Its dual is the NOR operator (also known as the Peirce arrow, Quine dagger or Webb operator). Like its dual, NAND can be used by itself, without any other logical operator, to constitute a logical formal system (making NAND functionally complete). This property makes the NAND gate crucial to modern digital electronics, including its use in computer processor design.

==Definition==
The non-conjunction is a logical operation on two logical values. It produces a value of true, if — and only if — at least one of the propositions is false.

===Truth table===
The truth table of formula_5 is as follows.

===Logical equivalences===
The Sheffer stroke of formula_6 and formula_7 is the negation of their conjunction

By De Morgan&#x27;s laws, this is also equivalent to the disjunction of the negations of formula_6 and formula_7

==Alternative notations and names==
Peirce was the first to show the functional completeness of non-conjunction (representing this as formula_10) but didn&#x27;t publish his result. Peirce&#x27;s editor added formula_10) for non-disjunction.

In 1911, was the first to publish a proof of the completeness of non-conjunction, representing this with formula_12 (the Stamm hook) and non-disjunction in print at the first time and showed their functional completeness.

In 1913, Sheffer described non-disjunction using formula_1 and showed its functional completeness. Sheffer also used formula_14 for non-disjunction. Many people, beginning with Nicod in 1917, and followed by Whitehead, Russell and many others, mistakenly thought Sheffer has described non-conjunction using formula_1, naming this the Sheffer stroke.

In 1928, Hilbert and Ackermann described non-conjunction with the operator formula_16.

In 1929, Łukasiewicz used formula_17 in formula_4 for non-conjunction in his Polish notation.

An alternative notation for non-conjunction is formula_2. It is not clear who first introduced this notation, although the corresponding formula_20 for non-disjunction was used by Quine in 1940.

==History==
The stroke is named after Henry Maurice Sheffer, who in 1913 published a paper in the &quot;Transactions of the American Mathematical Society&quot; providing an axiomatization of Boolean algebras using the stroke, and proved its equivalence to a standard formulation thereof by Huntington employing the familiar operators of propositional logic (AND, OR, NOT). Because of self-duality of Boolean algebras, Sheffer&#x27;s axioms are equally valid for either of the NAND or NOR operations in place of the stroke. Sheffer interpreted the stroke as a sign for nondisjunction (NOR) in his paper, mentioning non-conjunction only in a footnote and without a special sign for it. It was Jean Nicod who first used the stroke as a sign for non-conjunction (NAND) in a paper of 1917 and which has since become current practice. Russell and Whitehead used the Sheffer stroke in the 1927 second edition of &quot;Principia Mathematica&quot; and suggested it as a replacement for the &quot;OR&quot; and &quot;NOT&quot; operations of the first edition.

Charles Sanders Peirce (1880) had discovered the functional completeness of NAND or NOR more than 30 years earlier, using the term &quot;ampheck&quot; (for &#x27;cutting both ways&#x27;), but he never published his finding. Two years before Sheffer, also described the NAND and NOR operators and showed that the other Boolean operations could be expressed by it.

==Properties==

NAND is commutative but not associative, which means that formula_21 but formula_22.

===Functional completeness===
The Sheffer stroke, taken by itself, is a functionally complete set of connectives. This can be seen from the fact that NAND does not possess any of the following five properties, each of which is required to be absent from, and the absence of all of which is sufficient for, at least one member of a set of functionally complete operators: truth-preservation, falsity-preservation, linearity, monotonicity, self-duality. (An operator is truth-preserving if its value is truth whenever all of its arguments are truth, or falsity-preserving if its value is falsity whenever all of its arguments are falsity.)

It can also be proved by first showing, with a truth table, that formula_23 is truth-functionally equivalent to formula_24. Then, since formula_5 is truth-functionally equivalent to formula_26, and formula_27 is equivalent to formula_28, the Sheffer stroke suffices to define the set of connectives formula_29, which is shown to be truth-functionally complete by the Disjunctive Normal Form Theorem.

==Other Boolean operations in terms of the Sheffer stroke==
Expressed in terms of NAND formula_2, the usual operators of propositional logic are:

==See also==

* Boolean domain
* CMOS
* Gate equivalent (GE)
* Logical graph
* Minimal axioms for Boolean algebra
* NAND flash memory
* NAND logic
* Peirce&#x27;s law
* Peirce arrow = NOR
* Sole sufficient operator
==References==
==Further reading==
* (NB. Edited and translated from the French and German editions: Précis de logique mathématique)

==External links==
* Sheffer Stroke article in the &quot;Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy&quot;
* http://hyperphysics.phy-astr.gsu.edu/hbase/electronic/nand.html
* Implementations of 2- and 4-input NAND gates
* Proofs of some axioms by Stroke function by Yasuo Setô @ Project Euclid</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q942353" start="3" end="19" title="Boolean function" label="Boolean function"/>
<link wikidata="Q200694" start="25" end="47" title="propositional calculus" label="propositional calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874243" start="53" end="67" title="Sheffer stroke" label="Sheffer stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q211790" start="78" end="95" title="logical operation" label="logical operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q190558" start="122" end="130" title="logical negation" label="negation"/>
<link wikidata="Q191081" start="138" end="149" title="logical conjunction" label="conjunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874243" start="235" end="250" title="Sheffer stroke" label="non-conjunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874243" start="255" end="273" title="Sheffer stroke" label="alternative denial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874243" start="347" end="351" title="Sheffer stroke" label="NAND"/>
<link wikidata="Q173156" start="378" end="397" title="digital electronics" label="digital electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q575178" start="421" end="430" title="NAND gate" label="NAND gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346410" start="450" end="471" title="Henry Maurice Sheffer" label="Henry Maurice Sheffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q214510" start="548" end="563" title="Polish notation" label="Polish notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q313454" start="567" end="578" title="Jan Łukasiewicz" label="Łukasiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651704" start="619" end="630" title="logical disjunction" label="disjunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755512" start="638" end="642" title="duality (mathematics)" label="dual"/>
<link wikidata="Q574946" start="650" end="662" title="logical NOR" label="NOR operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q574946" start="682" end="694" title="Peirce arrow" label="Peirce arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q574946" start="696" end="708" title="Quine dagger" label="Quine dagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q574946" start="712" end="725" title="Webb operator" label="Webb operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q649732" start="831" end="844" title="formal system" label="formal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348801" start="858" end="879" title="functionally complete" label="functionally complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q575178" start="906" end="915" title="NAND gate" label="NAND gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q173156" start="934" end="953" title="digital electronics" label="digital electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466064" start="976" end="994" title="computer processor" label="computer processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q211790" start="1044" end="1061" title="logical operation" label="logical operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q185521" start="1069" end="1082" title="logical value" label="logical value"/>
<link wikidata="Q108163" start="1153" end="1164" title="proposition" label="proposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q219079" start="1199" end="1210" title="truth table" label="truth table"/>
<link wikidata="Q173300" start="1354" end="1375" title="De Morgan&amp;#x27;s laws" label="De Morgan&amp;#x27;s laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q187520" start="1501" end="1507" title="Charles Sanders Peirce" label="Peirce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346410" start="1940" end="1947" title="Henry Maurice Sheffer" label="Sheffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q41585" start="2291" end="2298" title="David Hilbert" label="Hilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q61037" start="2303" end="2312" title="Wilhelm Ackermann" label="Ackermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q313454" start="2379" end="2390" title="Jan Łukasiewicz" label="Łukasiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q214510" start="2447" end="2462" title="Polish notation" label="Polish notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346410" start="2699" end="2720" title="Henry Maurice Sheffer" label="Henry Maurice Sheffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379946" start="2765" end="2814" title="Transactions of the American Mathematical Society" label="Transactions of the American Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973304" start="2852" end="2867" title="Boolean algebra (structure)" label="Boolean algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q535672" start="2951" end="2961" title="Edward Vermilye Huntington" label="Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q200694" start="2998" end="3017" title="propositional logic" label="propositional logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191081" start="3019" end="3022" title="logical conjunction" label="AND"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651704" start="3024" end="3026" title="logical disjunction" label="OR"/>
<link wikidata="Q190558" start="3028" end="3031" title="negation" label="NOT"/>
<link wikidata="Q554403" start="3050" end="3057" title="duality (order theory)" label="duality"/>
<link wikidata="Q574946" start="3245" end="3248" title="logical NOR" label="NOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685715" start="3352" end="3362" title="Jean Nicod" label="Jean Nicod"/>
<link wikidata="Q163335" start="3572" end="3593" title="Principia Mathematica" label="Principia Mathematica"/>
<link wikidata="Q187520" start="3711" end="3733" title="Charles Sanders Peirce" label="Charles Sanders Peirce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348801" start="3760" end="3783" title="functional completeness" label="functional completeness"/>
<link wikidata="Q574946" start="3848" end="3855" title="ampheck" label="ampheck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348801" start="4249" end="4270" title="Functional completeness" label="functionally complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348801" start="4515" end="4536" title="functionally complete" label="functionally complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q382497" start="4590" end="4599" title="affine transformation" label="linearity"/>
<link wikidata="Q194404" start="4601" end="4610" title="monotonic" label="monotonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755512" start="4615" end="4627" title="self-duality" label="self-duality"/>
<link wikidata="Q219079" start="4863" end="4874" title="truth table" label="truth table"/>
<link wikidata="Q903789" start="5183" end="5214" title="Disjunctive Normal Form Theorem" label="Disjunctive Normal Form Theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269980" start="5380" end="5394" title="Boolean domain" label="Boolean domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q173431" start="5397" end="5401" title="CMOS" label="CMOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527009" start="5404" end="5419" title="Gate equivalent" label="Gate equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383836" start="5427" end="5440" title="Logical graph" label="Logical graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q4059939" start="5443" end="5477" title="Minimal axioms for Boolean algebra" label="Minimal axioms for Boolean algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="5485" end="5497" title="flash memory" label="flash memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116068" start="5500" end="5510" title="NAND logic" label="NAND logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2387196" start="5513" end="5530" title="Peirce&amp;#x27;s law" label="Peirce&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q574946" start="5533" end="5545" title="Peirce arrow" label="Peirce arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348801" start="5554" end="5578" title="Sole sufficient operator" label="Sole sufficient operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q673672" start="5680" end="5710" title="Précis de logique mathématique" label="Précis de logique mathématique"/>
<link wikidata="Q259513" start="5770" end="5805" title="Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" label="Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29390" wikidata="Q177197" url="?curid=29390" title="Stalactite">
<text>A stalactite (, ; , ) is a mineral formation that hangs from the ceiling of caves, hot springs, or man-made structures such as bridges and mines. Any material that is soluble and that can be deposited as a colloid, or is in suspension, or is capable of being melted, may form a stalactite. Stalactites may be composed of lava, minerals, mud, peat, pitch, sand, sinter, and amberat (crystallized urine of pack rats). A stalactite is not necessarily a speleothem, though speleothems are the most common form of stalactite because of the abundance of limestone caves.

The corresponding formation on the floor of the cave is known as a stalagmite.

==Formation and type==
===Limestone stalactites===

The most common stalactites are speleothems, which occur in limestone caves. They form through deposition of calcium carbonate and other minerals, which is precipitated from mineralized water solutions. Limestone is the chief form of calcium carbonate rock which is dissolved by water that contains carbon dioxide, forming a calcium bicarbonate solution in caverns. The chemical formula for this reaction is:

::(s) + (l) + (aq) → 

This solution travels through the rock until it reaches an edge and if this is on the roof of a cave it will drip down. When the solution comes into contact with air the chemical reaction that created it is reversed and particles of calcium carbonate are deposited. The reversed reaction is:

An average growth rate is a year. The quickest growing stalactites are those formed by a constant supply of slow dripping water rich in calcium carbonate (CaCO3) and carbon dioxide (CO2), which can grow at per year. The drip rate must be slow enough to allow the CO2 to degas from the solution into the cave atmosphere, resulting in deposition of CaCO3 on the stalactite. Too fast a drip rate and the solution, still carrying most of the CaCO3, falls to the cave floor where degassing occurs and CaCO3 is deposited as a stalagmite.

All limestone stalactites begin with a single mineral-laden drop of water. When the drop falls, it deposits the thinnest ring of calcite. Each subsequent drop that forms and falls deposits another calcite ring. Eventually, these rings form a very narrow (≈4 to 5 mm diameter), hollow tube commonly known as a &quot;soda straw&quot; stalactite. Soda straws can grow quite long, but are very fragile. If they become plugged by debris, water begins flowing over the outside, depositing more calcite and creating the more familiar cone-shaped stalactite.

Stalactite formation generally begins over a large area, with multiple paths for the mineral rich water to flow. As minerals are dissolved in one channel slightly more than other competing channels, the dominant channel begins to draw more and more of the available water, which speeds its growth, ultimately resulting in all other channels being choked off. This is one reason why formations tend to have minimum distances from one another. The larger the formation, the greater the interformation distance.

==== Pillars ====

The same water drops that fall from the tip of a stalactite deposit more calcite on the floor below, eventually resulting in a rounded or cone-shaped stalagmite. Unlike stalactites, stalagmites never start out as hollow &quot;soda straws&quot;. Given enough time, these formations can meet and fuse to create a speleothem of calcium carbonate known as a pillar, column, or stalagnate.

===Lava stalactites===

Another type of stalactite is formed in lava tubes while molten and fluid lava is still active inside. The mechanism of formation is the deposition of molten dripping material on the ceilings of caves, however with lava stalactites formation happens very quickly in only a matter of hours, days, or weeks, whereas limestone stalactites may take up to thousands of years. A key difference with lava stalactites is that once the lava has ceased flowing, so too will the stalactites cease to grow. This means that if the stalactite were to be broken it would never grow back.

The generic term &quot;lavacicle&quot; has been applied to lava stalactites and stalagmites indiscriminately and evolved from the word icicle.

Like limestone stalactites, they can leave lava drips onto the floor that turn into lava stalagmites and may eventually fuse with the corresponding stalactite to form a column.

==== Shark tooth stalactites ====

The shark tooth stalactite is broad and tapering in appearance. It may begin as a small driblet of lava from a semi-solid ceiling, but then grows by accreting layers as successive flows of lava rise and fall in the lava tube, coating and recoating the stalactite with more material. They can vary from a few millimeters to over a meter in length.

==== Splash stalactites ====
As lava flows through a tube, material will be splashed up on the ceiling and ooze back down, hardening into a stalactite. This type of formation results in an irregularly-shaped stalactite, looking somewhat like stretched taffy. Often they may be of a different color than the original lava that formed the cave.

==== Tubular lava stalactites ====
When the roof of a lava tube is cooling, a skin forms that traps semi-molten material inside. Trapped gases expansion forces lava to extrude out through small openings that result in hollow, tubular stalactites analogous to the soda straws formed as depositional speleothems in solution caves. The longest known is almost 2 meters in length. These are common in Hawaiian lava tubes and are often associated with a drip stalagmite that forms below as material is carried through the tubular stalactite and piles up on the floor beneath. Sometimes the tubular form collapses near the distal end, most likely when the pressure of escaping gases decreased and still-molten portions of the stalactites deflated and cooled.
Often these tubular stalactites acquire a twisted, vermiform appearance as bits of lava crystallize and force the flow in different directions. These tubular lava helictites may also be influenced by air currents through a tube and point downwind.

===Ice stalactites===
A common stalactite found seasonally or year round in many caves is the ice stalactite, commonly referred to as icicles, especially on the surface. Water seepage from the surface will penetrate into a cave and if temperatures are below freezing, the water will form stalactites. They can also be formed by the freezing of water vapor. Similar to lava stalactites, ice stalactites form very quickly within hours or days. Unlike lava stalactites however, they may grow back as long as water and temperatures are suitable.

Ice stalactites can also form under sea ice when saline water is introduced to ocean water. These specific stalactites are referred to as brinicles.

Ice stalactites may also form corresponding stalagmites below them and given time may grow together to form an ice column.

===Concrete stalactites===


Stalactites can also form on concrete, and on plumbing where there is a slow leak and where there are calcium, magnesium or other ions in the water supply, although they form much more rapidly there than in the natural cave environment. These secondary deposits, such as stalactites, stalagmites, flowstone and others, which are derived from the lime, mortar or other calcareous material in concrete, outside of the &quot;cave&quot; environment, can not be classified as &quot;speleothems&quot; due to the definition of the term. The term &quot;calthemite&quot; is used to encompass these secondary deposits which mimic the shapes and forms of speleothems outside the cave environment.

The way stalactites form on concrete is due to different chemistry than those that form naturally in limestone caves and is due to the presence of calcium oxide in cement. Concrete is made from aggregate, sand and cement. When water is added to the mix, the calcium oxide in the cement reacts with water to form calcium hydroxide (Ca(OH)2). The chemical formula for this is:

Over time, any rainwater that penetrates cracks in set (hard) concrete will carry any free calcium hydroxide in solution to the edge of the concrete. Stalactites can form when the solution emerges on the underside of the concrete structure where it is suspended in the air, for example, on a ceiling or a beam. When the solution comes into contact with air on the underside of the concrete structure, another chemical reaction takes place. The solution reacts with carbon dioxide in the air and precipitates calcium carbonate.

When this solution drops down it leaves behind particles of calcium carbonate and over time these form into a stalactite. They are normally a few centimeters long and with a diameter of approximately . The growth rate of stalactites is significantly influenced by supply continuity of saturated solution and the drip rate. A straw shaped stalactite which has formed under a concrete structure can grow as much as 2 mm per day in length, when the drip rate is approximately 11 minutes between drops. Changes in leachate solution pH can facilitate additional chemical reactions, which may also influence calthemite stalactite growth rates.

==Records==
The White Chamber in the Jeita Grotto&#x27;s upper cavern in Lebanon contains an limestone stalactite which is accessible to visitors and is claimed to be the longest stalactite in the world. Another such claim is made for a limestone stalactite that hangs in the Chamber of Rarities in the Gruta Rei do Mato (Sete Lagoas, Minas Gerais, Brazil). However, cavers have often encountered longer stalactites during their explorations. One of the longest stalactites viewable by the general public is in Pol an Ionain (Doolin Cave), County Clare, Ireland, in a karst region known as The Burren; what makes it more impressive is the fact that the stalactite is held on by a section of calcite less than .

==Etymology==
Stalactites are first mentioned (though not by name) by the Roman natural historian Pliny in a text which also mentions stalagmites and columns and refers to their formation by the dripping of water. The term &quot;stalactite&quot; was coined in the 17th century by the Danish Physician Ole Worm, who coined the word from the Greek word σταλακτός (stalaktos, &quot;dripping&quot;) and the Greek suffix -ίτης (-ites, connected with or belonging to).

==Photo gallery==
==See also==
* Stalagmite
* Lavacicle
* Rusticle
* Karst
* Icicle
* Bottlebrush - Stalactite coated with pool spar.
* Brinicle

==References==

* &quot;Dripstone in time-lapse&quot; (&quot;Tropfsteine im Zeitraffer&quot;) - Schmidkonz, B.; Wittke, G.; &quot;Chemie Unserer Zeit&quot;, 2006, 40, 246. 

==External links==
* The Virtual Cave&#x27;s page on stalactites
* Stalactites by Enrique Zeleny, Wolfram Demonstrations Project.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q177197" start="2" end="12" title="Stalactite" label="stalactite"/>
<link wikidata="Q35509" start="76" end="80" title="cave" label="cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q177380" start="83" end="93" title="hot spring" label="hot spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q12280" start="127" end="133" title="bridge" label="bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q181780" start="206" end="213" title="colloid" label="colloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q26100" start="224" end="234" title="suspension (chemistry)" label="suspension"/>
<link wikidata="Q106080" start="259" end="265" title="melting" label="melted"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="321" end="325" title="lava" label="lava"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="327" end="334" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q170449" start="337" end="340" title="mud" label="mud"/>
<link wikidata="Q184624" start="342" end="346" title="peat" label="peat"/>
<link wikidata="Q840692" start="348" end="353" title="pitch (resin)" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="355" end="359" title="sand" label="sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976078" start="361" end="367" title="Geyserite" label="sinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q468544" start="404" end="412" title="pack rat" label="pack rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q154507" start="450" end="460" title="speleothem" label="speleothem"/>
<link wikidata="Q181312" start="633" end="643" title="stalagmite" label="stalagmite"/>
<link wikidata="Q154507" start="730" end="740" title="speleothem" label="speleothem"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="758" end="767" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987070" start="793" end="803" title="Deposition (geology)" label="deposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q23767" start="807" end="824" title="calcium carbonate" label="calcium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q113796" start="854" end="865" title="precipitate" label="precipitate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447188" start="890" end="898" title="Solution (chemistry)" label="solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="950" end="954" title="Rock (geology)" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q739398" start="964" end="972" title="Dissolution (chemistry)" label="dissolve"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="977" end="982" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="997" end="1011" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q415144" start="1023" end="1042" title="calcium bicarbonate" label="calcium bicarbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q83147" start="1068" end="1084" title="chemical formula" label="chemical formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q35509" start="1227" end="1231" title="cave" label="cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="1293" end="1296" title="air" label="air"/>
<link wikidata="Q36534" start="1301" end="1318" title="chemical reaction" label="chemical reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="1546" end="1551" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q853592" start="2272" end="2282" title="soda straw" label="soda straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q181312" start="3188" end="3198" title="stalagmite" label="stalagmite"/>
<link wikidata="Q154507" start="3349" end="3359" title="speleothem" label="speleothem"/>
<link wikidata="Q27919" start="3488" end="3498" title="lava tubes" label="lava tubes"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="3522" end="3526" title="lava" label="lava"/>
<link wikidata="Q154507" start="5369" end="5380" title="speleothems" label="speleothems"/>
<link wikidata="Q24384" start="6121" end="6127" title="season" label="season"/>
<link wikidata="Q496380" start="6207" end="6213" title="icicle" label="icicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="6243" end="6248" title="Water" label="Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311748" start="6249" end="6253" title="seep" label="seep"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="6308" end="6319" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q108000" start="6331" end="6339" title="freezing" label="freezing"/>
<link wikidata="Q255722" start="6423" end="6428" title="vapor" label="vapor"/>
<link wikidata="Q213926" start="6652" end="6659" title="sea ice" label="sea ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q179615" start="6665" end="6671" title="salinity" label="saline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925596" start="6754" end="6762" title="brinicle" label="brinicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q22657" start="6948" end="6956" title="concrete" label="concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q22988272" start="7021" end="7053" title="Water hardness" label="calcium, magnesium or other ions"/>
<link wikidata="Q22657" start="7310" end="7318" title="concrete" label="concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q154507" start="7396" end="7406" title="speleothem" label="speleothem"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456450" start="7464" end="7474" title="calthemite" label="calthemite"/>
<link wikidata="Q185006" start="7753" end="7766" title="calcium oxide" label="calcium oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q182849" start="7918" end="7935" title="calcium hydroxide" label="calcium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q83147" start="7951" end="7967" title="chemical formula" label="chemical formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q182849" start="8073" end="8090" title="calcium hydroxide" label="calcium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447188" start="8094" end="8102" title="Solution (chemistry)" label="solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="8335" end="8338" title="air" label="air"/>
<link wikidata="Q36534" start="8391" end="8408" title="chemical reaction" label="chemical reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="8447" end="8461" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q113796" start="8477" end="8488" title="precipitate" label="precipitate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23767" start="8490" end="8507" title="calcium carbonate" label="calcium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q37221" start="8684" end="8692" title="diameter" label="diameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281647" start="9020" end="9028" title="leachate" label="leachate"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="9038" end="9040" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456450" start="9112" end="9122" title="calthemite" label="calthemite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552568" start="9186" end="9198" title="Jeita Grotto" label="Jeita Grotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301571" start="9452" end="9469" title="Gruta Rei do Mato" label="Gruta Rei do Mato"/>
<link wikidata="Q841226" start="9471" end="9482" title="Sete Lagoas" label="Sete Lagoas"/>
<link wikidata="Q39109" start="9484" end="9496" title="Minas Gerais" label="Minas Gerais"/>
<link wikidata="Q200341" start="9516" end="9521" title="caver" label="caver"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107978" start="9660" end="9673" title="Pol an Ionain" label="Pol an Ionain"/>
<link wikidata="Q181862" start="9689" end="9701" title="County Clare" label="County Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q16817" start="9717" end="9722" title="karst" label="karst"/>
<link wikidata="Q917858" start="9739" end="9749" title="The Burren" label="The Burren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="9935" end="9940" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="9959" end="9964" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny"/>
<link wikidata="Q463570" start="10162" end="10170" title="Ole Worm" label="Ole Worm"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="10201" end="10206" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q181312" start="10358" end="10368" title="Stalagmite" label="Stalagmite"/>
<link wikidata="Q177197" start="10371" end="10380" title="Lavacicle" label="Lavacicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177377" start="10383" end="10391" title="Rusticle" label="Rusticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16817" start="10394" end="10399" title="Karst" label="Karst"/>
<link wikidata="Q496380" start="10402" end="10408" title="Icicle" label="Icicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16889943" start="10411" end="10422" title="Bottlebrush (cave formation)" label="Bottlebrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925596" start="10461" end="10469" title="Brinicle" label="Brinicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632017" start="10743" end="10773" title="Wolfram Demonstrations Project" label="Wolfram Demonstrations Project"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29391" wikidata="Q1972969" url="?curid=29391" title="Strangers in Paradise">
<text>Strangers in Paradise is a creator-owned comic book series, written and drawn by Terry Moore, which debuted in 1993. Principally the story of a love triangle between two women and one man, &quot;Strangers in Paradise&quot; began as a slice-of-life dramedy that later expanded to incorporate aspects of the crime and thriller genres. Moore has remained the sole creator throughout the run, with the exception of a superhero dream sequence drawn by Jim Lee that opens Volume 3, issue #1. The artwork was originally presented in Moore&#x27;s distinctive black-and-white style, aside from two full colour dream sequences, which included the aforementioned superhero panels.

The majority of the run has been published under Moore&#x27;s creator-owned imprint, Abstract Studio. The first issue was published in November 1993, and the original series reached its planned conclusion in 2007 with issue #90 of Volume 3.

In 2012, Moore announced he was working on a &quot;Strangers in Paradise&quot; novel at San Diego Comic-Con.

In 2018, Moore officially revived the series as &quot;Strangers in Paradise XXV&quot; for the 25th anniversary.

==Origins and publication history ==
Terry Moore stated that &quot;I started out wanting to do a newspaper strip, and tried one idea after another before I realised I hated the gag-a-day life and really wanted to try a story instead&quot;. The story he chose to tell turned out to be &quot;Strangers in Paradise&quot;, or &quot;this story about 2 girls and a guy who gets to know them&quot; (from Moore&#x27;s introduction to &quot;The Collected Strangers in Paradise, Volume One&quot;), which used characters he had developed during his time on the gag-a-day circuit. For example, Katchoo appears as a &quot;happy-go-lucky wood nymph&quot; in an early strip by Moore about an enchanted forest. These strips were collected into two trade paperbacks, but they did not include three issues. Because of this, the entire run was later published in one large paperback edition entitled &quot;The Complete Paradise Too&quot;. This volume can be considered the true origin of Katchoo, Francine and the &quot;Strangers in Paradise&quot; universe.

&quot;SiP&quot;, as it is commonly known, began as a three-issue mini-series published by Antarctic Press in 1993, which focused entirely on the relationship between the three main characters and Francine&#x27;s unfaithful boyfriend. This is now known as &quot;Volume 1&quot;. Thirteen issues were published under Moore&#x27;s own &quot;Abstract Studio&quot; imprint, and these make up &quot;Volume 2&quot;. This is where the &quot;thriller&quot; plot was introduced. The series moved to Image Comics&#x27; Homage imprint for the start of &quot;Volume 3&quot;, but after eight issues moved back to Abstract Studio, where it continued with the same numbering. Volume 3 concluded at issue #90, released on June 6, 2007.

Moore revived the series as &quot;Strangers in Paradise XXV&quot; in 2018 for the 25th anniversary. The new miniseries included characters and elements from Moore&#x27;s other works, &quot;Echo&quot;, &quot;Rachel Rising&quot;, and &quot;Motor Girl&quot;.

==Plot==
The story primarily concerns the difficult relationship between two women, Helen Francine Peters (referred to as Francine throughout the series) and Katina Marie (&quot;Katchoo&quot;) Choovanski, and their friend David Qin. Francine considers Katchoo her best friend; Katchoo is in love with Francine. David is in love with Katchoo (a relationship which Katchoo herself is deeply conflicted over).

The love triangle (which later expands into a love rectangle with the introduction of Casey Bullock, who marries Francine&#x27;s ex-boyfriend Freddie Femur and later divorces him, in order to pursue both David and Katchoo) alternates with the mystery and intrigue regarding Katchoo&#x27;s past as an underage lesbian call girl and the Parker Crime Syndicate. Run by David&#x27;s lesbian sister Darcy, the &quot;Parker Girls&quot; work for the shadowy &#x27;Big Six&#x27; organization, an international crime syndicate with influence over the world of politics. &quot;Parker Girls&quot; are highly trained women used by organized crime to control, manipulate, spy upon, and ultimately kill men and women in positions of power and authority, for the Big Six.

==Characters==
;Katina &quot;Katchoo&quot; Choovanski: Katchoo (occasionally referred to as &quot;The Original Angry Blonde&quot; by fans of the series) is a temperamental artist with a violent past. A former prostitute, Katchoo was the lover and agent of Darcy Parker. Katchoo has been in love with her best friend, Francine, for most of her life, though she has complicated romantic feelings for her only male friend, David, as well. Katchoo was ranked 69th in &quot;Comics Buyer&#x27;s Guide&#x27;s&quot; &quot;100 Sexiest Women in Comics&quot; list.
;Francine Helena Peters-Silver: Katchoo&#x27;s kind-hearted best friend. Francine struggles with her weight and her self-image, never quite able to see the beauty in herself that Katchoo is enamored with. Francine has difficulty bringing herself to make a romantic commitment to Katchoo, partly due to her Methodist upbringing and partly because of her childhood dream to become a wife and mother. Her fairytale marriage to Brad Silver comes crashing down when she realizes that he is unfaithful to her, leading her to reconsider choosing him over Katchoo. Francine was ranked 86th in &quot;Comics Buyer&#x27;s Guide&#x27;s&quot; &quot;100 Sexiest Women in Comics&quot; list.
;Yousaka Takahashi/David Qin: A gentle, sensitive art student, Yousaka is the younger brother of Darcy Parker and the unwilling heir to the Takahashi crime syndicate. Once the leader of a violent street gang, Yousaka became a born-again Christian after a personal tragedy and he changed his name to &quot;David Qin&quot; to reflect his new identity and honoring the young man he murdered. The complex romantic feelings he harbors for Casey and Katchoo come to a head when he is diagnosed with a serious illness, leading the trio to contemplate having a baby in his memory.
;Casey Bullock-Femur: A blonde, busty, and bisexual aerobics instructor, Casey was married to Freddie Femur but divorced him after learning that he was still in love with Francine. Since the divorce, she has had romantic involvements with both Katchoo and David. Because of her childhood anorexia, she is unable to have a child with David.
;Freddie Femur: Francine&#x27;s ex-boyfriend and Casey&#x27;s ex-husband. A womanizing attorney, Freddie cheated on Francine and humiliated her during their break-up (giving her a nervous breakdown in the process) but later becomes obsessed with her.
;Darcy Parker: Darcy was a ruthless and predatory crime boss who led the &quot;Parker Girls&quot;, women who are skilled in various acts of seduction and espionage. Though she employed only women and expresses a profound abhorrence of the male gender itself, Darcy had an intense, incestuous love for her brother David. She had a relationship with Katchoo until Katchoo ran away to Hawaii with her friend Emma. Darcy was murdered by Tambi after the collapse of her crime syndicate.
;Mary Beth &quot;Tambi&quot; Baker:A brutal enforcer who worked for Darcy Parker alongside her twin sister Sara Beth &quot;Bambi&quot;, Tambi is skilled in not only the deadly arts, but in business and strategy. She and Sara are Katchoo&#x27;s older half-sisters. In a quest to continue the Baker line, she subconsciously encourages Katchoo to bear David&#x27;s child. Tambi&#x27;s many scars are self-inflicted.
;Griffin Silver: An aging rock star admired by Katchoo in her youth, Griffin&#x27;s songs were printed in the series long before the character made his first appearance. He was the brother of Brad Silver. Griffin was shot and killed by a stalker.
;Brad Silver: A charming, handsome gynecologist, Brad at first appears to be an ideal husband for Francine; however, their inability to communicate drives a wedge between them. When Francine discovers his infidelity, she initiates divorce proceedings.
;Molly Lane:Molly has only a tenuous connection to the main &quot;SiP&quot; cast (she dated Francine&#x27;s brother Benjamin in high school) but has nevertheless been the star of one of the book&#x27;s major storylines. The protagonist of &quot;Molly and Poo&quot;, Molly is a tortured writer who dreams of a mysterious muse (&quot;Ma Malai&quot;) and murders her husband with a meat cleaver.

==Awards==
The series received the Eisner Award for Best Serialized Story in 1996 for &quot;I Dream of You&quot; as well as the National Cartoonists Society Reuben Award for Best Comic Book in 2003. It also won the GLAAD Award for Best Comic Book in 2001.

==Collected editions==

&quot;Strangers in Paradise&quot; has been collected into a series of full-size trade paperbacks, hardback collections, and smaller format paperback collections. These reprints collect the issues into different sets.

The full-size paperback collections to date are:
The hardback collections to date are:
The &quot;pocket book&quot; collections to date are:
Other books to date are:
* &quot;Lyrics and Poems&quot;
* &quot;Strangers in Paradise Source Book&quot;
* &quot;Strangers in Paradise Treasury Edition&quot;
* &quot;Strangers in Paradise&quot; calendars: 1999, 2000, 2002, 2003, 2004. For unknown reasons, there is no 2001 calendar.

==Merchandise==
Two limited edition statuettes of Katchoo were produced by Clayburn Moore as the first in a planned series of three statues based around the series. In the first, she is standing in a skimpy black dress, and in the second she is reclining in a bath wearing her leather jacket and holding a drink and a gun.

In 2009, Shocker Toys released a Katchoo figure as part of the first series of its &quot;Indie Spotlight&quot; line.

In 1996, a series of trading cards was released by Comic Images, consisting of a 90-card base set plus extra collector&#x27;s cards, such as the 500 &#x27;autograph cards&#x27; that featured Terry Moore&#x27;s signature and information on the creation of &quot;SiP&quot;. These extra cards were inserted randomly into packs. Also produced was a matching &quot;SiP&quot; binder, which came with 12 9-pocket sleeves to hold the cards.

Advertised on the official &quot;SiP&quot; website are character pin badges representing Francine, Katchoo and David. There is also a black tote bag featuring the &quot;Strangers in Paradise&quot; logo and a tumbler decorated with colour panels from the series, in addition to a postcard set and two T-shirts, although several of these items are listed as &#x27;sold out&#x27;, and are hard to come by elsewhere.

==Film adaptation==
Angela Robinson and Moore announced in Autumn 2017 that they were developing the film adaptation. Moore was working on a script for it. IMG Global Media is backing the project and Robinson will direct.

==References==
== External links ==
*&quot;Strangers in Paradise&quot; website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5183614" start="27" end="40" title="Creator ownership in comics" label="creator-owned"/>
<link wikidata="Q327711" start="81" end="92" title="Terry Moore (comics)" label="Terry Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070872" start="144" end="157" title="love triangle" label="love triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561438" start="234" end="247" title="Slice of life" label="slice-of-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q859369" start="248" end="255" title="dramedy" label="dramedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5937792" start="306" end="311" title="crime fiction" label="crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q182015" start="316" end="331" title="Thriller (genre)" label="thriller genres"/>
<link wikidata="Q188784" start="413" end="422" title="superhero" label="superhero"/>
<link wikidata="Q998854" start="423" end="437" title="dream sequence" label="dream sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q357776" start="447" end="454" title="Jim Lee" label="Jim Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q279385" start="1001" end="1020" title="San Diego Comic-Con" label="San Diego Comic-Con"/>
<link wikidata="Q25038259" start="1313" end="1322" title="gag-a-day" label="gag-a-day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243552" start="1868" end="1884" title="trade paperback (comics)" label="trade paperbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q571134" start="2266" end="2281" title="Antarctic Press" label="Antarctic Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q913301" start="2664" end="2676" title="Image Comics" label="Image Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280752" start="3084" end="3088" title="Echo (comic book)" label="Echo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16594049" start="3102" end="3115" title="Rachel Rising" label="Rachel Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q28127325" start="3133" end="3143" title="Motor Girl" label="Motor Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q170079" start="3860" end="3868" title="Minor (law)" label="underage"/>
<link wikidata="Q55719239" start="3869" end="3876" title="lesbian" label="lesbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q814356" start="3877" end="3886" title="call girl" label="call girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3951828" start="4565" end="4570" title="Agency (philosophy)" label="agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3684349" start="4787" end="4812" title="Comics Buyer&amp;#x27;s Guide" label="Comics Buyer&amp;#x27;s Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q473596" start="4988" end="4998" title="self-image" label="self-image"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="5178" end="5187" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328940" start="5274" end="5283" title="Fairytale fantasy" label="fairytale"/>
<link wikidata="Q613015" start="5774" end="5794" title="born-again Christian" label="born-again Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q43200" start="6164" end="6172" title="bisexual" label="bisexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q215641" start="6173" end="6181" title="aerobics" label="aerobics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947495" start="6762" end="6772" title="crime boss" label="crime boss"/>
<link wikidata="Q127683" start="6993" end="7003" title="Incest" label="incestuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q622527" start="7591" end="7605" title="Self-harm" label="self-inflicted"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="7633" end="7637" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221899" start="7889" end="7901" title="gynecologist" label="gynecologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q842614" start="8535" end="8547" title="Eisner Award" label="Eisner Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571762" start="8628" end="8656" title="National Cartoonists Society" label="National Cartoonists Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571762" start="8657" end="8669" title="Reuben Award" label="Reuben Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266111" start="8715" end="8726" title="GLAAD Media Awards" label="GLAAD Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243552" start="8861" end="8877" title="trade paperback (comics)" label="trade paperbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7499895" start="9755" end="9767" title="Shocker Toys" label="Shocker Toys"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447985" start="10438" end="10446" title="tote bag" label="tote bag"/>
<link wikidata="Q131151" start="10598" end="10605" title="T-shirt" label="T-shirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q459542" start="10732" end="10747" title="Angela Robinson (director)" label="Angela Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348428" start="10868" end="10884" title="IMG Global Media" label="IMG Global Media"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29392" wikidata="Q1313" url="?curid=29392" title="Summer">
<text>Summer or summertime is the hottest and brightest of the four temperate seasons, occurring after spring and before autumn. At or centred on the summer solstice, daylight hours are the longest and darkness hours are the shortest, with day length decreasing as the season progresses after the solstice. The earliest sunrises and latest sunsets also occur near the date of the solstice. The date of the beginning of varies according to definition, climate, tradition, and culture. When it is summer in the Northern Hemisphere, it is winter in the Southern Hemisphere, and vice versa.

==Etymology==
The modern English &quot;summer&quot; derives from the Middle English &quot;somer&quot;, via the Old English &quot;sumor&quot;.

==Timing==
From an astronomical view, the equinoxes and solstices would be the middle of the respective seasons, but sometimes astronomical summer is defined as starting at the solstice, the time of maximal insolation, often identified with 21 June or 21 December. By solar reckoning, summer instead starts on around 5 May, ends around 7 August and the summer solstice is Midsummer. A variable seasonal lag means that the meteorological centre of the season, which is based on average temperature patterns, occurs several weeks after the time of maximal insolation. 

The meteorological convention defines summer as comprising the months of June, July, and August in the northern hemisphere and the months of December, January, and February in the southern hemisphere. Under meteorological definitions, all seasons are arbitrarily set to start at the beginning of a calendar month and end at the end of a month. This meteorological definition of summer also aligns with the commonly viewed notion of summer as the season with the longest (and warmest) days of the year, in which daylight predominates. 

The meteorological reckoning of seasons is used in countries including Australia, New Zealand, Austria, Denmark, Russia and Japan. It is also used by many people in the United Kingdom and Canada. In Ireland, the summer months according to the national meteorological service, Met Éireann, are June, July and August. By the Irish calendar, summer begins on 1 May (Beltane) and ends on 31 July (Lughnasadh).
Days continue to lengthen from equinox to solstice and summer days progressively shorten after the solstice, so meteorological summer encompasses the build-up to the longest day and a diminishing thereafter, with summer having many more hours of daylight than spring. Reckoning by hours of daylight alone, summer solstice marks the midpoint, not the beginning, of the seasons. Midsummer takes place over the shortest night of the year, which is the summer solstice, or on a nearby date that varies with tradition.

Where a seasonal lag of half a season or more is common, reckoning based on astronomical markers is shifted half a season. By this method, in North America, summer is the period from the summer solstice (usually 20 or 21 June in the Northern Hemisphere) to the autumn equinox.

Reckoning by cultural festivals, the summer season in the United States is traditionally regarded as beginning on Memorial Day weekend (the last weekend in May) and ending on Labor Day (the first Monday in September), more closely in line with the meteorological definition for the parts of the country that have four-season weather. The similar Canadian tradition starts summer on Victoria Day one week prior (although summer conditions vary widely across Canada&#x27;s expansive territory) and ends, as in the United States, on Labour Day.

In some Southern Hemisphere countries such as Brazil, Argentina, South Africa, Australia and New Zealand, summer is associated with the Christmas and New Year holidays. Many families take extended holidays for two or three weeks or longer during summer.

In Australia and New Zealand, summer begins on 1 December and ends on 28 February (29 February in leap years).

In Chinese astronomy, summer starts on or around 5 May, with the &quot;jiéqì&quot; (solar term) known as &quot;lìxià&quot; (立夏), i.e. &quot;establishment of summer&quot;. Summer ends around 7 August, with the solar term of &quot;lìqiū&quot; (立秋, &quot;establishment of autumn&quot;).

In southern and southeast Asia, where the monsoon occurs, summer is more generally defined as lasting from March, April, May and June, the warmest time of the year, ending with the onset of the monsoon rains.

Because the temperature lag is shorter in the oceanic temperate southern hemisphere, most countries in this region use the meteorological definition with summer starting on 1 December and ending on the last day of February.

==Weather==

Summer is traditionally associated with hot or warm weather. In Mediterranean climates, it is also associated with dry weather, while in other places (particularly in Eastern Asia because of the monsoon) it is associated with rainy weather. The wet season is the main period of vegetation growth within the savanna climate regime. Where the wet season is associated with a seasonal shift in the prevailing winds, it is known as a monsoon.

In the northern Atlantic Ocean, a distinct tropical cyclone season occurs from 1 June to 30 November. The statistical peak of the Atlantic hurricane season is 10 September. The Northeast Pacific Ocean has a broader period of activity, but in a similar timeframe to the Atlantic. The Northwest Pacific sees tropical cyclones year-round, with a minimum in February and March and a peak in early September. In the North Indian basin, storms are most common from April to December, with peaks in May and November. In the Southern Hemisphere, the tropical cyclone season runs from the start of November until the end of April with peaks in mid-February to early March.

Thunderstorm season in the United States and Canada runs in the spring through summer but sometimes can run as late as October or even November in the fall. These storms can produce hail, strong winds and tornadoes, usually during the afternoon and evening.

==Holidays==
===School breaks===
Schools and universities typically have a summer break to take advantage of the warmer weather and longer days. In almost all countries, children are out of school during this time of year for summer break, although dates vary. Many families will take holidays for a week or two over the summer, particularly in Southern Hemisphere Western countries with statutory Christmas and New Year holidays.

In the United States, public schools usually end in late May in Memorial Day weekend, while colleges finish in early May. Schools often resume in mid-August. Note that school start and end dates vary significantly across the US.

In England and Wales, school ends in mid-July and resumes again in early September. In Scotland, the summer holiday begins in late June and ends in mid-to-late August. Similarly, in Canada the summer holiday starts on the last or second-last Friday in June and ends in late August or on the first Tuesday of September, with the exception of when that date falls before Labour Day, in which case, ends on the second Tuesday of the month. In Russia, the summer holiday begins at the end of May and ends on 31 August.

In the Southern Hemisphere, school summer holiday dates include the major holidays of Christmas and New Year&#x27;s Day. School summer holidays in Australia, New Zealand and South Africa begin in early December and end in early February, with dates varying between states. In South Africa, the new school year usually starts during the second week of January, thus aligning the academic year with the Calendar year. In India, school ends in late April and resumes in early or mid-June. In Cameroon and Nigeria, schools usually start a summer vacation in mid-July and resume in the later weeks of September or the first week of October.

===Public holidays===
A wide range of public holidays fall during summer, including:
* Northern Hemisphere
** Bank holidays in the United Kingdom and Ireland
** Bastille Day, National Day of France (14 July)
** Belgian National Day (21 July)
** Canada Day (1 July)
** Festa della Repubblica, Italian national day and republic day (2 June)
** Independence Day (Jordan) (25 May)
** Independence Day (Pakistan) (14 August)
** Independence Day (India) (15 August)
** Independence Day (Indonesia) (17 August)
** Independence Day (Malaysia) (31 August)
** Independence Day (United States) (4 July)
** Juneteenth (United States) (19 June)
** King&#x27;s Official Birthday (United Kingdom and some Commonwealth countries) (third Saturday in June)
** Memorial Day (United States) or Victoria Day (Canada) through Labor Day
** National Day of Singapore (9 August)
** National Day of Sweden (6 June) and Midsummer, sometimes referred to as the &quot;alternative National Day&quot;
** Ólavsøka, Faroe Islands (29 July)
** Swiss National Day (1 August)
** Victory Day (Turkey) (30 August)

* Southern Hemisphere
** Australia Day (26 January)
** Christmas Day (25 December) and Boxing Day (26 December) in many countries
** New Year&#x27;s Day (1 January) and the following day (2 January) in many countries
** Waitangi Day (6 February) In New Zealand

==Activities==

People generally take advantage of the high temperatures by spending more time outdoors during summer. Activities such as travelling to the beach and picnics occur during the summer months. Sports including cricket, association football (soccer), horse racing, basketball, American football, volleyball, skateboarding, baseball, softball, tennis and golf are played. 

Water sports also occur. These include water skiing, wakeboarding, swimming, surfing, tubing and water polo. The modern Olympics have been held during the summer months every four years since 1896. The 2000 Summer Olympics, in Sydney, were held in spring and the 2016 Summer Olympics, in Rio de Janeiro, were held in winter.

In the United States, many television shows made for children are released during the summer, as children are off school.

Conversely, the music and film industries generally experience higher returns during the summer than other times of the year and market their summer hits accordingly. Summer is popular for animated movies to be released theatrically in movie theaters.

With many schools closed, especially in Western countries, travel and vacationing tend to peak during the summer. Teenagers and university students often take summer jobs, and business activity for the recreation, tourism, restaurant, and retail industries reach their peak.

==See also==
* Summer Olympic Games
* Summer War

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1313" start="0" end="6" title="Summer" label="Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313" start="10" end="20" title="Summer" label="summertime"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="62" end="71" title="temperate" label="temperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q24384" start="72" end="78" title="season" label="season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312" start="97" end="103" title="Spring (season)" label="spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314" start="115" end="121" title="autumn" label="autumn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603898" start="144" end="159" title="summer solstice" label="summer solstice"/>
<link wikidata="Q52643" start="234" end="244" title="day length" label="day length"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937" start="445" end="452" title="climate" label="climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="503" end="522" title="Northern Hemisphere" label="Northern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311" start="530" end="536" title="winter" label="winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q41228" start="544" end="563" title="Southern Hemisphere" label="Southern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q36395" start="651" end="665" title="Middle English" label="Middle English"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="693" end="704" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315" start="767" end="774" title="equinox" label="equinox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556707" start="932" end="942" title="insolation" label="insolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q154502" start="1097" end="1106" title="Midsummer" label="Midsummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441914" start="1119" end="1131" title="seasonal lag" label="seasonal lag"/>
<link wikidata="Q25261" start="1147" end="1161" title="meteorology" label="meteorological"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="1900" end="1909" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="1911" end="1922" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="1924" end="1931" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="1933" end="1940" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="1942" end="1948" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="1953" end="1958" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1998" end="2012" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="2017" end="2023" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="2028" end="2035" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6822234" start="2105" end="2116" title="Met Éireann" label="Met Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278773" start="2152" end="2166" title="Irish calendar" label="Irish calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q792558" start="2192" end="2199" title="Beltane" label="Beltane"/>
<link wikidata="Q543108" start="2222" end="2232" title="Lughnasadh" label="Lughnasadh"/>
<link wikidata="Q123524" start="2548" end="2556" title="solstice" label="solstice"/>
<link wikidata="Q154502" start="2612" end="2621" title="Midsummer" label="Midsummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441914" start="2758" end="2770" title="seasonal lag" label="seasonal lag"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603898" start="2937" end="2952" title="summer solstice" label="summer solstice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7530126" start="3011" end="3025" title="Autumn equinox (Northern Hemisphere)" label="autumn equinox"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3086" end="3099" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q371781" start="3142" end="3162" title="Memorial Day weekend" label="Memorial Day weekend"/>
<link wikidata="Q848352" start="3203" end="3212" title="Labor Day" label="Labor Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="3374" end="3382" title="Canada" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916311" start="3410" end="3422" title="Victoria Day" label="Victoria Day"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3558" end="3568" title="Labour Day#Canada" label="Labour Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="3617" end="3623" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="3625" end="3634" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="3636" end="3648" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="3650" end="3659" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="3664" end="3675" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="3707" end="3716" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q34812" start="3721" end="3729" title="New Year" label="New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="3829" end="3838" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="3843" end="3854" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268276" start="3941" end="3958" title="Chinese astronomy" label="Chinese astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190993" start="4009" end="4014" title="Jieqi" label="jiéqì"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190993" start="4022" end="4032" title="solar term" label="solar term"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191007" start="4049" end="4054" title="lixia" label="lìxià"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147421" start="4167" end="4172" title="liqiu" label="lìqiū"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="4265" end="4272" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925" start="4425" end="4429" title="rain" label="rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="4735" end="4756" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="4838" end="4850" title="Eastern Asia" label="Eastern Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="4978" end="4993" title="savanna climate" label="savanna climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330018" start="5066" end="5082" title="prevailing winds" label="prevailing winds"/>
<link wikidata="Q756721" start="5241" end="5266" title="Atlantic hurricane season" label="Atlantic hurricane season"/>
<link wikidata="Q41228" start="5628" end="5647" title="Southern Hemisphere" label="Southern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857578" start="5776" end="5788" title="Thunderstorm" label="Thunderstorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312" start="5840" end="5846" title="Spring (season)" label="spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314" start="5927" end="5931" title="Autumn" label="fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q37602" start="5958" end="5962" title="hail" label="hail"/>
<link wikidata="Q8081" start="5981" end="5990" title="tornadoes" label="tornadoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155370" start="6261" end="6273" title="Summer vacation" label="summer break"/>
<link wikidata="Q41228" start="6380" end="6399" title="Southern Hemisphere" label="Southern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="6433" end="6442" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q34812" start="6447" end="6455" title="New Year" label="New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q371781" start="6531" end="6543" title="Memorial Day" label="Memorial Day"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6635" end="6661" title="school start and end dates" label="school start and end dates"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="6700" end="6707" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="6712" end="6717" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="6784" end="6792" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="6879" end="6885" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7066" end="7076" title="Labour Day#Canada" label="Labour Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="7137" end="7143" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="7299" end="7308" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q196627" start="7313" end="7332" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Day" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="7387" end="7399" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q915466" start="7591" end="7604" title="academic year" label="academic year"/>
<link wikidata="Q3186692" start="7614" end="7627" title="Calendar year" label="Calendar year"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="7632" end="7637" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009" start="7702" end="7710" title="Cameroon" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="7715" end="7722" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q277436" start="7960" end="7972" title="Bank holiday" label="Bank holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q326724" start="8011" end="8023" title="Bastille Day" label="Bastille Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2190144" start="8061" end="8081" title="Belgian National Day" label="Belgian National Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q639756" start="8095" end="8105" title="Canada Day" label="Canada Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q802461" start="8118" end="8140" title="Festa della Repubblica" label="Festa della Repubblica"/>
<link wikidata="Q57598" start="8150" end="8162" title="national day" label="national day"/>
<link wikidata="Q802614" start="8167" end="8179" title="republic day" label="republic day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007314" start="8230" end="8257" title="Independence Day (Pakistan)" label="Independence Day (Pakistan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q56106" start="8273" end="8297" title="Independence Day (India)" label="Independence Day (India)"/>
<link wikidata="Q62732044" start="8313" end="8341" title="Independence Day (Indonesia)" label="Independence Day (Indonesia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25173278" start="8357" end="8384" title="Independence Day (Malaysia)" label="Independence Day (Malaysia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q86591" start="8400" end="8432" title="Independence Day (United States)" label="Independence Day (United States)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6312521" start="8445" end="8455" title="Juneteenth" label="Juneteenth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564633" start="8485" end="8514" title="King&amp;#x27;s Official Birthday" label="King&amp;#x27;s Official Birthday"/>
<link wikidata="Q371781" start="8592" end="8604" title="Memorial Day" label="Memorial Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916311" start="8624" end="8636" title="Victoria Day" label="Victoria Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q848352" start="8654" end="8663" title="Labor Day" label="Labor Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972121" start="8667" end="8692" title="National Day (Singapore)" label="National Day of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348730" start="8707" end="8729" title="National Day of Sweden" label="National Day of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q154502" start="8743" end="8752" title="Midsummer" label="Midsummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q293048" start="8823" end="8831" title="Ólavsøka" label="Ólavsøka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="8833" end="8846" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q38087" start="8860" end="8878" title="Swiss National Day" label="Swiss National Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q8145593" start="8893" end="8913" title="Victory Day (Turkey)" label="Victory Day (Turkey)"/>
<link wikidata="Q502375" start="8952" end="8965" title="Australia Day" label="Australia Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="8982" end="8995" title="Christmas Day" label="Christmas Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q956699" start="9014" end="9024" title="Boxing Day" label="Boxing Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q196627" start="9060" end="9079" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Day" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851080" start="9147" end="9159" title="Waitangi Day" label="Waitangi Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q40080" start="9345" end="9350" title="beach" label="beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q506294" start="9355" end="9361" title="picnic" label="picnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="9412" end="9419" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="9421" end="9441" title="association football" label="association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q187916" start="9452" end="9464" title="horse racing" label="horse racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="9466" end="9476" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="9478" end="9495" title="American football" label="American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="9497" end="9507" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q842284" start="9509" end="9522" title="skateboarding" label="skateboarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="9524" end="9532" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q171038" start="9534" end="9542" title="softball" label="softball"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="9544" end="9550" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="9555" end="9559" title="golf" label="golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q61065" start="9574" end="9586" title="Water sports" label="Water sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q472827" start="9613" end="9625" title="water skiing" label="water skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q376040" start="9627" end="9639" title="wakeboarding" label="wakeboarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388" start="9641" end="9649" title="human swimming" label="swimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q159992" start="9651" end="9658" title="surfing" label="surfing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978323" start="9660" end="9666" title="tubing (recreation)" label="tubing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707" start="9671" end="9681" title="water polo" label="water polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="9694" end="9702" title="Olympics" label="Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8544" start="9776" end="9796" title="2000 Summer Olympics" label="2000 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="9801" end="9807" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312" start="9822" end="9828" title="Spring (season)" label="spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q8613" start="9837" end="9857" title="2016 Summer Olympics" label="2016 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="9862" end="9876" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311" start="9891" end="9897" title="winter" label="winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="10212" end="10227" title="animated movies" label="animated movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q41253" start="10259" end="10273" title="movie theaters" label="movie theaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626021" start="10435" end="10446" title="seasonal industry" label="summer jobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q159821" start="10567" end="10587" title="Summer Olympic Games" label="Summer Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q12375607" start="10590" end="10600" title="Summer War" label="Summer War"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29393" wikidata="Q19304" url="?curid=29393" title="Spring">
<text>Spring(s) may refer to:
==Common uses==
* Spring (season), a season of the year
* Spring (device), a mechanical device that stores energy
* Spring (hydrology), a natural source of water
* Spring (mathematics), a geometric surface in the shape of a helically coiled tube
* Spring (political terminology), often used to name periods of political liberalization
* Springs (tide), in oceanography, the maximum tide, occurs twice a month during the full and new moon

==Places==
* Spring (Milz), a river in Thuringia, Germany
* Spring, Alabel, a barangay unit in Alabel, Sarangani Province, Philippines
* Șpring, a commune in Alba County, Romania
* Șpring (river), a river in Alba County, Romania
* Springs, Gauteng, South Africa
* Springs, the location of Dubai British School, Dubai
* Spring Village, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
* Spring Village, Shropshire, England

===United States===
* Springs, New York, a part of East Hampton, New York
* Springs, Pennsylvania, an unincorporated community
* Spring, Texas, a census-designated place
* Spring District, neighborhood in Bellevue, Washington

==People==
* Spring (given name)
* Spring (surname), including a list of people with the name

===Groups===
* Spring baronets, of Pakenham
* Spring family, English noble family

===People with the given name===
* Spring Byington (1886–1971), American actress

==Arts, entertainment and media==
===Paintings===
*The Spring (La Primavera), by Giuseppe Arcimboldo
* &quot;Spring&quot; (Alma-Tadema painting), an 1894 oil painting by Lawrence Alma-Tadema
* Spring (Plastov painting), a 1954 painting by Arkady Plastov
* &quot;The Spring&quot; (or La Source), a painting by Francis Picabia
* &quot;Primavera&quot; (Botticelli) (English translation: &quot;Spring&quot;), a painting by Sandro Botticelli, c. 1482
* &quot;Spring&quot;, a painting by Édouard Manet
* &quot;Spring&quot;, a painting by Christopher Williams

===Film===
* &quot;In Spring&quot; (1929 film) (&quot;Весной&quot;), a Soviet film
* &quot;Spring&quot; (1969 film), an Estonian film
* &quot;Spring&quot; (2011), a short film by British director Hong Khaou
* &quot;Spring&quot; (2014 film), an American romantic science fiction horror film
* &quot;Spring&quot; (2019 film), an animated short film created by the Blender Institute

=== Television ===
* &quot;Spring&quot; (&quot;Pee-wee&#x27;s Playhouse&quot;), an episode of &quot;Pee-wee&#x27;s Playhouse&quot;
* &quot;Spring&quot; (TV series), a Flemish-Belgian television series

===Literature===
* Spring (Runelords), a character in The Runelords series of fantasy novels by David Farland
* &quot;Spring&quot; (&quot;Kevade&quot;), a novel by Oskar Luts, basis for the 1969 film

===Music===
====Groups====
* Spring (band), an English band, or the band&#x27;s only album
* Spring (Belgian band), a group that performed at Marktrock in 2004
* American Spring, a 1970s pop music duo, known from 1971/&#x27;72 as &quot;Spring&quot;
* Springs, a Japanese band, formed by Aya Hirano, Yuuki Yoshida, Ayaka Itō

====Albums and EPs====
* &quot;Spring&quot; (Wallows EP), 2018
* &quot;Spring&quot; (Akdong Musician EP), 2016
* &quot;Spring&quot; (American Spring album), 1972
* &quot;Spring&quot; (April EP), 2016
* &quot;Spring&quot; (Cyann &amp; Ben album), 2004
* &quot;Spring&quot; (Jon Foreman EP), 2008
* &quot;Spring&quot; (Irène Schweizer and Jürg Wickihalder album), 2014
* &quot;Spring&quot; (Tony Williams album), 1965
* &quot;Spring&quot; (single album), by Park Bom, 2019
* &quot;Spring&quot;, an album by Clay Hart, 1969
* &quot;Spring&quot;, an EP by Subtle, 2003
* &quot;Spring!&quot;, an album by The Lettermen, (1967)
* &quot;The Blake Project: Spring&quot;, an album by Finn Coren, 1997
** &quot;&quot;, a follow-up album, 1998

====Songs====
* &quot;Spring&quot; (Rammstein song)
* &quot;Spring&quot; (RMB song), 1996
* Spring (Tanya Tucker song), 1975

====Classical works====
* &quot;Spring&quot; (concerto), &quot;La primavera&quot;, from Vivaldi&#x27;s &quot;The Four Seasons&quot;
* &quot;Spring&quot; (Rachmaninoff), a 1902 cantata by Sergei Rachmaninoff
* &quot;Spring&quot; (sonata), Violin Sonata No. 5 by Beethoven
* &quot;In Spring&quot;, a symphony by John Knowles Paine
* Spring Quartet, String Quartet No. 14 by Mozart
* &quot;Spring Symphony&quot;, a symphony by Benjamin Britten
* Symphony No. 1 (Schumann) (&quot;Spring&quot;), by Robert Schumann
* &quot;Spring&quot;, song by Frédéric Chopin

===Other media===
* &quot;Spring: A Journal of Archetype and Culture&quot;, a psychology journal

==Brands and organizations==
* Spring (company), a computer software company owned by Pivotal Software
* Spring, Inc., formerly Teespring, an e-commerce company that allows people to create and sell custom apparel
* Spring (store), a Canada-based shoe retailer
* Spring Airlines, a Chinese airline
* Spring! (brand), a brand of bottled water
* Springs Global, a Brazil-based corporation
* Spring (political party), a movement in Poland
* SPRING Singapore, a governmental department of Singapore
*Dacia Spring, an electric city car

==Science and technology==
* Spring green, occurs between green and cyan in the visible spectrum

===Computing===
* Spring (application), an E-commerce platform
* Spring (game engine), an open-source RTS engine
* Spring (operating system), an experimental operating system from Sun Microsystems
* SPRING, a GIS and remote-sensing image-processing system with an object-oriented data-model
* Spring Framework, an application-framework for the Java platform

==Other uses==
* Sacred spring, a revered spring or well
* Spring (building), a residential condominium in Austin, Texas, US
* Springs Christian Academy, a private school in Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada
* Forward or aft spring, a method of mooring a vessel to a shore fixture

==See also==
* 
* :Category:Spring (season), for articles related to the season
* :Category:Springs, for articles related to the water source
* :Category:Springs (mechanical), for articles related to the device
* Fountain (disambiguation)
* Hooke&#x27;s law, for the mathematical model of certain processes
* Primavera (disambiguation)
* Printemps (disambiguation)
* Spring Creek (disambiguation)
* Spring equinox (disambiguation)
* Spring Lake (disambiguation)
* Spring River (disambiguation)
* Spring Township (disambiguation)
* Springer (disambiguation)
* Springfield (disambiguation)
* Springleaf (disambiguation)
* Springtime (disambiguation)
* Springville (disambiguation)
* Sprung (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q19304" start="0" end="6" title="Spring" label="Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q19304" start="7" end="8" title="Spring" label="s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312" start="42" end="57" title="Spring (season)" label="Spring (season)"/>
<link wikidata="Q102836" start="82" end="97" title="Spring (device)" label="Spring (device)"/>
<link wikidata="Q124714" start="140" end="158" title="Spring (hydrology)" label="Spring (hydrology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580364" start="272" end="302" title="Spring (political terminology)" label="Spring (political terminology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="361" end="375" title="Springs (tide)" label="Springs (tide)"/>
<link wikidata="Q830752" start="476" end="489" title="Spring (Milz)" label="Spring (Milz)"/>
<link wikidata="Q174393" start="523" end="537" title="Spring, Alabel" label="Spring, Alabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16425367" start="600" end="606" title="Șpring" label="Șpring"/>
<link wikidata="Q8083887" start="644" end="658" title="Șpring (river)" label="Șpring (river)"/>
<link wikidata="Q761408" start="694" end="710" title="Springs, Gauteng" label="Springs, Gauteng"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310510" start="752" end="772" title="Dubai British School" label="Dubai British School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580749" start="782" end="830" title="Spring Village, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines" label="Spring Village, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3812281" start="833" end="859" title="Spring Village, Shropshire" label="Spring Village, Shropshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111100" start="892" end="909" title="Springs, New York" label="Springs, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581166" start="946" end="967" title="Springs, Pennsylvania" label="Springs, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q981346" start="999" end="1012" title="Spring, Texas" label="Spring, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q28225940" start="1042" end="1057" title="Spring District" label="Spring District"/>
<link wikidata="Q112628961" start="1110" end="1129" title="Spring (given name)" label="Spring (given name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q37562822" start="1132" end="1148" title="Spring (surname)" label="Spring (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580759" start="1207" end="1222" title="Spring baronets" label="Spring baronets"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020005" start="1238" end="1251" title="Spring family" label="Spring family"/>
<link wikidata="Q267803" start="1310" end="1325" title="Spring Byington" label="Spring Byington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751" start="1438" end="1457" title="Giuseppe Arcimboldo" label="Giuseppe Arcimboldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q732011" start="1460" end="1501" title="Spring (Alma-Tadema painting)" label="&amp;quot;Spring&amp;quot; (Alma-Tadema painting)"/>
<link wikidata="Q56825126" start="1550" end="1575" title="Spring (Plastov painting)" label="Spring (Plastov painting)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65060966" start="1619" end="1629" title="The Spring" label="The Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q549847" start="1684" end="1718" title="Primavera (Botticelli)" label="&amp;quot;Primavera&amp;quot; (Botticelli)"/>
<link wikidata="Q40599" start="1839" end="1852" title="Édouard Manet" label="Édouard Manet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1889" end="1909" title="Christopher Williams (Welsh artist)#Compositions" label="Christopher Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q16708469" start="1924" end="1957" title="In Spring (1929 film)" label="&amp;quot;In Spring&amp;quot; (1929 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579305" start="1996" end="2026" title="Spring (1969 film)" label="&amp;quot;Spring&amp;quot; (1969 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18098383" start="2107" end="2117" title="Hong Khaou" label="Hong Khaou"/>
<link wikidata="Q18578674" start="2120" end="2150" title="Spring (2014 film)" label="&amp;quot;Spring&amp;quot; (2014 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q62770443" start="2203" end="2233" title="Spring (2019 film)" label="&amp;quot;Spring&amp;quot; (2019 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593687" start="2313" end="2370" title="Spring (Pee-wee&amp;#x27;s Playhouse)" label="&amp;quot;Spring&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Pee-wee&amp;#x27;s Playhouse&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078789" start="2425" end="2455" title="Spring (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Spring&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441836" start="2513" end="2531" title="Spring (Runelords)" label="Spring (Runelords)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005705" start="2658" end="2668" title="Oskar Luts" label="Oskar Luts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3967242" start="2724" end="2737" title="Spring (band)" label="Spring (band)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2788" end="2809" title="Spring (Belgian band)" label="Spring (Belgian band)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2837" end="2846" title="Marktrock#Marktrock 2004" label="Marktrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745160" start="2857" end="2872" title="American Spring" label="American Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q237405" start="2982" end="2992" title="Aya Hirano" label="Aya Hirano"/>
<link wikidata="Q104861026" start="3045" end="3076" title="Spring (Wallows EP)" label="&amp;quot;Spring&amp;quot; (Wallows EP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24026132" start="3085" end="3124" title="Spring (Akdong Musician EP)" label="&amp;quot;Spring&amp;quot; (Akdong Musician EP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580356" start="3133" end="3175" title="Spring (American Spring album)" label="&amp;quot;Spring&amp;quot; (American Spring album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24007362" start="3184" end="3213" title="Spring (April EP)" label="&amp;quot;Spring&amp;quot; (April EP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580359" start="3222" end="3264" title="Spring (Cyann &amp;amp; Ben album)" label="&amp;quot;Spring&amp;quot; (Cyann &amp;amp; Ben album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580358" start="3273" end="3308" title="Spring (Jon Foreman EP)" label="&amp;quot;Spring&amp;quot; (Jon Foreman EP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q118901490" start="3317" end="3380" title="Spring (Irène Schweizer and Jürg Wickihalder album)" label="&amp;quot;Spring&amp;quot; (Irène Schweizer and Jürg Wickihalder album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580360" start="3389" end="3429" title="Spring (Tony Williams album)" label="&amp;quot;Spring&amp;quot; (Tony Williams album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q96406212" start="3438" end="3471" title="Spring (single album)" label="&amp;quot;Spring&amp;quot; (single album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5129911" start="3525" end="3534" title="Clay Hart" label="Clay Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502695" start="3572" end="3578" title="Subtle (band)" label="Subtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412483" start="3620" end="3633" title="The Lettermen" label="The Lettermen"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3650" end="3675" title="The Blake Project: Spring" label="The Blake Project: Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q213591" start="3770" end="3805" title="Spring (Rammstein song)" label="&amp;quot;Spring&amp;quot; (Rammstein song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28937958" start="3808" end="3837" title="Spring (RMB song)" label="&amp;quot;Spring&amp;quot; (RMB song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q114043970" start="3846" end="3872" title="Spring (Tanya Tucker song)" label="Spring (Tanya Tucker song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12016" start="3906" end="3935" title="Spring (concerto)" label="&amp;quot;Spring&amp;quot; (concerto)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472082" start="4014" end="4047" title="Spring (Rachmaninoff)" label="&amp;quot;Spring&amp;quot; (Rachmaninoff)"/>
<link wikidata="Q669358" start="4089" end="4116" title="Spring (sonata)" label="&amp;quot;Spring&amp;quot; (sonata)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16952490" start="4159" end="4168" title="In Spring" label="In Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737992" start="4211" end="4225" title="Spring Quartet" label="Spring Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4844448" start="4267" end="4282" title="Spring Symphony" label="Spring Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q163594" start="4323" end="4348" title="Symphony No. 1 (Schumann)" label="Symphony No. 1 (Schumann)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268" start="4420" end="4435" title="Frédéric Chopin" label="Frédéric Chopin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18392457" start="4463" end="4505" title="Spring (journal)" label="Spring: A Journal of Archetype and Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580362" start="4566" end="4582" title="Spring (company)" label="Spring (company)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17084807" start="4640" end="4652" title="Spring, Inc." label="Spring, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q2832297" start="4751" end="4765" title="Spring (store)" label="Spring (store)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340408" start="4798" end="4813" title="Spring Airlines" label="Spring Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6444391" start="4835" end="4850" title="Spring! (brand)" label="Spring! (brand)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581167" start="4879" end="4893" title="Springs Global" label="Springs Global"/>
<link wikidata="Q61452057" start="4924" end="4948" title="Spring (political party)" label="Spring (political party)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7392645" start="4973" end="4989" title="SPRING Singapore" label="SPRING Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q19960305" start="5031" end="5043" title="Dacia Spring" label="Dacia Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q373787" start="5096" end="5108" title="Spring green" label="Spring green"/>
<link wikidata="Q30598723" start="5183" end="5203" title="Spring (application)" label="Spring (application)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754264" start="5230" end="5250" title="Spring (game engine)" label="Spring (game engine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049965" start="5280" end="5305" title="Spring (operating system)" label="Spring (operating system)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7392646" start="5364" end="5370" title="SPRING" label="SPRING"/>
<link wikidata="Q720314" start="5458" end="5474" title="Spring Framework" label="Spring Framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371047" start="5541" end="5554" title="Holy well" label="Sacred spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580361" start="5583" end="5600" title="Spring (building)" label="Spring (building)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581165" start="5651" end="5676" title="Springs Christian Academy" label="Springs Christian Academy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5762" end="5769" title="mooring#Mooring to a shore fixture" label="mooring"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5817" end="5842" title=":Category:Spring (season)" label=":Category:Spring (season)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5881" end="5898" title=":Category:Springs" label=":Category:Springs"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5943" end="5973" title=":Category:Springs (mechanical)" label=":Category:Springs (mechanical)"/>
<link wikidata="Q542098" start="6012" end="6037" title="Fountain (disambiguation)" label="Fountain (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q170282" start="6040" end="6056" title="Hooke&amp;#x27;s law" label="Hooke&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q247857" start="6108" end="6134" title="Primavera (disambiguation)" label="Primavera (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19702549" start="6137" end="6163" title="Printemps (disambiguation)" label="Printemps (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q418132" start="6166" end="6195" title="Spring Creek (disambiguation)" label="Spring Creek (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q80800323" start="6198" end="6229" title="Spring equinox (disambiguation)" label="Spring equinox (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q402464" start="6232" end="6260" title="Spring Lake (disambiguation)" label="Spring Lake (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580666" start="6263" end="6292" title="Spring River (disambiguation)" label="Spring River (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313847" start="6295" end="6327" title="Spring Township (disambiguation)" label="Spring Township (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q251288" start="6330" end="6355" title="Springer (disambiguation)" label="Springer (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q191058" start="6358" end="6386" title="Springfield (disambiguation)" label="Springfield (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q120755376" start="6389" end="6416" title="Springleaf (disambiguation)" label="Springleaf (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218991" start="6419" end="6446" title="Springtime (disambiguation)" label="Springtime (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q348123" start="6449" end="6477" title="Springville (disambiguation)" label="Springville (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628275" start="6480" end="6503" title="Sprung (disambiguation)" label="Sprung (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29394" wikidata="Q171052" url="?curid=29394" title="Shrike">
<text>Shrikes () are passerine birds of the family Laniidae. The family is composed of 34 species in two genera.

The family name, and that of the larger genus, &quot;Lanius&quot;, is derived from the Latin word for &quot;butcher&quot;, and some shrikes are also known as butcherbirds because of the habit, particularly of males, of impaling prey onto plant spines within their territories. These larders have multiple functions, attracting females and serving as food stores. 

The common English name shrike is from Old English , alluding to the shrike&#x27;s shriek-like call.

==Taxonomy==
The family Laniidae was introduced (as the subfamily Lanidia) in 1815 by the French polymath Constantine Samuel Rafinesque. The type genus &quot;Lanius&quot; had been introduced by Carl Linnaeus in 1758.
As currently constituted, the family contains 34 species in four genera. It includes the genus &quot;Eurocephalus&quot; with the two white-crowned shrikes. A molecular phylogenetic study published in 2023 found that the white-crowned shrikes were more closely related to the crows in the family Corvidae than they are to the Laniidae and authors proposed that the genus &quot;Eurocephalus&quot; should be moved to its own family Eurocephalidae. The cladogram below is based on these results:
==Distribution, migration, and habitat==
Most shrike species have a Eurasian and African distribution, with just two breeding in North America (the loggerhead and northern shrikes). No members of this family occur in South America or Australia, although one species reaches New Guinea. The shrikes vary in the extent of their ranges: some species, such as the great grey shrike, ranging across the Northern Hemisphere, while the São Tomé fiscal (or Newton&#x27;s fiscal) is restricted to the island of São Tomé.

They inhabit open habitats, especially steppe and savannah. A few species of shrikes are forest dwellers, seldom occurring in open habitats. Some species breed in northern latitudes during the summer, then migrate to warmer climes for the winter.

==Description==
Shrikes are medium-sized birds with grey, brown, or black-and-white plumage. Most species are between and in size; however, the genus &quot;Corvinella&quot;, with its extremely elongated tail-feathers, may reach up to in length. Their beaks are hooked, like those of a bird of prey, reflecting their carnivorous nature; their calls are strident.

==Behaviour==

Male shrikes are known for their habit of catching insects and small vertebrates and impaling them on thorns, branches, the spikes on barbed-wire fences, or any available sharp point. These stores serve as a cache so that the shrike can return to the uneaten portions at a later time. The primary function of conspicuously impaling prey on thorny vegetation is however thought to be for males to display their fitness and the quality of the territory held to prospective mates. The impaling behaviour increases during the onset of the breeding season. Female shrikes have been known to impale prey, but primarily to assist in dismembering prey. This behaviour may also serve secondarily as an adaptation to eating the toxic lubber grasshopper, &quot;Romalea microptera&quot;. The bird waits 1–2 days for the toxins within the grasshopper to degrade before eating it.
Loggerhead shrikes kill vertebrates by using their beaks to grab or pierce the neck and violently shake their prey.

Shrikes are territorial, and these territories are defended from other pairs. In migratory species, a breeding territory is defended in the breeding grounds and a smaller feeding territory is established during migration and in the wintering grounds. Where several species of shrikes exist together, competition for territories can be intense.

Shrikes make regular use of exposed perch sites, where they adopt a conspicuous upright stance. These sites are used to watch for prey and to advertise their presence to rivals.

Shrikes vocally imitate their prey to lure them for capture. In 1575, this was noted by the English poet George Turberville.She will stand at perch upon some tree or poste, and there make an exceedingly lamentable crye. . . . All to make other fowles to thinke that she is very much distressed. . . whereupon the credulous sellie birds do flocke together at her call. If any happen to approach near her, she. . . ceazeth on them, and devoureth them (ungrateful subtill fowle).

===Breeding===
Shrikes are generally monogamous breeders, although polygyny has been recorded in some species. Co-operative breeding, where younger birds help their parents raise the next generation of young, has been recorded in both species in the genera &quot;Eurocephalus&quot; and &quot;Corvinella&quot;, as well as one species of &quot;Lanius&quot;. Males attract females to their territory with well-stocked caches, which may include inedible but brightly coloured items. During courtship, the male performs a ritualised dance which includes actions that mimic the skewering of prey on thorns, and feeds the female. Shrikes make simple, cup-shaped nests from twigs and grasses, in bushes and the lower branches of trees.

==Species in taxonomic order==
FAMILY: LANIIDAE 
==References==
==Further reading==


==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q171052" start="0" end="7" title="Shrike" label="Shrikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q25341" start="15" end="24" title="passerine" label="passerine"/>
<link wikidata="Q171052" start="45" end="53" title="Shrike" label="Laniidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="99" end="105" title="genus" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q754657" start="161" end="167" title="Lanius" label="Lanius"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="195" end="200" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q171052" start="266" end="278" title="Shrike" label="butcherbirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="512" end="523" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q270141" start="672" end="680" title="polymath" label="polymath"/>
<link wikidata="Q364857" start="681" end="710" title="Constantine Samuel Rafinesque" label="Constantine Samuel Rafinesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q842832" start="716" end="726" title="type genus" label="type genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q754657" start="733" end="739" title="Lanius" label="Lanius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="769" end="782" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q992770" start="893" end="905" title="Eurocephalus" label="Eurocephalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25565" start="1087" end="1095" title="Corvidae" label="Corvidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="1352" end="1359" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q430863" start="1432" end="1442" title="loggerhead shrike" label="loggerhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q31874734" start="1447" end="1462" title="northern shrike" label="northern shrike"/>
<link wikidata="Q40285" start="1558" end="1568" title="New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q184508" start="1644" end="1661" title="great grey shrike" label="great grey shrike"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="1682" end="1701" title="Northern Hemisphere" label="Northern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069044" start="1713" end="1728" title="São Tomé fiscal" label="São Tomé fiscal"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="1758" end="1768" title="endemism" label="restricted"/>
<link wikidata="Q3932" start="1786" end="1794" title="São Tomé" label="São Tomé"/>
<link wikidata="Q123991" start="1836" end="1842" title="steppe" label="steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="1847" end="1855" title="savannah" label="savannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q216507" start="2003" end="2010" title="migration (birds)" label="migrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303665" start="2129" end="2136" title="plumage" label="plumage"/>
<link wikidata="Q48428" start="2330" end="2342" title="bird of prey" label="bird of prey"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="2492" end="2502" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q201851" start="2525" end="2531" title="Spine (botany)" label="thorns"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874546" start="2631" end="2636" title="Cache (biology)" label="cache"/>
<link wikidata="Q310265" start="3173" end="3191" title="Romalea microptera" label="Romalea microptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q430863" start="3290" end="3307" title="Loggerhead shrike" label="Loggerhead shrike"/>
<link wikidata="Q917215" start="3419" end="3430" title="territory (animal)" label="territorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545355" start="4036" end="4054" title="George Turberville" label="George Turberville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901585" start="4446" end="4456" title="monogamy in animals" label="monogamous"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105315" start="4476" end="4484" title="polygyny in animals" label="polygyny"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29396" wikidata="Q667951" url="?curid=29396" title="Screwdriver (cocktail)">
<text>A screwdriver is a simple and popular alcoholic highball drink made with orange juice and vodka. In the UK, it is referred to as a &quot;vodka and orange&quot;. While the basic drink is simply the two ingredients, there are many variations. Many of the variations have different names in different parts of the world.

==History==

The drink originated during World War II, when Americans in China and Turkey mixed neutral spirits with orange juice.
The origin of the name &quot;screwdriver&quot; is less clear, but the name appeared in Ankara, Turkey, in 1943 and 1944 and later in Istanbul. Variations on the recipe were present in 1948 in Turkey and also called screwdrivers, such as a mixture of one-third vodka and two-thirds gin, and another recipe adding gin, cognac, bitters, and other ingredients to orange juice and vodka. An unattributed but popular story for the name is that the Americans lacked a spoon and instead used a screwdriver as a stirring stick. Another unattributed story is that auto workers in the US used to pour vodka in their breakfast orange juice before starting the shift and used screwdrivers to stir the glass.

Starting mid-1950s, vodka rose rapidly in popularity in America, and mixed drinks such as the screwdriver rose with it.
Advertising campaigns in the 1950s and 1960s by vodka brands such as Smirnoff cemented the screwdriver as a vodka favorite.

== Variations ==
The screwdriver served as the foundation of the Harvey Wallbanger.

A screwdriver with two parts of sloe gin, one part of Southern Comfort, and filled with orange juice is a &quot;sloe comfortable screw&quot; or &quot;slow comfortable screw&quot;.

A screwdriver with one part of sloe gin, one part of Southern Comfort, one part Galliano, and filled with orange juice is a &quot;sloe comfortable screw up against the wall&quot;.

A screwdriver with one part of sloe gin, one part of Southern Comfort, one part Galliano, one part tequila, and filled with orange juice is a &quot;sloe comfortable screw up against the wall Mexican style&quot;.

A &quot;virgin screwdriver&quot; is a mocktail (non-alcoholic variation), usually made with orange juice and tonic water.

A screwdriver with apple juice instead of orange juice is an &quot;Anita Bryant cocktail&quot;. Bryant was an American singer and spokeswoman for the Florida Citrus Commission during the 1960s and 1970s. Starting in 1977, she became an anti-gay-rights activist.
Because Bryant promoted orange juice, the gay community retaliated by boycotting it in the 1977–1980 Florida orange juice boycott. Gay bars across North America stopped serving screwdrivers and invented this cocktail to replace it. The sales and proceeds of the cocktail went to gay rights activists and helped fund their work against Bryant. The campaign was ultimately successful, as Bryant&#x27;s activism damaged her musical and business career. Her contract with the Florida Citrus Commission was left to expire in 1980 after they stated she was &quot;worn out&quot; as a spokesperson.

==See also==
* Gimlet (cocktail)

==References==
==External links==

* Drinknation.com: Screwdriver variations</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q667951" start="2" end="13" title="Screwdriver (cocktail)" label="screwdriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617899" start="48" end="56" title="highball" label="highball"/>
<link wikidata="Q219059" start="73" end="85" title="orange juice" label="orange juice"/>
<link wikidata="Q374" start="90" end="95" title="vodka" label="vodka"/>
<link wikidata="Q667951" start="137" end="153" title="Screwdriver (cocktail)" label="vodka and orange"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="229" end="239" title="#Variations" label="variations"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="360" end="372" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q266143" start="415" end="430" title="neutral spirits" label="neutral spirits"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640" start="537" end="551" title="Ankara, Turkey" label="Ankara, Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="583" end="591" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q777721" start="1335" end="1343" title="Smirnoff" label="Smirnoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587980" start="1456" end="1473" title="Harvey Wallbanger" label="Harvey Wallbanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972926" start="1508" end="1516" title="sloe gin" label="sloe gin"/>
<link wikidata="Q585992" start="1530" end="1546" title="Southern Comfort" label="Southern Comfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331962" start="1737" end="1745" title="Galliano (liqueur)" label="Galliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331962" start="1918" end="1926" title="Galliano (liqueur)" label="Galliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q125078160" start="2089" end="2097" title="mocktail" label="mocktail"/>
<link wikidata="Q237315" start="2160" end="2171" title="tonic water" label="tonic water"/>
<link wikidata="Q618355" start="2193" end="2204" title="apple juice" label="apple juice"/>
<link wikidata="Q240623" start="2241" end="2253" title="Anita Bryant" label="Anita Bryant"/>
<link wikidata="Q21020901" start="2324" end="2349" title="Florida Citrus Commission" label="Florida Citrus Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q240623" start="2527" end="2565" title="1977–1980 Florida orange juice boycott" label="1977–1980 Florida orange juice boycott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524752" start="3043" end="3060" title="Gimlet (cocktail)" label="Gimlet (cocktail)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29398" wikidata="Q198107" url="?curid=29398" title="Single-stage-to-orbit">
<text>A single-stage-to-orbit (SSTO) vehicle reaches orbit from the surface of a body using only propellants and fluids and without expending tanks, engines, or other major hardware. The term exclusively refers to reusable vehicles. To date, no Earth-launched SSTO launch vehicles have ever been flown; orbital launches from Earth have been performed by either fully or partially expendable multi-stage rockets.

The main projected advantage of the SSTO concept is elimination of the hardware replacement inherent in expendable launch systems. However, the non-recurring costs associated with design, development, research and engineering (DDR&amp;E) of reusable SSTO systems are much higher than expendable systems due to the substantial technical challenges of SSTO, assuming that those technical issues can in fact be solved. SSTO vehicles may also require a significantly higher degree of regular maintenance.

It is considered to be marginally possible to launch a single-stage-to-orbit chemically fueled spacecraft from Earth. The principal complicating factors for SSTO from Earth are: high orbital velocity of over ; the need to overcome Earth&#x27;s gravity, especially in the early stages of flight; and flight within Earth&#x27;s atmosphere, which limits speed in the early stages of flight due to drag, and influences engine performance.

Advances in rocketry in the 21st century have resulted in a substantial fall in the cost to launch a kilogram of payload to either low Earth orbit or the International Space Station, reducing the main projected advantage of the SSTO concept.

Notable single stage to orbit concepts include Skylon, which used the hybrid-cycle SABRE engine that can use oxygen from the atmosphere when it is at low altitude, and then using onboard liquid oxygen after switching to the closed cycle rocket engine at high altitude, the McDonnell Douglas DC-X, the Lockheed Martin X-33 and VentureStar which was intended to replace the Space Shuttle, and the Roton SSTO, which is a helicopter that can get to orbit. However, despite showing some promise, none of them have come close to achieving orbit yet due to problems with finding a sufficiently efficient propulsion system and discontinued development.

Single-stage-to-orbit is much easier to achieve on extraterrestrial bodies that have weaker gravitational fields and lower atmospheric pressure than Earth, such as the Moon and Mars, and has been achieved from the Moon by the Apollo program&#x27;s Lunar Module, by several robotic spacecraft of the Soviet Luna program, and by China&#x27;s Chang&#x27;e 5 and Chang&#x27;e 6 lunar sample return missions.

==History==

===Early concepts===

Before the second half of the twentieth century, very little research was conducted into space travel. During the 1960s, some of the first concept designs for this kind of craft began to emerge.

One of the earliest SSTO concepts was the expendable One stage Orbital Space Truck (OOST) proposed by Philip Bono, an engineer for Douglas Aircraft Company. A reusable version named ROOST was also proposed.

Another early SSTO concept was a reusable launch vehicle named NEXUS which was proposed by Krafft Arnold Ehricke in the early 1960s. It was one of the largest spacecraft ever conceptualized with a diameter of over 50 metres and the capability to lift up to 2000 short tons into Earth orbit, intended for missions to further out locations in the Solar System such as Mars.

The North American Air Augmented VTOVL from 1963 was a similarly large craft which would have used ramjets to decrease the liftoff mass of the vehicle by removing the need for large amounts of liquid oxygen while traveling through the atmosphere.

From 1965, Robert Salkeld investigated various single stage to orbit winged spaceplane concepts. He proposed a vehicle which would burn hydrocarbon fuel while in the atmosphere and then switch to hydrogen fuel for increasing efficiency once in space.

Further examples of Bono&#x27;s early concepts (prior to the 1990s) which were never constructed include:
*ROMBUS (Reusable Orbital Module, Booster, and Utility Shuttle), another design from Philip Bono. This was not technically single stage since it dropped some of its initial hydrogen tanks, but it came very close.
*Ithacus, an adapted ROMBUS concept which was designed to carry soldiers and military equipment to other continents via a sub-orbital trajectory.
*Pegasus, another adapted ROMBUS concept designed to carry passengers and payloads long distances in short amounts of time via space.
*Douglas SASSTO, a 1967 launch vehicle concept. 
*Hyperion, yet another Philip Bono concept which used a sled to build up speed before liftoff to save on the amount of fuel which had to be lifted into the air.

Star-raker: In 1979, Rockwell International unveiled a concept for a 100-ton payload heavy-lift multicycle airbreather ramjet/cryogenic rocket engine, horizontal takeoff/horizontal landing single-stage-to-orbit spaceplane named &quot;Star-Raker&quot;, designed to launch heavy Space-based solar power satellites into a 300 nautical mile Earth orbit. Star-raker would have had 3 x LOX/LH2 rocket engines (based on the SSME) + 10 x turboramjets.

Around 1985 the NASP project was intended to launch a scramjet vehicle into orbit, but funding was stopped and the project cancelled. At around the same time, the HOTOL tried to use precooled jet engine technology, but failed to show significant advantages over rocket technology.

===DC-X technology===
The DC-X, short for Delta Clipper Experimental, was an uncrewed one-third scale vertical takeoff and landing demonstrator for a proposed SSTO. It is one of only a few prototype SSTO vehicles ever built. Several other prototypes were intended, including the DC-X2 (a half-scale prototype) and the DC-Y, a full-scale vehicle which would be capable of single stage insertion into orbit. Neither of these were built, but the project was taken over by NASA in 1995, and they built the DC-XA, an upgraded one-third scale prototype. This vehicle was lost when it landed with only three of its four landing pads deployed, which caused it to tip over on its side and explode. The project has not been continued since.

===Roton===

From 1999 to 2001 Rotary Rocket attempted to build a SSTO vehicle called the Roton. It received a large amount of media attention and a working sub-scale prototype was completed, but the design was largely impractical.

==Approaches==
There have been various approaches to SSTO, including pure rockets that are launched and land vertically, air-breathing scramjet-powered vehicles that are launched and land horizontally, nuclear-powered vehicles, and even jet-engine-powered vehicles that can fly into orbit and return landing like an airliner, completely intact.

For rocket-powered SSTO, the main challenge is achieving a high enough mass-ratio to carry sufficient propellant to achieve orbit, plus a meaningful payload weight. One possibility is to give the rocket an initial speed with a space gun, as planned in the Quicklaunch project.

For air-breathing SSTO, the main challenge is system complexity and associated research and development costs, material science, and construction techniques necessary for surviving sustained high-speed flight within the atmosphere, &quot;and&quot; achieving a high enough mass-ratio to carry sufficient propellant to achieve orbit, plus a meaningful payload weight. Air-breathing designs typically fly at supersonic or hypersonic speeds, and usually include a rocket engine for the final burn for orbit.

Whether rocket-powered or air-breathing, a reusable vehicle must be rugged enough to survive multiple round trips into space without adding excessive weight or maintenance. In addition a reusable vehicle must be able to reenter without damage, and land safely.

While single-stage rockets were once thought to be beyond reach, advances in materials technology and construction techniques have shown them to be possible. For example, calculations show that the Titan II first stage, launched on its own, would have a 25-to-1 ratio of fuel to vehicle hardware.
It has a sufficiently efficient engine to achieve orbit, but without carrying much payload.

===Dense versus hydrogen fuels===
Hydrogen fuel might seem the obvious fuel for SSTO vehicles. When burned with oxygen, hydrogen gives the highest specific impulse of any commonly used fuel: around 450 seconds, compared with up to 350 seconds for kerosene.

Hydrogen has the following advantages:

* Hydrogen has nearly 30% higher specific impulse (about 450 seconds vs. 350 seconds) than most dense fuels.
* Hydrogen is an excellent coolant.
* The gross mass of hydrogen stages is lower than dense-fuelled stages for the same payload.
* Hydrogen is environmentally friendly.

However, hydrogen also has these disadvantages:

* Very low density (about of the density of kerosene) – requiring a very large tank
* Deeply cryogenic – must be stored at very low temperatures and thus needs heavy insulation
* Escapes very easily from the smallest gap
* Wide combustible range – easily ignited and burns with a dangerously invisible flame
* Tends to condense oxygen which can cause flammability problems
* Has a large coefficient of expansion for even small heat leaks.

These issues can be dealt with, but at extra cost.

While kerosene tanks can be 1% of the weight of their contents, hydrogen tanks often must weigh 10% of their contents. This is because of both the low density and the additional insulation required to minimize boiloff (a problem which does not occur with kerosene and many other fuels). The low density of hydrogen further affects the design of the rest of the vehicle: pumps and pipework need to be much larger in order to pump the fuel to the engine. The result is the thrust/weight ratio of hydrogen-fueled engines is 30–50% lower than comparable engines using denser fuels.

This inefficiency indirectly affects gravity losses as well; the vehicle has to hold itself up on rocket power until it reaches orbit. The lower excess thrust of the hydrogen engines due to the lower thrust/weight ratio means that the vehicle must ascend more steeply, and so less thrust acts horizontally. Less horizontal thrust results in taking longer to reach orbit, and gravity losses are increased by at least . While not appearing large, the mass ratio to delta-v curve is very steep to reach orbit in a single stage, and this makes a 10% difference to the mass ratio on top of the tankage and pump savings.

The overall effect is that there is surprisingly little difference in overall performance between SSTOs that use hydrogen and those that use denser fuels, except that hydrogen vehicles may be rather more expensive to develop and buy. Careful studies have shown that some dense fuels (for example liquid propane) exceed the performance of hydrogen fuel when used in an SSTO launch vehicle by 10% for the same dry weight.

In the 1960s Philip Bono investigated single-stage, VTVL tripropellant rockets, and showed that it could improve payload size by around 30%.

Operational experience with the DC-X experimental rocket has caused a number of SSTO advocates to reconsider hydrogen as a satisfactory fuel. The late Max Hunter, while employing hydrogen fuel in the DC-X, often said that he thought the first successful orbital SSTO would more likely be fueled by propane.

===One engine for all altitudes===
Some SSTO concepts use the same engine for all altitudes, which is a problem for traditional engines with a bell-shaped nozzle. Depending on the atmospheric pressure, different bell shapes are required. Engines designed to operate in a vacuum have large bells, allowing the exhaust gasses to expand to near vacuum pressures, thereby raising efficiency. Due to an effect known as Flow separation, using a vacuum bell in atmosphere would have disastrous consequences for the engine. Engines designed to fire in atmosphere therefore have to shorten the nozzle, only expanding the gasses to atmospheric pressure. The efficiency losses due to the smaller bell are usually mitigated via staging, as upper stage engines such as the Rocketdyne J-2 do not have to fire until atmospheric pressure is negligible, and can therefore use the larger bell.

One possible solution would be to use an aerospike engine, which can be effective in a wide range of ambient pressures. In fact, a linear aerospike engine was to be used in the X-33 design.

Other solutions involve using multiple engines and other altitude adapting designs such as double-mu bells or extensible bell sections.

Still, at very high altitudes, the extremely large engine bells tend to expand the exhaust gases down to near vacuum pressures. As a result, these engine bells are counterproductive due to their excess weight. Some SSTO concepts use very high pressure engines which permit high ratios to be used from ground level. This gives good performance, negating the need for more complex solutions.

===Airbreathing SSTO===

Some designs for SSTO attempt to use airbreathing jet engines that collect oxidizer and reaction mass from the atmosphere to reduce the take-off weight of the vehicle.

Some of the issues with this approach are:

* No known air breathing engine is capable of operating at orbital speed within the atmosphere (for example hydrogen fueled scramjets seem to have a top speed of about Mach 17). This means that rockets must be used for the final orbital insertion.
* Rocket thrust needs the orbital mass to be as small as possible to minimize propellant weight.
* The thrust-to-weight ratio of rockets that rely on on-board oxygen increases dramatically as fuel is expended, because the oxidizer fuel tank has about 1% of the mass as the oxidizer it carries, whereas air-breathing engines traditionally have a poor thrust/weight ratio which is relatively fixed during the air-breathing ascent.
* Very high speeds in the atmosphere necessitate very heavy thermal protection systems, which makes reaching orbit even harder.
* While at lower speeds, air-breathing engines are very efficient, but the efficiency (Isp) and thrust levels of air-breathing jet engines drop considerably at high speed (above Mach 5–10 depending on the engine) and begin to approach that of rocket engines or worse.
* Lift to drag ratios of vehicles at hypersonic speeds are poor, however the effective lift to drag ratios of rocket vehicles at high g is not dissimilar.

Thus with for example scramjet designs (e.g. X-43) the mass budgets do not seem to close for orbital launch.

Similar issues occur with single-stage vehicles attempting to carry conventional jet engines to orbit—the weight of the jet engines is not compensated sufficiently by the reduction in propellant.

On the other hand, LACE-like precooled airbreathing designs such as the Skylon spaceplane (and ATREX) which transition to rocket thrust at rather lower speeds (Mach 5.5) do seem to give, on paper at least, an improved orbital mass fraction over pure rockets (even multistage rockets) sufficiently to hold out the possibility of full reusability with better payload fraction.

It is important to note that mass fraction is an important concept in the engineering of a rocket. However, mass fraction may have little to do with the costs of a rocket, as the costs of fuel are very small when compared to the costs of the engineering program as a whole. As a result, a cheap rocket with a poor mass fraction may be able to deliver more payload to orbit with a given amount of money than a more complicated, more efficient rocket.

===Launch assists===

Many vehicles are only narrowly suborbital, so practically anything that gives a relatively small delta-v increase can be helpful, and outside assistance for a vehicle is therefore desirable.

Proposed launch assists include:
*sled launch (rail, maglev including Bantam, MagLifter, and StarTram, etc.)
*air launch or aircraft tow
*in-flight fueling
*Lofstrom launch loop/space fountains

And on-orbit resources such as:
*Space tether
*tugs

===Nuclear propulsion===

Due to weight issues such as shielding, many nuclear propulsion systems are unable to lift their own weight, and hence are unsuitable for launching to orbit. However, some designs such as the Orion project and some nuclear thermal designs do have a thrust to weight ratio in excess of 1, enabling them to lift off. Clearly, one of the main issues with nuclear propulsion would be safety, both during a launch for the passengers, but also in case of a failure during launch. As of February 2024, no current program is attempting nuclear propulsion from Earth&#x27;s surface.

===Beam-powered propulsion===

Because they can be more energetic than the potential energy that chemical fuel allows for, some laser or microwave powered rocket concepts have the potential to launch vehicles into orbit, single stage. In practice, this area is not possible with current technology.

==Design challenges inherent in SSTO==

The design space constraints of SSTO vehicles were described by rocket design engineer Robert Truax:

The Tsiolkovsky rocket equation expresses the maximum change in velocity any single rocket stage can achieve:

where:


The mass ratio of a vehicle is defined as a ratio the initial vehicle mass when fully loaded with propellants formula_1 to the final vehicle mass formula_2 after the burn:

 {m_s + m_\text{pl}}&lt;/math&gt;}}

where:


The propellant mass fraction (formula_3) of a vehicle can be expressed solely as a function of the mass ratio:

The structural coefficient (formula_4) is a critical parameter in SSTO vehicle design. Structural efficiency of a vehicle is maximized as the structural coefficient approaches zero. The structural coefficient is defined as:

 = \frac {\frac {m_s} {m_i}} {1 - \frac {m_\text{pl}} {m_i}}&lt;/math&gt;}}

The overall structural mass fraction formula_5 can be expressed in terms of the structural coefficient:

 {m_i} \right )&lt;/math&gt;}}

An additional expression for the overall structural mass fraction can be found by noting that the payload mass fraction formula_6, propellant mass fraction and structural mass fraction sum to one:

 {m_i} + \frac {m_p} {m_i} + \frac {m_s} {m_i} = \frac {m_\text{pl}} {m_i} + \zeta + \frac {m_s} {m_i}&lt;/math&gt;}}
 {m_i}&lt;/math&gt;}}

Equating the expressions for structural mass fraction and solving for the initial vehicle mass yields:

 {1 - \left ( \frac {\zeta} {1 - \lambda} \right )}&lt;/math&gt;}}

This expression shows how the size of a SSTO vehicle is dependent on its structural efficiency. Given a mission profile formula_7 and propellant type formula_8, the size of a vehicle increases with an increasing structural coefficient. This growth factor sensitivity is shown parametrically for both SSTO and two-stage-to-orbit (TSTO) vehicles for a standard LEO mission. The curves vertically asymptote at the maximum structural coefficient limit where mission criteria can no longer be met:

In comparison to a non-optimized TSTO vehicle using restricted staging, a SSTO rocket launching an identical payload mass and using the same propellants will always require a substantially smaller structural coefficient to achieve the same delta-v. Given that current materials technology places a lower limit of approximately 0.1 on the smallest structural coefficients attainable, reusable SSTO vehicles are typically an impractical choice even when using the highest performance propellants available.

==Examples==
It is easier to achieve SSTO from a body with lower gravitational pull than Earth, such as the Moon or Mars. The Apollo Lunar Module ascended from the lunar surface to lunar orbit in a single stage.

A detailed study into SSTO vehicles was prepared by Chrysler Corporation&#x27;s Space Division in 1970–1971 under NASA contract NAS8-26341. Their proposal (Shuttle SERV) was an enormous vehicle with more than of payload, utilizing jet engines for (vertical) landing. While the technical problems seemed to be solvable, the USAF required a winged design that led to the Shuttle as we know it today.

The uncrewed DC-X technology demonstrator, originally developed by McDonnell Douglas for the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) program office, was an attempt to build a vehicle that could lead to an SSTO vehicle. The one-third-size test craft was operated and maintained by a small team of three people based out of a trailer, and the craft was once relaunched less than 24 hours after landing. Although the test program was not without mishap (including a minor explosion), the DC-X demonstrated that the maintenance aspects of the concept were sound. That project was cancelled when it landed with three of four legs deployed, tipped over, and exploded on the fourth flight after transferring management from the Strategic Defense Initiative Organization to NASA.

The Aquarius Launch Vehicle was designed to bring bulk materials to orbit as cheaply as possible.

===Current development===
Current and previous SSTO projects include the Japanese Kankoh-maru project, ARCA Haas 2C, Radian One and the Indian Avatar spaceplane.

===Skylon===

The British Government partnered with the ESA in 2010 to promote a single-stage to orbit spaceplane concept called Skylon. This design was pioneered by Reaction Engines Limited (REL), a company founded by Alan Bond after HOTOL was canceled. The Skylon spaceplane has been positively received by the British government, and the British Interplanetary Society. Following a successful propulsion system test that was audited by ESA&#x27;s propulsion division in mid-2012, REL announced that it would begin a three-and-a-half-year project to develop and build a test jig of the Sabre engine to prove the engines performance across its air-breathing and rocket modes. In November 2012, it was announced that a key test of the engine precooler had been successfully completed, and that ESA had verified the precooler&#x27;s design. The project&#x27;s development is now allowed to advance to its next phase, which involves the construction and testing of a full-scale prototype engine.

=== Starship ===

Elon Musk, CEO of SpaceX, has claimed that the upper stage of the prototype &quot;Starship&quot; rocket, currently in development in Starbase (Texas), has the capability to reach orbit as an SSTO. However he concedes that if this was done, there would be no appreciable mass left for a heat shield, landing legs, or fuel to land, much less any usable payload.

==Alternative approaches to inexpensive spaceflight==
Many studies have shown that regardless of selected technology, the most effective cost reduction technique is economies of scale. Merely launching a large total number reduces the manufacturing costs per vehicle, similar to how the mass production of automobiles brought about great increases in affordability.

Using this concept, some aerospace analysts believe the way to lower launch costs is the exact opposite of SSTO. Whereas reusable SSTOs would reduce per launch costs by making a reusable high-tech vehicle that launches frequently with low maintenance, the &quot;mass production&quot; approach views the technical advances as a source of the cost problem in the first place. By simply building and launching large quantities of rockets, and hence launching a large volume of payload, costs can be brought down. This approach was attempted in the late 1970s, early 1980s in West Germany with the Democratic Republic of the Congo-based OTRAG rocket.

This is somewhat similar to the approach some previous systems have taken, using simple engine systems with &quot;low-tech&quot; fuels, as the Russian and Chinese space programs still do.

An alternative to scale is to make the discarded stages practically reusable: this was the original design goal of the Space Shuttle phase B studies, and is currently pursued by the SpaceX reusable launch system development program with their Falcon 9, Falcon Heavy, and Starship, and Blue Origin using New Glenn.

== See also ==

* Aerospike engine
* Bristol Spaceplanes
* British Aerospace HOTOL
* Kankoh-maru
* Launch loop
* Lockheed Martin X-33
* Mass fraction
* NASA X-43
* Orbital ring
* Rockwell X-30
* Roton
* Scramjet
* Space elevator
* Spacecraft propulsion
* Three-stage-to-orbit
* Two-stage-to-orbit
* VentureStar
* XS-1 (spacecraft)
== Further reading ==
* Andrew J. Butrica: &quot;Single Stage to Orbit - Politics, Space Technology, and the Quest for Reusable Rocketry.&quot; The Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore 2004, .

==References==
==External links==

* A Single-Stage-to-Orbit Thought Experiment 
* Why are launch costs so high?, an analysis of space launch costs, with a section critiquing SSTO
* The Cold Equations Of Spaceflight A critique of SSTO by Jeffrey F. Bell.
* Burnout Velocity Vb of a Single 1-Stage Rocket</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q198107" start="2" end="23" title="Single-stage-to-orbit" label="single-stage-to-orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q198107" start="25" end="29" title="Single-stage-to-orbit" label="SSTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130" start="47" end="52" title="orbit" label="orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q30128" start="208" end="225" title="reusable launch system" label="reusable vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q15078724" start="374" end="384" title="Expendable launch system" label="expendable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161829" start="385" end="404" title="Multistage rocket" label="multi-stage rockets"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="986" end="1003" title="Rocket engine#Chemically powered" label="chemically fueled"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="1222" end="1245" title="atmosphere of Earth" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q663611" start="1476" end="1491" title="low Earth orbit" label="low Earth orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q25271" start="1499" end="1526" title="International Space Station" label="International Space Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q618985" start="1635" end="1641" title="Skylon (spacecraft)" label="Skylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q367581" start="1879" end="1883" title="McDonnell Douglas DC-X" label="DC-X"/>
<link wikidata="Q255648" start="1889" end="1909" title="Lockheed Martin X-33" label="Lockheed Martin X-33"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574972" start="1914" end="1925" title="VentureStar" label="VentureStar"/>
<link wikidata="Q444327" start="1983" end="1993" title="Rotary Rocket" label="Roton SSTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="2448" end="2452" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="2460" end="2474" title="Apollo program" label="Apollo program"/>
<link wikidata="Q208382" start="2482" end="2494" title="Apollo Lunar Module" label="Lunar Module"/>
<link wikidata="Q192372" start="2540" end="2552" title="Luna programme" label="Luna program"/>
<link wikidata="Q10944018" start="2574" end="2588" title="Chang&amp;#x27;e 5" label="Chang&amp;#x27;e 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q18346001" start="2593" end="2607" title="Chang&amp;#x27;e 6" label="Chang&amp;#x27;e 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q9059079" start="2972" end="2983" title="Philip Bono" label="Philip Bono"/>
<link wikidata="Q651778" start="3001" end="3025" title="Douglas Aircraft Company" label="Douglas Aircraft Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953645" start="3141" end="3146" title="NEXUS (rocket)" label="NEXUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q90301" start="3169" end="3190" title="Krafft Arnold Ehricke" label="Krafft Arnold Ehricke"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="3444" end="3448" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3455" end="3489" title="North American Air Augmented VTOVL" label="North American Air Augmented VTOVL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414565" start="3775" end="3785" title="spaceplane" label="spaceplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q111765628" start="3835" end="3851" title="hydrocarbon fuel" label="hydrocarbon fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q478859" start="3895" end="3908" title="hydrogen fuel" label="hydrogen fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301957" start="4551" end="4565" title="Douglas SASSTO" label="Douglas SASSTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348664" start="4782" end="4804" title="Rockwell International" label="Rockwell International"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190528" start="4887" end="4910" title="cryogenic rocket engine" label="cryogenic rocket engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981843" start="5038" end="5061" title="Space-based solar power" label="Space-based solar power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030042" start="5178" end="5182" title="Space shuttle main engine" label="SSME"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539479" start="5222" end="5226" title="Rockwell X-30" label="NASP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473217" start="5369" end="5374" title="HOTOL" label="HOTOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866376" start="5388" end="5408" title="precooled jet engine" label="precooled jet engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="5957" end="5961" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q60591" start="6588" end="6596" title="scramjet" label="scramjet"/>
<link wikidata="Q927766" start="6655" end="6670" title="Project Orion (nuclear propulsion)" label="nuclear-powered"/>
<link wikidata="Q618985" start="6690" end="6700" title="Reaction Engines Skylon" label="jet-engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364934" start="6901" end="6911" title="propellant" label="propellant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130" start="6923" end="6928" title="orbit" label="orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7641034" start="6948" end="6955" title="Payload (air and space craft)" label="payload"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083758" start="7026" end="7035" title="space gun" label="space gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271743" start="7055" end="7066" title="Quicklaunch" label="Quicklaunch"/>
<link wikidata="Q276099" start="7156" end="7180" title="research and development" label="research and development"/>
<link wikidata="Q228736" start="7188" end="7204" title="material science" label="material science"/>
<link wikidata="Q221337" start="7482" end="7492" title="supersonic" label="supersonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q830787" start="7496" end="7506" title="hypersonic" label="hypersonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187405" start="8042" end="8050" title="LGM-25C Titan II" label="Titan II"/>
<link wikidata="Q478859" start="8268" end="8281" title="Hydrogen fuel" label="Hydrogen fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="8346" end="8352" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q51504" start="8381" end="8397" title="specific impulse" label="specific impulse"/>
<link wikidata="Q76904" start="8481" end="8489" title="kerosene" label="kerosene"/>
<link wikidata="Q192116" start="8953" end="8962" title="cryogenic" label="cryogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583695" start="9247" end="9271" title="coefficient of expansion" label="coefficient of expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598080" start="9968" end="9982" title="gravity drag" label="gravity losses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184955" start="10394" end="10401" title="delta-v" label="delta-v"/>
<link wikidata="Q131189" start="10850" end="10857" title="propane" label="propane"/>
<link wikidata="Q9059079" start="10981" end="10992" title="Philip Bono" label="Philip Bono"/>
<link wikidata="Q3539111" start="11025" end="11045" title="tripropellant rocket" label="tripropellant rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q367581" start="11142" end="11146" title="DC-X" label="DC-X"/>
<link wikidata="Q250840" start="11573" end="11579" title="nozzle" label="nozzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545856" start="11832" end="11847" title="Flow separation" label="Flow separation"/>
<link wikidata="Q967676" start="12178" end="12192" title="Rocketdyne J-2" label="Rocketdyne J-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q381750" start="12336" end="12352" title="aerospike engine" label="aerospike engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q255648" start="12472" end="12476" title="Lockheed Martin X-33" label="X-33"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736736" start="12543" end="12568" title="altitude compensating nozzle" label="altitude adapting designs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420767" start="12596" end="12620" title="expanding nozzle" label="extensible bell sections"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773032" start="13076" end="13099" title="airbreathing jet engine" label="airbreathing jet engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q60591" start="13376" end="13384" title="scramjet" label="scramjet"/>
<link wikidata="Q51504" start="14144" end="14147" title="Specific impulse" label="Isp"/>
<link wikidata="Q845727" start="14327" end="14345" title="Lift to drag ratio" label="Lift to drag ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598080" start="14464" end="14478" title="gravity drag" label="not dissimilar"/>
<link wikidata="Q836296" start="14526" end="14530" title="NASA X-43" label="X-43"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866376" start="14817" end="14839" title="precooled jet engine" label="precooled airbreathing"/>
<link wikidata="Q618985" start="14860" end="14877" title="Reaction Engines Skylon" label="Skylon spaceplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819557" start="14883" end="14888" title="ATREX" label="ATREX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250140" start="15014" end="15027" title="Propellant mass fraction" label="mass fraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355162" start="15864" end="15875" title="Rocket sled launch" label="sled launch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355162" start="15900" end="15917" title="Rocket sled launch" label="Bantam, MagLifter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600576" start="15923" end="15931" title="StarTram" label="StarTram"/>
<link wikidata="Q4114781" start="15940" end="15966" title="air launch" label="air launch or aircraft tow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569868" start="15987" end="16007" title="Lofstrom launch loop" label="Lofstrom launch loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636225" start="16008" end="16022" title="space fountain" label="space fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q503520" start="16058" end="16070" title="Space tether" label="Space tether"/>
<link wikidata="Q927766" start="16296" end="16309" title="Project Orion (nuclear propulsion)" label="Orion project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211136" start="16319" end="16334" title="Nuclear thermal rocket" label="nuclear thermal"/>
<link wikidata="Q904824" start="16353" end="16375" title="thrust to weight ratio" label="thrust to weight ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436439" start="17106" end="17118" title="Robert Truax" label="Robert Truax"/>
<link wikidata="Q834199" start="17125" end="17152" title="Tsiolkovsky rocket equation" label="Tsiolkovsky rocket equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250140" start="17464" end="17488" title="propellant mass fraction" label="propellant mass fraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q198055" start="18831" end="18849" title="two-stage-to-orbit" label="two-stage-to-orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161829" start="19068" end="19086" title="Multistage rocket" label="restricted staging"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="19630" end="19634" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="19638" end="19642" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q208382" start="19648" end="19667" title="Apollo Lunar Module" label="Apollo Lunar Module"/>
<link wikidata="Q181114" start="19787" end="19807" title="Chrysler Corporation" label="Chrysler Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389846" start="19891" end="19903" title="Shuttle SERV" label="Shuttle SERV"/>
<link wikidata="Q178777" start="19966" end="19976" title="jet engine" label="jet engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="20058" end="20062" title="United States Air Force" label="USAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q367581" start="20147" end="20151" title="DC-X" label="DC-X"/>
<link wikidata="Q201815" start="20201" end="20218" title="McDonnell Douglas" label="McDonnell Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q211031" start="20227" end="20255" title="Strategic Defense Initiative" label="Strategic Defense Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q211031" start="20850" end="20891" title="Strategic Defense Initiative Organization" label="Strategic Defense Initiative Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q624547" start="20906" end="20929" title="Aquarius Launch Vehicle" label="Aquarius Launch Vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4212504" start="21083" end="21094" title="Kankoh-maru" label="Kankoh-maru"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366848" start="21104" end="21116" title="Haas (rocket)" label="ARCA Haas 2C"/>
<link wikidata="Q110639966" start="21118" end="21128" title="Radian One" label="Radian One"/>
<link wikidata="Q19730903" start="21144" end="21150" title="Avatar (spacecraft)" label="Avatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="21220" end="21223" title="ESA" label="ESA"/>
<link wikidata="Q198107" start="21245" end="21266" title="single-stage to orbit" label="single-stage to orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414565" start="21267" end="21277" title="spaceplane" label="spaceplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q618985" start="21293" end="21299" title="Skylon (spacecraft)" label="Skylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688976" start="21330" end="21360" title="Reaction Engines Limited" label="Reaction Engines Limited (REL)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706211" start="21383" end="21392" title="Alan Bond (engineer)" label="Alan Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473217" start="21399" end="21404" title="HOTOL" label="HOTOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q981349" start="21505" end="21535" title="British Interplanetary Society" label="British Interplanetary Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q522644" start="21752" end="21764" title="SABRE (rocket engine)" label="Sabre engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q56650652" start="22224" end="22280" title="SpaceX Starship (spacecraft)" label="upper stage of the prototype &amp;quot;Starship&amp;quot; rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950811" start="22310" end="22326" title="SpaceX Starbase" label="Starbase (Texas)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22463" end="22474" title="Heat shield#Spacecraft" label="heat shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970087" start="22703" end="22721" title="economies of scale" label="economies of scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q215768" start="22825" end="22840" title="mass production" label="mass production"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="23477" end="23489" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="23499" end="23531" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7073104" start="23538" end="23550" title="OTRAG (rocket)" label="OTRAG rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q190795" start="23696" end="23703" title="Russian Space Agency" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q320644" start="23708" end="23729" title="China National Space Administration" label="Chinese space program"/>
<link wikidata="Q30128" start="23810" end="23818" title="reusable launch system" label="reusable"/>
<link wikidata="Q48806" start="23861" end="23874" title="Space Shuttle" label="Space Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950816" start="23924" end="23973" title="SpaceX reusable launch system development program" label="SpaceX reusable launch system development program"/>
<link wikidata="Q249091" start="23985" end="23993" title="Falcon 9" label="Falcon 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093627" start="23995" end="24007" title="Falcon Heavy" label="Falcon Heavy"/>
<link wikidata="Q62833385" start="24013" end="24021" title="SpaceX Starship" label="Starship"/>
<link wikidata="Q885836" start="24027" end="24038" title="Blue Origin" label="Blue Origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q26869616" start="24045" end="24054" title="New Glenn" label="New Glenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q381750" start="24075" end="24091" title="Aerospike engine" label="Aerospike engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18110773" start="24094" end="24113" title="Bristol Spaceplanes" label="Bristol Spaceplanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473217" start="24116" end="24139" title="British Aerospace HOTOL" label="British Aerospace HOTOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q4212504" start="24142" end="24153" title="Kankoh-maru" label="Kankoh-maru"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569868" start="24156" end="24167" title="Launch loop" label="Launch loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q255648" start="24170" end="24190" title="Lockheed Martin X-33" label="Lockheed Martin X-33"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250140" start="24193" end="24206" title="Propellant mass fraction" label="Mass fraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q836296" start="24209" end="24218" title="NASA X-43" label="NASA X-43"/>
<link wikidata="Q4235016" start="24221" end="24233" title="Orbital ring" label="Orbital ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539479" start="24236" end="24249" title="Rockwell X-30" label="Rockwell X-30"/>
<link wikidata="Q444327" start="24252" end="24257" title="Rotary Rocket" label="Roton"/>
<link wikidata="Q60591" start="24260" end="24268" title="Scramjet" label="Scramjet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473823" start="24271" end="24285" title="Space elevator" label="Space elevator"/>
<link wikidata="Q609089" start="24288" end="24309" title="Spacecraft propulsion" label="Spacecraft propulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161829" start="24312" end="24332" title="Three-stage-to-orbit" label="Three-stage-to-orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q198055" start="24335" end="24353" title="Two-stage-to-orbit" label="Two-stage-to-orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574972" start="24356" end="24367" title="VentureStar" label="VentureStar"/>
<link wikidata="Q17131152" start="24370" end="24387" title="XS-1 (spacecraft)" label="XS-1 (spacecraft)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29400" wikidata="Q908902" url="?curid=29400" title="Structural biology">
<text>Structural biology deals with structural analysis of living material (formed, composed of, and/or maintained and refined by living cells) at every level of organization. 

Early structural biologists throughout the 19th and early 20th centuries were primarily only able to study structures to the limit of the naked eye&#x27;s visual acuity and through magnifying glasses and light microscopes. In the 20th century, a variety of experimental techniques were developed to examine the 3D structures of biological molecules. The most prominent techniques are X-ray crystallography, nuclear magnetic resonance, and electron microscopy. Through the discovery of X-rays and its applications to protein crystals, structural biology was revolutionized, as now scientists could obtain the three-dimensional structures of biological molecules in atomic detail. Likewise, NMR spectroscopy allowed information about protein structure and dynamics to be obtained. Finally, in the 21st century, electron microscopy also saw a drastic revolution with the development of more coherent electron sources, aberration correction for electron microscopes, and reconstruction software that enabled the successful implementation of high resolution cryo-electron microscopy, thereby permitting the study of individual proteins and molecular complexes in three-dimensions at angstrom resolution.

With the development of these three techniques, the field of structural biology expanded and also became a branch of molecular biology, biochemistry, and biophysics concerned with the molecular structure of biological macromolecules (especially proteins, made up of amino acids, RNA or DNA, made up of nucleotides, and membranes, made up of lipids), how they acquire the structures they have, and how alterations in their structures affect their function. This subject is of great interest to biologists because macromolecules carry out most of the functions of cells, and it is only by coiling into specific three-dimensional shapes that they are able to perform these functions. This architecture, the &quot;tertiary structure&quot; of molecules, depends in a complicated way on each molecule&#x27;s basic composition, or &quot;primary structure.&quot; At lower resolutions, tools such as FIB-SEM tomography have allowed for greater understanding of cells and their organelles in 3-dimensions, and how each hierarchical level of various extracellular matrices contributes to function (for example in bone). In the past few years it has also become possible to predict highly accurate physical molecular models to complement the experimental study of biological structures. Computational techniques such as molecular dynamics simulations can be used in conjunction with empirical structure determination strategies to extend and study protein structure, conformation and function.

== History ==
In 1912 Max Von Laue directed X-rays at crystallized copper sulfate generating a diffraction pattern. These experiments led to the development of X-ray crystallography, and its usage in exploring biological structures. In 1951, Rosalind Franklin and Maurice Wilkins used X-ray diffraction patterns to capture the first image of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). Francis Crick and James Watson modeled the double helical structure of DNA using this same technique in 1953 and received the Nobel Prize in Medicine along with Wilkins in 1962.

Pepsin crystals were the first proteins to be crystallized for use in X-ray diffraction, by Theodore Svedberg who received the 1962 Nobel Prize in Chemistry. The first tertiary protein structure, that of myoglobin, was published in 1958 by John Kendrew. During this time, modeling of protein structures was done using balsa wood or wire models. With the invention of modeling software such as CCP4 in the late 1970s, modeling is now done with computer assistance. Recent developments in the field have included the generation of X-ray free electron lasers, allowing analysis of the dynamics and motion of biological molecules, and the use of structural biology in assisting synthetic biology.

In the late 1930s and early 1940s, the combination of work done by Isidor Rabi, Felix Bloch, and Edward Mills Purcell led to the development of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). Currently, solid-state NMR is widely used in the field of structural biology to determine the structure and dynamic nature of proteins (protein NMR).

In 1990, Richard Henderson produced the first three-dimensional, high resolution image of bacteriorhodopsin using cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM). Since then, cryo-EM has emerged as an increasingly popular technique to determine three-dimensional, high resolution structures of biological images.

More recently, computational methods have been developed to model and study biological structures. For example, molecular dynamics (MD) is commonly used to analyze the dynamic movements of biological molecules. In 1975, the first simulation of a biological folding process using MD was published in Nature. Recently, protein structure prediction was significantly improved by a new machine learning method called AlphaFold. Some claim that computational approaches are starting to lead the field of structural biology research.

== Techniques ==
Biomolecules are too small to see in detail even with the most advanced light microscopes. The methods that structural biologists use to determine their structures generally involve measurements on vast numbers of identical molecules at the same time. These methods include:
* Mass spectrometry
* Macromolecular crystallography
* Neutron diffraction
* Proteolysis
* Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy of proteins (NMR)
* Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR)
* Cryogenic electron microscopy (cryoEM)
* Electron crystallography and microcrystal electron diffraction
* Multiangle light scattering
* Small angle scattering
* Ultrafast laser spectroscopy
* Anisotropic terahertz microspectroscopy
* Two-dimensional infrared spectroscopy
* Dual-polarization interferometry and circular dichroism
Most often researchers use them to study the &quot;native states&quot; of macromolecules. But variations on these methods are also used to watch nascent or denatured molecules assume or reassume their native states. See protein folding.

A third approach that structural biologists take to understanding structure is bioinformatics to look for patterns among the diverse sequences that give rise to particular shapes. Researchers often can deduce aspects of the structure of integral membrane proteins based on the membrane topology predicted by hydrophobicity analysis. See protein structure prediction.

== Applications ==

Structural biologists have made significant contributions towards understanding the molecular components and mechanisms underlying human diseases. For example, cryo-EM and ssNMR have been used to study the aggregation of amyloid fibrils, which are associated with Alzheimer&#x27;s disease, Parkinson&#x27;s disease, and type II diabetes. In addition to amyloid proteins, scientists have used cryo-EM to produce high resolution models of tau filaments in the brain of Alzheimer&#x27;s patients which may help develop better treatments in the future. Structural biology tools can also be used to explain interactions between pathogens and hosts. For example, structural biology tools have enabled virologists to understand how the HIV envelope allows the virus to evade human immune responses.

Structural biology is also an important component of drug discovery. Scientists can identify targets using genomics, study those targets using structural biology, and develop drugs that are suited for those targets. Specifically, ligand-NMR, mass spectrometry, and X-ray crystallography are commonly used techniques in the drug discovery process. For example, researchers have used structural biology to better understand Met, a protein encoded by a protooncogene that is an important drug target in cancer. Similar research has been conducted for HIV targets to treat people with AIDS. Researchers are also developing new antimicrobials for mycobacterial infections using structure-driven drug discovery.

== See also ==

* Primary structure
* Secondary structure
* Tertiary structure
* Quaternary structure
* Structural domain
* Structural motif
* Protein subunit
* Molecular model
* Cooperativity
* Chaperonin
* Structural genomics
* Stereochemistry
* Resolution (electron density)
* Proteopedia The collaborative, 3D encyclopedia of proteins and other molecules.
* Protein structure prediction
* SBGrid Consortium

== References ==
==Further reading==
* 

== External links ==
* &quot;Nature: Structural &amp; Molecular Biology&quot; magazine website
* Journal of Structural Biology
* Structural Biology - The Virtual Library of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology
* &quot;Structural Biology in Europe&quot;
* Learning Crystallography</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q908902" start="0" end="18" title="Structural biology" label="Structural biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q826582" start="556" end="577" title="X-ray crystallography" label="X-ray crystallography"/>
<link wikidata="Q209402" start="579" end="605" title="nuclear magnetic resonance" label="nuclear magnetic resonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q132560" start="611" end="630" title="Electron microscope" label="electron microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="657" end="663" title="X-ray" label="X-rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q10359898" start="861" end="877" title="Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy" label="NMR spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202" start="1489" end="1506" title="molecular biology" label="molecular biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094" start="1508" end="1520" title="biochemistry" label="biochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100" start="1526" end="1536" title="biophysics" label="biophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q178593" start="1590" end="1603" title="macromolecule" label="macromolecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="1617" end="1624" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="1638" end="1648" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11053" start="1651" end="1654" title="RNA" label="RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="1658" end="1661" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q28745" start="1674" end="1684" title="nucleotide" label="nucleotide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587185" start="1691" end="1700" title="Biological membrane" label="membranes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11367" start="1713" end="1718" title="lipid" label="lipid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="1934" end="1939" title="cell (biology)" label="cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q898483" start="2082" end="2100" title="tertiary structure" label="tertiary structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q899763" start="2202" end="2219" title="primary structure" label="primary structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196961" start="2567" end="2582" title="molecular model" label="molecular model"/>
<link wikidata="Q901663" start="2680" end="2698" title="molecular dynamics" label="molecular dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q57067" start="2877" end="2889" title="Max Von Laue" label="Max Von Laue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168801" start="2922" end="2936" title="copper sulfate" label="copper sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q133900" start="2950" end="2969" title="Diffraction" label="diffraction pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q826582" start="3015" end="3036" title="X-ray crystallography" label="X-ray crystallography"/>
<link wikidata="Q7474" start="3097" end="3114" title="Rosalind Franklin" label="Rosalind Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q184659" start="3119" end="3134" title="Maurice Wilkins" label="Maurice Wilkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q123280" start="3226" end="3239" title="Francis Crick" label="Francis Crick"/>
<link wikidata="Q83333" start="3244" end="3256" title="James Watson" label="James Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q190265" start="3405" end="3411" title="Pepsin" label="Pepsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q186391" start="3497" end="3514" title="Theodor Svedberg" label="Theodore Svedberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q898483" start="3573" end="3599" title="Protein tertiary structure" label="tertiary protein structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q192642" start="3609" end="3618" title="myoglobin" label="myoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q232295" start="3645" end="3657" title="John Kendrew" label="John Kendrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q12302824" start="3723" end="3733" title="Ochroma" label="balsa wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q551997" start="3737" end="3741" title="wire" label="wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145814" start="3798" end="3802" title="Collaborative Computational Project Number 4" label="CCP4"/>
<link wikidata="Q586386" start="3934" end="3960" title="Free-electron laser" label="X-ray free electron lasers"/>
<link wikidata="Q862838" start="4079" end="4096" title="synthetic biology" label="synthetic biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q165969" start="4166" end="4177" title="Isidor Rabi" label="Isidor Rabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q123022" start="4179" end="4190" title="Felix Bloch" label="Felix Bloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q183270" start="4196" end="4216" title="Edward Mills Purcell" label="Edward Mills Purcell"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4288" end="4303" title="Solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance#:~:text=Solid-state NMR (ssNMR),magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy." label="solid-state NMR"/>
<link wikidata="Q864267" start="4413" end="4424" title="Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy of proteins" label="protein NMR"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190506" start="4542" end="4571" title="cryogenic electron microscopy" label="cryogenic electron microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q901663" start="4846" end="4864" title="molecular dynamics" label="molecular dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5051" end="5079" title="Protein structure prediction#:~:text=Protein structure prediction is the,inverse problem of protein design." label="protein structure prediction"/>
<link wikidata="Q60827595" start="5147" end="5156" title="AlphaFold" label="AlphaFold"/>
<link wikidata="Q206229" start="5280" end="5291" title="Biomolecule" label="Biomolecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q196538" start="5358" end="5368" title="microscope" label="microscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q180809" start="5557" end="5574" title="Mass spectrometry" label="Mass spectrometry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5577" end="5607" title="X-ray crystallography#Biological macromolecular crystallography" label="Macromolecular crystallography"/>
<link wikidata="Q910499" start="5610" end="5629" title="Neutron diffraction" label="Neutron diffraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q33123" start="5632" end="5643" title="Proteolysis" label="Proteolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q864267" start="5646" end="5697" title="Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy of proteins" label="Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy of proteins"/>
<link wikidata="Q260463" start="5706" end="5737" title="Electron paramagnetic resonance" label="Electron paramagnetic resonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190506" start="5746" end="5775" title="Cryo-electron microscopy" label="Cryogenic electron microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305783" start="5787" end="5811" title="Electron crystallography" label="Electron crystallography"/>
<link wikidata="Q65091274" start="5816" end="5849" title="microcrystal electron diffraction" label="microcrystal electron diffraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934570" start="5852" end="5879" title="Multiangle light scattering" label="Multiangle light scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005805" start="5882" end="5904" title="Biological small-angle scattering" label="Small angle scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q186105" start="5907" end="5935" title="Ultrafast laser spectroscopy" label="Ultrafast laser spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q115519429" start="5938" end="5977" title="Anisotropic terahertz microspectroscopy" label="Anisotropic terahertz microspectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7858699" start="5980" end="6017" title="Two-dimensional infrared spectroscopy" label="Two-dimensional infrared spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q899102" start="6057" end="6075" title="circular dichroism" label="circular dichroism"/>
<link wikidata="Q583851" start="6127" end="6139" title="native state" label="native state"/>
<link wikidata="Q273186" start="6232" end="6241" title="Denaturation (biochemistry)" label="denatured"/>
<link wikidata="Q847556" start="6296" end="6311" title="protein folding" label="protein folding"/>
<link wikidata="Q128570" start="6393" end="6407" title="bioinformatics" label="bioinformatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q863908" start="6447" end="6455" title="DNA sequence" label="sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757382" start="6551" end="6576" title="integral membrane protein" label="integral membrane protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815143" start="6591" end="6608" title="membrane topology" label="membrane topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q817136" start="6622" end="6645" title="hydrophobicity analysis" label="hydrophobicity analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q899656" start="6651" end="6679" title="protein structure prediction" label="protein structure prediction"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="6966" end="6990" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q11085" start="6992" end="7016" title="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025883" start="7022" end="7038" title="Type 2 diabetes" label="type II diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7215" start="7397" end="7407" title="virologist" label="virologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380903" start="7431" end="7443" title="HIV envelope" label="HIV envelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418791" start="7548" end="7562" title="drug discovery" label="drug discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q209402" start="7732" end="7735" title="Nuclear magnetic resonance" label="NMR"/>
<link wikidata="Q180809" start="7737" end="7754" title="mass spectrometry" label="mass spectrometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q826582" start="7760" end="7781" title="X-ray crystallography" label="X-ray crystallography"/>
<link wikidata="Q5005897" start="7917" end="7920" title="C-Met" label="Met"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="7995" end="8001" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="8043" end="8046" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="8076" end="8080" title="HIV/AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q899763" start="8220" end="8237" title="Primary structure" label="Primary structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q904984" start="8240" end="8259" title="Secondary structure" label="Secondary structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q898483" start="8262" end="8280" title="Tertiary structure" label="Tertiary structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q898529" start="8283" end="8303" title="Quaternary structure" label="Quaternary structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q898273" start="8306" end="8323" title="Structural domain" label="Structural domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273544" start="8326" end="8342" title="Structural motif" label="Structural motif"/>
<link wikidata="Q899781" start="8345" end="8360" title="Protein subunit" label="Protein subunit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196961" start="8363" end="8378" title="Molecular model" label="Molecular model"/>
<link wikidata="Q337217" start="8381" end="8394" title="Cooperativity" label="Cooperativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q24771589" start="8397" end="8407" title="Chaperonin" label="Chaperonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583975" start="8410" end="8429" title="Structural genomics" label="Structural genomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q186011" start="8432" end="8447" title="Stereochemistry" label="Stereochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315678" start="8450" end="8479" title="Resolution (electron density)" label="Resolution (electron density)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407965" start="8482" end="8493" title="Proteopedia" label="Proteopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="8551" end="8560" title="molecules" label="molecules"/>
<link wikidata="Q899656" start="8564" end="8592" title="Protein structure prediction" label="Protein structure prediction"/>
<link wikidata="Q21071015" start="8595" end="8612" title="SBGrid Consortium" label="SBGrid Consortium"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29402" wikidata="Q483654" url="?curid=29402" title="Sunni Islam">
<text>Sunni Islam (; ) is the largest denomination of Islam, followed by 87–90% of the world&#x27;s Muslims, and simultaneously the largest religious denomination in the world. The word Sunni refers to those who observe the &quot;Sunnah&quot;, referring to the traditions and practices of Muhammad. The differences between Sunni and Shia Muslims arose from a disagreement over the succession to Muhammad and subsequently acquired broader political significance, as well as theological and juridical dimensions. According to Sunni traditions, Muhammad left no successor and the participants of the Saqifah event elected Abu Bakr as the first caliph. This contrasts with the Shia view, which holds that Muhammad appointed his son-in-law and cousin Ali ibn Abi Talib as his successor.

The Quran, together with hadith (especially the Six Books) and &quot;ijma&quot; (juristic consensus), form the basis of all traditional jurisprudence within Sunni Islam. Sharia rulings are derived from these basic sources, in conjunction with analogical reasoning, consideration of public welfare and juristic discretion, using the principles of jurisprudence developed by the traditional legal schools: Hanafism, Shafi&#x27;ism, Malikism and Hanbalism.

In matters of creed, the Sunni tradition upholds the six pillars of (faith) and comprises the Ash&#x27;ari and Maturidi schools of (theology) as well as the textualist Athari school. Sunnis regard the first four caliphs Abu Bakr (), Umar (), Uthman () and Ali () as (rightly-guided) and revere the , , and as the (predecessors).

==Terminology==
=== Sunna ===
The Arabic term , according to which Sunnis are named, is old and roots in pre-Islamic language. It was used for traditions which a majority of people followed. The term got greater political significance after the murder of the third caliph Uthman (). It is said Malik al-Ashtar, a famous follower of Ali, encouraged during the Battle of Siffin with the expression, Ali&#x27;s political rival Mu&#x27;awiya kills the &#x27;. After the battle, it was agreed that &quot;the righteous &#x27;, the unifying, not the divisive&quot; (&quot;&quot;) should be consulted to resolve the conflict. The time when the term &quot;sunna&quot; became the short form for &quot;Sunnah of the Prophet&quot; (S&quot;unnat an-Nabī&quot;) is still unknown. During the Umayyad Caliphate, several political movements, including the Shia and the Kharijites rebelled against the formation of the state. They led their battles in the name of &quot;the book of God (&quot;Qur&#x27;an&quot;) and the &quot;Sunnah&quot; of his Prophet&quot;. During the second Civil War (680–92) the Sunna-term received connotations critical of Shi&#x27;i doctrines (&quot;Tashayyu&quot;&#x27;). It is recorded by Masrūq ibn al-Adschdaʿ (d. 683), who was a &quot;Mufti&quot; in Kufa, a need to love the first two caliphs Abū Bakr and ʿUmar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb and acknowledge their priority (&quot;Fadā&#x27;il&quot;). A disciple of Masrūq, the scholar ash-Shaʿbī (d. between 721 und 729), who first sided with the Shia in Kufa during Civil War, but turned away in disgust by their fanaticism and finally decided to join the Umayyad Caliph ʿAbd al-Malik, popularized the concept of &quot;Sunnah&quot;. It is also passed down by asch-Shaʿbī, that he took offensive at the hatred on ʿĀʾiša bint Abī Bakr and considered it a violation of the &quot;Sunnah&quot;.

The term &quot;Sunna&quot; instead of the longer expression &quot;ahl as-sunna&quot; or &quot;ahl as-sunnah wa l-jamāʻah&quot; as a group-name for Sunnis is a relatively young phenomenon. It was probably Ibn Taymiyyah, who used the short-term for the first time. It was later popularized by pan-Islamic scholars such as Muhammad Rashid Rida in his treatise &quot;as-Sunna wa-š-šiʿa au al-Wahhābīya wa-r-Rāfiḍa: Ḥaqāʾiq dīnīya taʾrīḫīya iǧtimaʿīya iṣlaḥīya&quot; (&quot;The Sunna and the Shia, Or Wahhabism and Rāfidism: Religious history, sociological und reform oriented facts&quot;) published in 1928–29. The term &quot;Sunnah&quot; is usually used in Arabic discourse as designation for Sunni Muslims, when they are intended to be contrasted with Shias. The word pair &quot;Sunnah-Shia&quot; is also used on Western research literature to denote the Sunni-Shia contrast.

=== Ahl as-Sunna ===
One of the earliest supporting documents for &quot;ahl as-sunna&quot; derives from the Basric scholar Muhammad Ibn Siri (d. 728). His is mentioned in the &quot;Sahih&quot; of Muslim ibn al-Hajjaj quoted with: &quot;Formerly one did not ask about the Isnad. But when the &quot;fitna&quot; started, one said: &#x27;Name us your informants&#x27;. One would then respond to them: If they were Sunnah people, you accept their hadith. But if they are people of the Innovations, the hadith was rejected.&quot; G.H.A. Juynboll assumed, the term &quot;fitna&quot; in this statement is not related to the first Civil War (665–661) after murder of ʿUthmān ibn ʿAffān, but the second Civil War (680–692) in which the Islamic community was split into four parties (Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr, the Umayyads, the Shia under al-Mukhtār ibn Abī ʿUbaid and the Kharijites). The term &quot;ahl as-sunna&quot; designated in this situation whose, who stayed away from heretic teachings of the different warring parties.

The term &quot;ahl as-sunna&quot; was always a laudatory designation. Abu Hanifa (d. 769), who sympathized with Murdshia, insisted that this were &quot;righteous people and people of the Sunnah&quot; (&quot;ahl al-ʿadl wa-ahl as-sunna&quot;). According to Josef van Ess this term did not mean more than &quot;honorable and righteous believing people&quot;. Among Hanafits the designation &quot;ahl as-sunna&quot; and &quot;ahl al-ʿadl&quot; (people of the righteous) remained interchangeable for a long time. Thus the Hanafite Abū l-Qāsim as-Samarqandī (d. 953), who composed a catechism for the Samanides, used sometimes one expression and sometimes another for his own group.

Singular to &quot;ahl as-sunna&quot; was &quot;ṣāḥib sunna&quot; (adherent to the sunnah). This expression was used for example by ʿAbd Allāh ibn al-Mubārak (d. 797) for a person, who distances himself from the teachings of Shia, Kharijites, Qadarites and Murjites. In addition, the Nisba adjective &quot;sunnī&quot; was also used for the individual person. Thus it has been recorded, the Kufic scholar of the Quran Abū Bakr ibn ʿAyyāsh (d. 809) was asked, how he was a &quot;sunni&quot;. He responded the following: &quot;The one who, when the heresies are mentioned, doesn&#x27;t get excited about any of them.&quot; The Andalusiaian scholar Ibn Hazm (d. 1064) taught later, that whose who confess to Islam can be divided into four groups: &quot;ahl as-sunna&quot;, Mutazilites, Murjites, Shites, Kharijites. The Muʿtazilites replaced the Qadarites here.

In the 9th century, one started to extent the term &quot;ahl as-sunna&quot; with further positive additions. Abu al-Hasan al-Ashari used for his own group expressions like &quot;ahl as-sunna wa-l-istiqāma&quot; (&quot;people of Sunna and Straightness&quot;), &quot;ahl as-sunna wa-l-ḥadīṯ&quot; (&quot;people of Sunnah and of the Hadith&quot;) or &quot;ahl al-ḥaqq wa-s-sunna&quot; (&quot;people of Truth and of the Sunnah&quot;).

=== Ahl as-Sunna wa l-Jamāʻah ===
The first appearances of the expression &#x27;ahl as-sunna wa l-jama&#x27;ah are entirely clear. The Abbasite Caliph Al-Ma&#x27;mūn (reigned 813–33) criticized in his Mihna edict a group of people, who related themselves to the sunnah (&quot;nasabū anfusa-hum ilā s-sunna&quot;) and claimed, they are the &quot;people of truth, religion and community&quot; (&quot;ahl al-ḥaqq wa-d-dīn wa-l-jamāʿah&quot;). &quot;Sunna&quot; and &quot;jamāʿah&quot; are already connected here. As a pair, these terms already appear in the 9th century. It is recorded that the disciple of Ahmad ibn Hanbal Harb ibn Ismail as-Sirjdshani (d. 893) created a writing with the title &quot;as-Sunna wa l-Jamāʿah&quot;, to which the Mutazilite Abu al-Qasim al-Balchi wrote a refutation later. Al-Jubba&#x27;i (d. 916) tells in his &quot;Kitāb al-Maqālāt&quot;, that Ahmad ibn Hanbal attributed to his students the predicate &quot;sunnī jamāʿah&quot; (&quot;Jammatic Sunnite&quot;). This indicates that the Hanbalis were the first to use the phrase &quot;ahl as-sunna wa l-jamāʿah&quot; as a self-designation.

Karramiyya theology, founded by Muhammad ibn Karram (d. 859) referred to the sunnah and community. They passed down in praise of their school founder a hadith, according to which Muhammad predicted that at the end of times a man named Muhammad ibn Karram will appear, who will restore the sunna and the community (&quot;as-sunna wa l-jamāʿah&quot;) and take Hidraj from Chorasan to Jerusalem, just how Muhammad himself took a Hidraj from Mecca to Medina. According to the testimony of the transoxanian scholar Abu al-Yusr al-Bazdawi (d. 1099) the Kullabites (followers of the Basrian scholar Ibn Kullab (d. 855)) dayed about themselves, that they are among the &quot;ahl as-sunna wa l-jama&quot; too.

Abu al-Hasan al-Ashari used the expression &quot;ahl as-sunna wa l-jamāʿah&quot; rarely, and preferred another combination. Later Asharites like al-Isfaranini (d. 1027) nad Abd al-Qahir al-Baghdadi (d. 1078) used the expression &quot;ahl as-sunna wa l-jamāʿah&quot; too and used them in their works to designate the teachings of their own school. According to al-Bazdawi all Asharites in his time said they belong to the &quot;ahl as-sunna wa l-jamāʿah&quot;. During this time, the term has been used as a self-designation by the hanafite Maturidites in Transoxiania, used frequently by Abu al-Layth al-Samarqandi (d. 983), Abu Schakur as-Salimi (d. 1086) and al-Bazdawi himself. They used the term as a contrast from their enemies among them Hanafites in the West, who have been followers of the Mutazilites. Al-Bazdawī also contrasted the &quot;Ahl as-Sunnah wa l-Jamāʻah&quot; with &quot;Ahl al-Ḥadīth&quot;, &quot;because they would adhere to teachings contrary to the Quran&quot;.

According to Schams ad-Dīn al-Maqdisī (end of the 10th century) was the expression &quot;ahl as-sunna wa l-jamāʿah&quot; a laudatory term during his time, similar to &quot;ahl al-ʿadl wa-t-tawḥīd&quot; (&quot;people of Righteousness and Divine Unity&quot;), which was used for Mutazilites or generally designations like Mu&#x27;minūn (&quot;Believer&quot;) or &quot;aṣḥāb al-hudā&quot; (&quot;people of guidance&quot;) for Muslims, who has been seen as rightoues believers. Since the expression &quot;ahl as-sunna wa l-jamāʿah&quot; was used with a demand on rightoues belief, it was used in academic researches translated as &quot;orthodox&quot;.

There are different opinions regarding what the term &quot;jama&quot; in the phrase &quot;ahl as-sunna wa l-jama&quot; actually means, among Muslim scholars. In the Sunni Creed by at-Tahawi (d. 933), the term &quot;jama&quot; contrasts several times the Arabic term &quot;furqa&quot; (&quot;division, sectarianism&quot;). Thus at-Tahāwī explains that &quot;jama&quot; is considered as true or right (&quot;ḥaqq wa-ṣawāb&quot;) and &quot;furqa&quot; as aberration and punishment (&quot;zaiġ wa-ʿaḏāb&quot;). Ibn Taymiyyah argues, that &quot;jama&quot; as opposite term to &quot;furqa&quot; inherents the meaning of &quot;iǧtimāʿ&quot; (&quot;Coming together, being together, agreement&quot;). Furthermore, he connects it with the principle of Ijma, a third juridical source after the Book (Quran), and the Sunnah. The Ottoman scholar Muslih ad-Din al-Qastallani (d. 1495) held the opinion that &quot;jama&quot; means &quot;Path of the Sahaba&quot; (&quot;ṭarīqat aṣ-ṣaḥāba&quot;). The modern Indonesian theologican Nurcholish Madjid (d. 2005) interpreted &quot;jama&quot; as an inclusivistic concept: It means a society open for pluralism and dialogue but does not emphasize that much.

==History==

One common mistake is to assume that Sunni Islam represents a normative Islam that emerged during the period after Muhammad&#x27;s death, and that Sufism and Shi&#x27;ism developed out of Sunni Islam. This perception is partly due to the reliance on highly ideological sources that have been accepted as reliable historical works, and also because the vast majority of the population is Sunni. Both Sunnism and Shiaism are the end products of several centuries of competition between ideologies. Both sects used each other to further cement their own identities and doctrines.

The first four caliphs are known among Sunnis as the Rāshidun or &quot;Rightly-Guided Ones&quot;. Sunni recognition includes the aforementioned Abu Bakr as the first, Umar as the second, Uthman as the third, and Ali as the fourth. Sunnis recognised different rulers as the caliph, though they did not include anyone in the list of the rightly guided ones or &quot;Rāshidun&quot; after the murder of Ali, until the caliphate was constitutionally abolished in Turkey on 3 March 1924.

===Transition of caliphate into dynastic monarchy of Banu Umayya===
The seeds of metamorphosis of caliphate into kingship were sown, as the second caliph Umar had feared, as early as the regime of the third caliph Uthman, who appointed many of his kinsmen from his clan Banu Umayya, including Marwān and Walid bin Uqba on important government positions, becoming the main cause of turmoil resulting in his murder and the ensuing infighting during Ali&#x27;s time and rebellion by Muāwiya, another of Uthman&#x27;s kinsman. This ultimately resulted in the establishment of firm dynastic rule of Banu Umayya after Husain, the younger son of Ali from Fātima, was killed at the Battle of Karbalā. The rise to power of Banu Umayya, the Meccan tribe of elites who had vehemently opposed Muhammad under the leadership of Abu Sufyān, Muāwiya&#x27;s father, right up to the conquest of Mecca by Muhammad, as his successors with the accession of Uthman to caliphate, replaced the egalitarian society formed as a result of Muhammad&#x27;s revolution to a society stratified between haves and have-nots as a result of nepotism, and in the words of El-Hibri through &quot;the use of religious charity revenues (&quot;zakāt&quot;) to subsidise family interests, which Uthman justified as &quot;&#x27;al-sila&quot;&#x27; (pious filial support)&quot;. Ali, during his rather brief regime after Uthman maintained austere life style and tried hard to bring back the egalitarian system and supremacy of law over the ruler idealised in Muhammad&#x27;s message, but faced continued opposition, and wars one after another by Aisha-Talhah-Zubair, by Muāwiya and finally by the Khārjites. After he was murdered, his followers immediately elected Hasan ibn Ali his elder son from Fātima to succeed him. Hasan shortly afterward signed a treaty with Muāwiya relinquishing power in favour of the latter, with a condition inter alia, that one of the two who will outlive the other will be the caliph, and that this caliph will not appoint a successor but will leave the matter of selection of the caliph to the public. Subsequently, Hasan was poisoned to death and Muawiya enjoyed unchallenged power. Dishonouring his treaty with Hasan, he nominated his son Yazid to succeed him. Upon Muāwiya&#x27;s death, Yazid asked Husain, the younger brother of Hasan, Ali&#x27;s son and Muhammad&#x27;s grandson, to give his allegiance to Yazid, which he plainly refused. His caravan was cordoned by Yazid&#x27;s army at Karbalā and he was killed with all his male companions – total 72 people, in a day long battle after which Yazid established himself as a sovereign, though strong public uprising erupted after his death against his dynasty to avenge the massacre of Karbalā, but Banu Umayya were able to quickly suppress them all and ruled the Muslim world, till they were finally overthrown by Banu Abbās.

=== Caliphate and the dynastic monarchy of Banu Abbās ===
The rule of and &quot;caliphate&quot; of Banu Umayya came to an end at the hands of Banu Abbās a branch of Banu Hāshim, the tribe of Muhammad, only to usher another dynastic monarchy styled as caliphate from 750 CE. This period is seen formative in Sunni Islam as the founders of the four schools viz, Abu Hanifa, Malik ibn Anas, Shāfi&#x27;i and Ahmad bin Hanbal all practised during this time, so also did Jafar al Sādiq who elaborated the doctrine of imāmate, the basis for the Shi&#x27;a religious thought. There was no clearly accepted formula for determining succession in the Abbasid caliphate. Two or three sons or other relatives of the dying caliph emerged as candidates to the throne, each supported by his own party of supporters. A trial of strength ensued and the most powerful party won and expected favours of the caliph they supported once he ascended the throne. The caliphate of this dynasty ended with the death of the Caliph al-Ma&#x27;mun in 833 CE, when the period of Turkish domination began.

===Sunni Islam in the contemporary era===

The fall, at the end of World War I of the Ottoman Empire, the biggest Sunni empire for six centuries, brought the caliphate to an end. This resulted in Sunni protests in far off places including the Khilafat Movement in India, which was later on upon gaining independence from Britain divided into Sunni dominated Pakistan and secular India. Pakistan, the most populous Sunni state at its dawn, was later partitioned into Pakistan and Bangladesh. The demise of Ottoman caliphate also resulted in the emergence of Saudi Arabia, a dynastic absolute monarchy that championed the reformist doctrines of Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab; the eponym of the Wahhabi movement. This was followed by a considerable rise in the influence of the Wahhabi, &quot;Salafiyya&quot;, Islamist and Jihadist movements that revived the doctrines of the Hanbali theologian Taqi Al-Din Ibn Taymiyyah (1263–1328 C.E/ 661–728 A.H), a fervent advocate of the traditions of the Sunni Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal. The expediencies of Cold War resulted in the radicalisation of Afghan refugees in Pakistan who fought the communist regime backed by USSR forces in Afghanistan giving birth to the Taliban movement. After the fall of communist regime in Afghanistan and the ensuing civil war, Taliban wrestled power from the various Mujahidin factions in Afghanistan and formed a government under the leadership of Mohammed Omar, who was addressed as the Emir of the faithful, an honorific way of addressing the caliph. The Taliban regime was recognised by Pakistan and Saudi Arabia till after 9/11, perpetrated by Osama bin Laden – a Saudi national by birth and harboured by the Taliban – took place, resulting in a war on terror launched against the Taliban.

The sequence of events of the 20th century has led to resentment in some quarters of the Sunni community due to the loss of pre-eminence in several previously Sunni-dominated regions such as the Levant, Mesopotamia, the Balkans, the North Caucasus and the Indian sub continent. The latest attempt by a radical wing of Salafi-Jihadists to re-establish a Sunni caliphate was seen in the emergence of the militant group ISIL, whose leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi is known among his followers as caliph and &quot;Amir-al-mu&#x27;mineen&quot;, &quot;The Commander of the Faithful&quot;. Jihadism is opposed from within the Muslim community (known as the &quot;ummah&quot; in Arabic) in all quarters of the world as evidenced by turnout of almost 2% of the Muslim population in London protesting against ISIL.

Following the puritan approach of Ibn Kathir, Muhammad Rashid Rida, etc. many contemporary &quot;Tafsir&quot; (exegetic treatises) downplay the earlier significance of Biblical material (&quot;Isrā&#x27;iliyyāt&quot;). Half of the Arab commentaries reject &quot;Isrā&#x27;iliyyāt&quot; in general, while Turkish tafsir usually partly allow referring to Biblical material. Nevertheless, most non-Arabic commentators regard them as useless or not applicable. A direct reference to the Israeli–Palestinian conflict could not be found. It remains unclear whether the refusal of &quot;Isrā&#x27;iliyyāt&quot; is motivated by political discourse or by traditionalist thought alone. The usage of &quot;tafsir&#x27;ilmi&quot; is another notable characteristic of modern Sunni tafsir. &quot;Tafsir&#x27;ilmi&quot; stands for alleged scientific miracles found in the Qur&#x27;an. In short, the idea is that the Qur&#x27;an contains knowledge about subjects an author of the 7th century could not possibly have. Such interpretations are popular among many commentators. Some scholars, such as the Commentators of Al-Azhar University, reject this approach, arguing the Qur&#x27;an is a text for religious guidance, not for science and scientific theories that may be disproved later; thus &quot;tafsir&#x27;ilmi&quot; might lead to interpreting Qur&#x27;anic passages as falsehoods. Modern trends of Islamic interpretation are usually seen as adjusting to a modern audience and purifying Islam from alleged alterings, some of which are believed to be intentional corruptions brought into Islam to undermine and corrupt its message.

==Adherents==
Sunnis believe the companions of Muhammad to be reliable transmitters of Islam, since God and Muhammad accepted their integrity. Medieval sources even prohibit cursing or vilifying them. This belief is based upon prophetic traditions such as one narrated by Abdullah, son of Masud, in which Muhammad said: &quot;The best of the people are my generation, then those who come after them, then those who come after them.&quot; Support for this view is also found in the Qur&#x27;an, according to Sunnis. Therefore, narratives of companions are also reliably taken into account for knowledge of the Islamic faith. Sunnis also believe that the companions were true believers since it was the companions who were given the task of compiling the Qur&#x27;an.

Sunni Islam does not have a formal hierarchy. Leaders are informal, and gain influence through study to become a scholar of Islamic law (&quot;sharia&quot;) or Islamic theology (&quot;Kalām&quot;). Both religious and political leadership are in principle open to all Muslims. According to the Islamic Center of Columbia, South Carolina, anyone with the intelligence and the will can become an Islamic scholar. During Midday Mosque services on Fridays, the congregation will choose a well-educated person to lead the service, known as a Khateeb (one who speaks).

A study conducted by the &quot;Pew Research Center&quot; in 2010 and released January 2011 found that there are 1.62 billion Muslims around the world, and it is estimated over 85–90% are Sunni.

=== Three group doctrines ===
There is no agreement among Muslim scholars as to which dogmatic tendencies are to be assigned to Sunni tradition. Since the early modern period, is the idea that a total of three groups belong to the Sunnis: 1. those named after Abu l-Hasan al-Aschʿari (d. 935) Ashʿarites, 2. those named after Abu Mansur al-Maturidi (d. 941) named Maturidites and 3. a differently named third group, which is traditionalistic-oriented and rejects the rational discourse of Kalām advocated by the Maturidites and Ashʿarites. The Syrian scholar ʿAbd al-Baqi Ibn Faqih Fussa (d. 1661) calls this third traditionalist group the Hanbalites. The late Ottoman thinker (d. 1946), who agreed to dividing Sunnis into these three groups, called the traditionalist group Salafiyya, but also used &quot;Athariyya&quot; as an alternative term. For the Maturidiyya he gives &quot;Nasafīyya&quot; as a possible alternative name. Another used for the traditionalist-oriented group is &quot;people of Hadith&quot; (&quot;ahl al-ḥadīṯ&quot;). It is used, for example, in the final document of the Grozny Conference. Only those &quot;people of the Hadith&quot; are assigned to Sunnism who practice &quot;tafwīḍ&quot;, i.e. who refrain from interpreting the ambiguous statements of the Quran.

====Ash&#x27;ari====

Founded by Abu al-Hasan al-Ash&#x27;ari (873–935). This theological school of Aqeedah was embraced by many Muslim scholars and developed in parts of the Islamic world throughout history; al-Ghazali wrote on the creed discussing it and agreeing upon some of its principles.

Ash&#x27;ari theology stresses divine revelation over human reason. Contrary to the Mu&#x27;tazilites, they say that ethics cannot be derived from human reason, but that God&#x27;s commands, as revealed in the &quot;Quran&quot; and the &quot;Sunnah&quot; (the practices of Muhammad and his companions as recorded in the traditions, or hadith), are the sole source of all morality and ethics.

Regarding the nature of God and the divine attributes, the Ash&#x27;ari rejected the Mu&#x27;tazili position that all Quranic references to God as having real attributes were metaphorical. The Ash&#x27;aris insisted that these attributes were as they &quot;best befit His Majesty&quot;. The Arabic language is a wide language in which one word can have 15 different meanings, so the Ash&#x27;aris endeavor to find the meaning that best befits God and is not contradicted by the Quran. Therefore, when God states in the Quran, &quot;He who does not resemble any of His creation&quot;, this clearly means that God cannot be attributed with body parts because He created body parts. Ash&#x27;aris tend to stress divine omnipotence over human free will and they believe that the Quran is eternal and uncreated.

====Maturidi====

Founded by Abu Mansur al-Maturidi (d. 944), Maturidiyyah was the major tradition in Central Asia based on Hanafi-law. It is more influenced by Persian interpretations of Islam and less on the traditions established within Arabian culture. In contrast to the traditionalistic approach, Maturidism allows to reject hadiths based on reason alone. Nevertheless, revelation remains important to inform humans about that is beyond their intellectual limits, such as the concept of an afterlife. Ethics on the other hand, do not need prophecy or revelation, but can be understood by reason alone. One of the tribes, the Seljuk Turks, migrated to Turkey, where later the Ottoman Empire was established. Their preferred school of law achieved a new prominence throughout their whole empire although it continued to be followed almost exclusively by followers of the Hanafi school while followers of the Shafi and Maliki schools within the empire followed the Ash&#x27;ari and Athari schools of thought. Thus, wherever can be found Hanafi followers, there can be found the Maturidi creed.

====Athari====
Traditionalist or Athari theology is a movement of Islamic scholars who reject rationalistic Islamic theology (&quot;kalam&quot;) in favor of strict textualism in interpreting the &quot;Qur&#x27;an&quot; and &quot;sunnah&quot;. The name derives from &quot;tradition&quot; in its technical sense as translation of the Arabic word &quot;hadith&quot;. It is also sometimes referred to as &quot;athari&quot; as by several other names.

Adherents of traditionalist theology believe that the &quot;zahir&quot; (literal, apparent) meaning of the &quot;Qur&#x27;an&quot; and the hadith have sole authority in matters of belief and law; and that the use of rational disputation is forbidden even if it verifies the truth. They engage in a literal reading of the &quot;Qur&#x27;an&quot;, as opposed to one engaged in &quot;ta&#x27;wil&quot; (metaphorical interpretation). They do not attempt to conceptualize the meanings of the &quot;Qur&#x27;an&quot; rationally, and believe that their realities should be consigned to God alone (&quot;tafwid&quot;). In essence, the text of the Qur&#x27;an and Hadith is accepted without asking &quot;how&quot; or &quot;Bi-la kaifa&quot;.

Traditionalist theology emerged among scholars of hadith who eventually coalesced into a movement called &quot;ahl al-hadith&quot; under the leadership of Ahmad ibn Hanbal. In matters of faith, they were pitted against Mu&#x27;tazilites and other theological currents, condemning many points of their doctrine as well as the rationalistic methods they used in defending them. In the 10th century AD al-Ash&#x27;ari and al-Maturidi found a middle ground between Mu&#x27;tazilite rationalism and Hanbalite literalism, using the rationalistic methods championed by Mu&#x27;tazilites to defend most tenets of the traditionalist doctrine. Although the mainly Hanbali scholars who rejected this synthesis were in the minority, their emotive, narrative-based approach to faith remained influential among the urban masses in some areas, particularly in Abbasid Baghdad.

While Ash&#x27;arism and Maturidism are often called the Sunni &quot;orthodoxy&quot;, traditionalist theology has thrived alongside it, laying rival claims to be the orthodox Sunni faith. In the modern era, it has had a disproportionate impact on Islamic theology, having been appropriated by Wahhabi and other traditionalist Salafi currents and have spread well beyond the confines of the Hanbali school of law.

=== Narrow definition ===
There were also Muslim scholars who wanted to limit the Sunni term to the &quot;Ash&#x27;arites&quot; and &quot;Māturīdites&quot; alone. For example, Murtadā az-Zabīdī (d. 1790) wrote in his commentary on al-Ghazalis &quot;Iḥyāʾ ʿulūm ad-dīn&quot;: &quot;When (sc. The term)&quot; &quot;ahl as-sunna wal jamaʿa&quot; is used, the Ashʿarites and Māturīdites are meant. This position was also taken over by the Egyptian Fatwa Office in July 2013. In Ottoman times, many efforts were made to establish a good harmony between the teachings of the Ashʿarīya and the Māturīdīya. Finally, there were also scholars who regarded the Ashʿarites alone as Sunnis. For example, the Moroccan Sufi Ahmad ibn ʿAdschiba (d. 1809) stated in his commentary on Fatiha: &quot;As far as the Sunnis are concerned, it is the Ashʿarites and those who follow in their correct belief.&quot;

Conversely, there were also scholars who excluded the Ashʿarites from Sunnism. The Andalusian scholar Ibn Hazm (d. 1064) said that Abu l-Hasan al-Ashʿarī belonged to the Murji&#x27;a, namely those who were particularly far removed from the Sunnis in terms of faith. Twentieth-century Syrian-Albanian Athari Salafi theologian Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani rejected extremism in excluding Ash&#x27;aris from Sunni Islam. He believed that despite that their fundamental differences from Atharis, not every Ash&#x27;ari is to be excluded from &quot;Ahl al-Sunna wal Jama&#x27;ah&quot;, unless they openly disapprove of the doctrines of the &quot;Salaf&quot; (&quot;mad&#x27;hab as-Salaf&quot;). According to Albani:&quot;I do not share [the view of] some of the noble scholars of the past and present that we say about a group from the [many] Islamic groups that it is not from &quot;Ahlus-Sunnah&quot; due to its deviation in one issue or another... as for whether the Ash’aris or the Maaturidis are from &quot;Ahlus-Sunnah wal-Jamaa’ah&quot;, I say that they are from &quot;Ahlus-Sunnah wal-Jamaa’ah&quot; in many things related to &quot;aqidah&quot; but in other &quot;aqidah&quot; issues they have deviated away from &quot;Ahlus-Sunnah wal-Jamaa’ah..&quot; I don&#x27;t hold that we should say that they are not from &quot;Ahlus-Sunnah wal-Jamaa’ah&quot; whatsoever&quot;

=== Sunnism in general and in a specific sense ===
The Hanbali scholar Ibn Taymiyyah (d. 1328) distinguished in his work &quot;Minhāj as-sunna&quot; between Sunnis in the general sense (&quot;ahl as-unna al-ʿāmma&quot;) and Sunnis in the special sense (&quot;ahl as-sunna al-ḫāṣṣa&quot;). Sunnis in the general sense are all Muslims who recognize the caliphate of the three caliphs (Abū Bakr, ʿUmar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb and ʿUthmān ibn ʿAffān). In his opinion, this includes all Islamic groups except the Shiite Rafidites. Sunnis in the special sense are only the &quot;people of the hadith&quot; (&quot;ahl al-ḥadīṯ&quot;).

İsmail Hakkı İzmirli, who took over the distinction between a broader and narrower circle of Sunnis from Ibn Taimiya, said that Kullabiyya and the Ashʿarīyya are Sunnis in the general sense, while the Salafiyya represent Sunnis in the specific sense. About the Maturidiyya he only says that they are closer to the Salafiyya than the Ashʿariyya because they excel more in Fiqh than in Kalām. The Saudi scholar Muhammad Ibn al-ʿUthaimin (d. 2001), who like Ibn Taimiya differentiated between Sunnis in general and special senses, also excluded the Asharites from the circle of Sunnis in the special sense and took the view that only the pious ancestors (&quot;as-salaf aṣ-ṣāliḥ&quot;) who have agreed on the Sunnah belonged to this circle.

=== Classification of the Muʿtazila ===
The Muʿtazilites are usually not regarded as Sunnis. Ibn Hazm, for example, contrasted them with the Sunnis as a separate group in his heresiographic work &quot;al-Faṣl fi-l-milal wa-l-ahwāʾ wa-n-niḥal&quot;. In many medieval texts from the Islamic East, the &quot;Ahl as-Sunna&quot; are also differentiated to the Muʿtazilites. In 2010 the Jordanian &quot;fatwa&quot; office ruled out in a fatwa that the Muʿtazilites, like the Kharijites, represent a doctrine that is contrary to Sunnism. Ibn Taymiyya argued that the Muʿtazilites belong to the Sunnis in the general sense because they recognize the caliphate of the first three caliphs.

=== Mysticism ===

There is broad agreement that the Sufis are also part of Sunnism. This view can already be found in the Shafi&#x27;ite scholar Abu Mansur al-Baghdadi (d. 1037). In his heresiographical work &quot; al-Farq baina l-firaq &quot; he divided the Sunnis into eight different categories (&quot;aṣnāf&quot;) of people: 1. the theologians and Kalam Scholars, 2. the Fiqh scholars, 3. the traditional and Hadith scholars, 4. the Adab and language scholars, 5. the Koran – Scholars, 6. the Sufi ascetics (&quot;az-zuhhād aṣ-ṣūfīya&quot;), 7. those who perform the &quot;ribat&quot; and &quot;jihad&quot; against the enemies of Islam, 8. the general crowd. According to this classification, the Sufis are one of a total of eight groups within Sunnism, defined according to their religious specialization.

The Tunisian scholar Muhammad ibn al-Qāsim al-Bakkī (d. 1510) also included the Sufis in Sunnism. He divided the Sunnis into the following three groups according to their knowledge (&quot;istiqrāʾ&quot;):
# the people of Hadith (&quot;ahl al-ḥadīṯh&quot;): Their principles are based on the hearing-based evidence, namely the Book (&quot;Qur&#x27;an&quot;), the &quot;Sunnah&quot; and the &quot;Ijmāʿ&quot; (consensus).
# The people of theory and the intellectual trade (&quot;ahl an-naẓar wa-ṣ-ṣināʿa al-fikrīya&quot;): They include the Ashʿarites and the Hanafis, the latter of whom consider Abū Mansūr al-Māturīdī as their master. They agree in the rational principles on all questions where there is no hearing-based evidence, in the hearing-based principles in everything that reason conceives as possible, and in the rational as well as the hearing-based principles in all other questions. They also agree on all dogmatic questions, except for the question of creation (&quot;takwīn&quot;) and the question of &quot;Taqlīd&quot;.
# the people of feeling and revelation (&quot;ahl al-wiǧdān wa-l-kašf&quot;): These are the Sufis. Its principles correspond in the initial stage to the principles of the other two groups, but in the final stage they rely on revelation (&quot;kašf&quot;) and inspiration (&quot;ilhām&quot;).
Similarly, Murtadā az-Zabīdī stated elsewhere in his commentary on Ghazzali&#x27;s &quot;Iḥyāʾ ʿulūm ad-dīn&quot; &quot; that the Sunnis consisted of four groups (firaq&quot;), namely the hadith scholars (&quot;muḥaddiṯhūn), the Sufis, the Ashʿarites and the Māturīdites.&quot;

Some &quot;ulema&quot; wanted to exclude the Sufis from Sunnism. The Yemeni scholar ʿAbbās ibn Mansūr as-Saksakī (d. 1284) explained in his doxographic work &quot; al-Burhān fī maʿrifat ʿaqāʾid ahl al-adyān &quot; (&quot;The evidence of knowledge of the beliefs of followers of different religions&quot;) about the Sufis: &quot;They associate themselves with the Sunnis, but they do not belong to them, because they contradict them in their beliefs, actions and teachings.&quot; That is what distinguishes the Sufis from Sunnis according to as-Saksakī their orientation to the hidden inner meaning of the &quot;Qur&#x27;an&quot; and the &quot;Sunnah&quot;. In this, he said, they resemble the Bātinites. According to the final document of the Grozny Conference, only those Sufis are to be regarded as Sunnis who are &quot;people of pure Sufism&quot; (&quot;ahl at-taṣauwuf aṣ-ṣāfī&quot;) in the knowledge, ethics and purification of the interior, according to Method as practiced by al-Junaid Al- Baghdadi and the &quot;Imams of Guidance&quot; (&quot;aʾimma al-hudā&quot;) who followed his path.

In the 11th century, Sufism, which had previously been a less &quot;codified&quot; trend in Islamic piety, began to be &quot;ordered and crystallized&quot; into &quot;Tariqahs&quot; (orders) which have continued until the present day. All these orders were founded by a major Sunni Islamic saint, and some of the largest and most widespread included the Qadiriyya (after Abdul-Qadir Gilani [d. 1166]), the Rifa&#x27;iyya (after Ahmed al-Rifa&#x27;i [d. 1182]), the Chishtiyya (after Moinuddin Chishti [d. 1236]), the Shadiliyya (after Abul Hasan ash-Shadhili [d. 1258]), and the Naqshbandiyya (after Baha-ud-Din Naqshband Bukhari [d. 1389]). Contrary to popular Orientalist depictions, neither the founders of these orders nor their followers considered themselves to be anything other than orthodox Sunni Muslims, Many of the most eminent defenders of Islamic orthodoxy, such as &#x27;Abd al-Qadir Jilani, Al-Ghazali, Sultan Ṣalāḥ ad-Dīn Al-Ayyubi (Saladin) were connected with Sufism.&quot; The Salafi and Wahhabi strands of Sunnism do not accept many mystical practices associated with the contemporary Sufi orders.

==Jurisprudence==
Interpreting Islamic law by deriving specific rulings – such as how to pray – is commonly known as Islamic jurisprudence. The schools of law all have their own particular tradition of interpreting this jurisprudence. As these schools represent clearly spelled out methodologies for interpreting Islamic law, there has been little change in the methodology with regard to each school. While conflict between the schools was often violent in the past, the four Sunni schools recognize each other&#x27;s validity and they have interacted in legal debate over the centuries.

===Schools===

There are many intellectual traditions within the field of &quot;Shari&#x27;ah&quot; (Islamic law), often referred to as &quot;Madh&#x27;habs&quot; (legal schools). These varied traditions reflect differing viewpoints on some laws and obligations within Islamic law. While one school may see a certain act as a religious obligation, another may see the same act as optional. These schools are not regarded as sects; rather, they represent differing viewpoints on issues that are not considered the core of Islamic belief. Historians have differed regarding the exact delineation of the schools based on the underlying principles they follow.

Many traditional scholars saw Sunni Islam in two groups: &quot;Ahl al-Ra&#x27;y&quot;, or &quot;people of reason&quot;, due to their emphasis on scholarly judgment and discourse; and &quot;Ahl al-Hadith&quot;, or &quot;people of traditions&quot;, due to their emphasis on restricting juristic thought to only what is found in scripture. Ibn Khaldun defined the Sunni schools as three: the Hanafi school representing reason, the Ẓāhirīte school representing tradition, and a broader, middle school encompassing the Shafi&#x27;ite, Malikite and Hanbalite schools.

==See also==
==References==
===Notes===
==Further reading==
* Ahmed, Khaled. &quot;Sectarian war: Pakistan&#x27;s Sunni-Shia violence and its links to the Middle East&quot; (Oxford University Press, 2011).
* Charles River Editors. &quot;The History of the Sunni and Shia Split: Understanding the Divisions within Islam&quot; (2010) 44pp excerpt; brief introduction.
* Farooqi, Mudassir, Sarwar Mehmood Azhar, and Rubeena Tashfeen. &quot;Jihadist Organizations History and Analysis.&quot; &quot;Journal of Social, Political, and Economic Studies&quot; 43.1/2 (2018): 142–151. online
* Gesink, Indira Falk. &quot;Islamic reform and conservatism: Al-Azhar and the evolution of modern Sunni Islam&quot; (Tauris Academic Studies, 2010)
* Haddad, Fanar. &quot;Understanding &#x27;Sectarianism&#x27;: Sunni-Shi&#x27;a Relations in the Modern Arab World&quot; (Oxford UP, 2020).
* Haddad, Fanar. &quot;Anti-Sunnism and anti-Shiism: Minorities, majorities and the question of equivalence.&quot; &quot;Mediterranean Politics&quot; (2020): 1–7 online.
* Halverson, Jeffry. &quot;Theology and creed in Sunni Islam: the Muslim Brotherhood, Ash&#x27;arism, and political Sunnism&quot; (Springer, 2010).
* Hazleton, Lesley. &quot;After the prophet: the epic story of the Shia-Sunni split in Islam&quot; (Anchor, 2010).
* Kamolnick, Paul. &quot;The Al-Qaeda Organization and the Islamic State Organization: History, Doctrine, Modus, Operandi, and US Policy to Degrade and Defeat Terrorism Conducted in the Name of Sunni Islam&quot; (Strategic Studies Institute, United States Army War College, 2017) online.
* Khaddour, Kheder. &quot;Localism, War, and the Fragmentation of Sunni Islam in Syria&quot; (Carnegie Endowment for International Peace., 2019) online.
* McHugo, John. &quot;A Concise History of Sunnis and Shi&#x27;is&quot; (2018) excerpt
* Nuruzzaman, Mohammed. &quot;Conflicts in Sunni Political Islam and Their Implications.&quot; &quot;Strategic Analysis&quot; 41.3 (2017): 285–296 online.
* Nydell, Margaret K. &quot;Understanding Arabs: A guide for modern times&quot; (3rd ed. Hachette UK, 2018).
* Tezcan, Baki. &quot;The Disenchantment of Sufism, the Rationalization of Sunni Islam, and Early Modernity.&quot; &quot;Journal of the Ottoman and Turkish Studies Association&quot; 7.1 (2020): 67–69 online.
* Wheeler, Branon. Applying the Canon in Islam: The Authorization and Maintenance of Interpretive Reasoning in Ḥanafī Scholarship, SUNY Press, 1996.

=== Online ===
* Sunni: Islam, in &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica Online&quot;, by The Editors of Encyclopædia Britannica, Asma Afsaruddin, Yamini Chauhan, Aakanksha Gaur, Gloria Lotha, Matt Stefon, Noah Tesch and Adam Zeidan</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="0" end="11" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192063" start="32" end="44" title="Islamic schools and branches" label="denomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="48" end="53" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="94" end="101" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q13414953" start="134" end="156" title="religious denomination" label="religious denomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q234764" start="224" end="230" title="Sunnah" label="Sunnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="283" end="291" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="327" end="339" title="Shia Islam" label="Shia Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115056" start="375" end="397" title="succession to Muhammad" label="succession to Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q12818349" start="467" end="478" title="Schools of Islamic theology" label="theological"/>
<link wikidata="Q484181" start="483" end="492" title="Fiqh" label="juridical"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164559" start="591" end="604" title="Saqifah event" label="Saqifah event"/>
<link wikidata="Q334923" start="613" end="621" title="Abu Bakr" label="Abu Bakr"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="635" end="641" title="caliph" label="caliph"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="667" end="676" title="Succession of ʿAlī (Shia Islam)" label="Shia view"/>
<link wikidata="Q39619" start="740" end="757" title="Ali" label="Ali ibn Abi Talib"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="781" end="786" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="802" end="808" title="hadith" label="hadith"/>
<link wikidata="Q310756" start="825" end="834" title="Six Books" label="Six Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q652172" start="846" end="850" title="ijma" label="ijma"/>
<link wikidata="Q484181" start="901" end="926" title="Fiqh" label="traditional jurisprudence"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="947" end="953" title="Sharia" label="Sharia"/>
<link wikidata="Q786184" start="1020" end="1040" title="Qiyas" label="analogical reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700567" start="1042" end="1055" title="Istislah" label="consideration"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783456" start="1059" end="1073" title="Maslaha" label="public welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502502" start="1078" end="1097" title="Istihsan" label="juristic discretion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321196" start="1109" end="1136" title="Principles of Islamic jurisprudence" label="principles of jurisprudence"/>
<link wikidata="Q209928" start="1166" end="1179" title="Madhhab" label="legal schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q228986" start="1181" end="1189" title="Hanafism" label="Hanafism"/>
<link wikidata="Q82245" start="1191" end="1205" title="Shafi&amp;#x27;ism" label="Shafi&amp;#x27;ism"/>
<link wikidata="Q48221" start="1207" end="1215" title="Malikism" label="Malikism"/>
<link wikidata="Q233387" start="1220" end="1229" title="Hanbalism" label="Hanbalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q235258" start="1246" end="1251" title="Aqidah" label="creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q539918" start="1326" end="1338" title="Ash&amp;#x27;ari" label="Ash&amp;#x27;ari"/>
<link wikidata="Q492501" start="1343" end="1351" title="Maturidi" label="Maturidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q638043" start="1400" end="1406" title="Atharism" label="Athari"/>
<link wikidata="Q334923" start="1452" end="1460" title="Abu Bakr" label="Abu Bakr"/>
<link wikidata="Q8467" start="1465" end="1469" title="Umar" label="Umar"/>
<link wikidata="Q37731" start="1474" end="1480" title="Uthman" label="Uthman"/>
<link wikidata="Q39619" start="1488" end="1491" title="Ali" label="Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q37731" start="1834" end="1840" title="Uthman" label="Uthman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108678" start="1856" end="1871" title="Malik al-Ashtar" label="Malik al-Ashtar"/>
<link wikidata="Q39619" start="1894" end="1897" title="Ali" label="Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q735876" start="1921" end="1937" title="Battle of Siffin" label="Battle of Siffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q181154" start="1986" end="1999" title="Mu&amp;#x27;awiya" label="Mu&amp;#x27;awiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q234764" start="2253" end="2259" title="Sunnah" label="Sunnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6932888" start="2267" end="2274" title="Muhammad in Islam" label="Prophet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="2339" end="2356" title="Umayyad Caliphate" label="Umayyad Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="2401" end="2405" title="Shia" label="Shia"/>
<link wikidata="Q189570" start="2414" end="2424" title="Kharijites" label="Kharijites"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="2537" end="2548" title="Quran" label="Qur&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769089" start="2616" end="2632" title="Second Fitna" label="second Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="2691" end="2701" title="Shia Islam" label="Shi&amp;#x27;i"/>
<link wikidata="Q185992" start="2809" end="2814" title="Mufti" label="Mufti"/>
<link wikidata="Q186234" start="2824" end="2828" title="Kufa" label="Kufa"/>
<link wikidata="Q334923" start="2867" end="2875" title="Abū Bakr" label="Abū Bakr"/>
<link wikidata="Q8467" start="2880" end="2900" title="ʿUmar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb" label="ʿUmar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb"/>
<link wikidata="Q36788" start="3181" end="3194" title="Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan" label="ʿAbd al-Malik"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730963" start="3322" end="3342" title="Aisha" label="ʿĀʾiša bint Abī Bakr"/>
<link wikidata="Q234764" start="3386" end="3392" title="Sunnah" label="Sunnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q491558" start="3605" end="3618" title="Ibn Taymiyyah" label="Ibn Taymiyyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q430032" start="3692" end="3703" title="Pan-Islamism" label="pan-Islamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q471046" start="3721" end="3741" title="Rashid Rida" label="Muhammad Rashid Rida"/>
<link wikidata="Q163140" start="3897" end="3906" title="Wahhabism" label="Wahhabism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182614" start="3911" end="3919" title="Rafida" label="Rāfidism"/>
<link wikidata="Q140124" start="4472" end="4492" title="Muslim ibn al-Hajjaj" label="Muslim ibn al-Hajjaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674390" start="4547" end="4552" title="Isnad" label="Isnad"/>
<link wikidata="Q962828" start="4573" end="4578" title="Fitna (word)" label="fitna"/>
<link wikidata="Q857060" start="4756" end="4767" title="Bidʻah" label="Innovations"/>
<link wikidata="Q37731" start="4934" end="4952" title="ʿUthmān ibn ʿAffān" label="ʿUthmān ibn ʿAffān"/>
<link wikidata="Q307665" start="5049" end="5072" title="Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr" label="Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr"/>
<link wikidata="Q45646" start="5078" end="5086" title="Umayyad dynasty" label="Umayyads"/>
<link wikidata="Q141317" start="5103" end="5128" title="Mukhtar al-Thaqafi" label="al-Mukhtār ibn Abī ʿUbaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q190896" start="5364" end="5374" title="Abu Hanifa" label="Abu Hanifa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5406" end="5414" title="Murdshia" label="Murdshia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5550" end="5563" title="Josef van Ess" label="Josef van Ess"/>
<link wikidata="Q486181" start="5890" end="5899" title="Samanides" label="Samanides"/>
<link wikidata="Q4666111" start="6104" end="6129" title="Abd Allah ibn al-Mubarak" label="ʿAbd Allāh ibn al-Mubārak"/>
<link wikidata="Q189570" start="6203" end="6213" title="Kharijites" label="Kharijites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359550" start="6229" end="6237" title="Murji&amp;#x27;ah" label="Murjites"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6256" end="6261" title="Arabic nouns and adjectives#Nisba" label="Nisba"/>
<link wikidata="Q317787" start="6617" end="6625" title="Ibn Hazm" label="Ibn Hazm"/>
<link wikidata="Q668460" start="6741" end="6752" title="Mutazilites" label="Mutazilites"/>
<link wikidata="Q61056" start="7414" end="7428" title="Al-Ma&amp;#x27;mūn" label="Al-Ma&amp;#x27;mūn"/>
<link wikidata="Q194442" start="7867" end="7883" title="Ahmad ibn Hanbal" label="Ahmad ibn Hanbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115307" start="8064" end="8079" title="Al-Jubba&amp;#x27;i" label="Al-Jubba&amp;#x27;i"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180491" start="8381" end="8391" title="Karramiyya" label="Karramiyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2804846" start="8973" end="8983" title="Ibn Kullab" label="Ibn Kullab"/>
<link wikidata="Q938348" start="9670" end="9696" title="Abu al-Layth al-Samarqandi" label="Abu al-Layth al-Samarqandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q294116" start="10083" end="10107" title="Al-Muqaddasī" label="Schams ad-Dīn al-Maqdisī"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812992" start="10390" end="10403" title="Mumin" label="Mu&amp;#x27;minūn"/>
<link wikidata="Q293771" start="10899" end="10908" title="at-Tahawi" label="at-Tahawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q652172" start="11461" end="11465" title="Ijma" label="Ijma"/>
<link wikidata="Q188711" start="11653" end="11659" title="Sahaba" label="Sahaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387931" start="11733" end="11750" title="Nurcholish Madjid" label="Nurcholish Madjid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109612" start="11796" end="11809" title="Inclusivism" label="inclusivistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1870755" start="11847" end="11856" title="Value pluralism" label="pluralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="12065" end="12071" title="Sufism" label="Sufism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="12076" end="12088" title="Shi&amp;#x27;ism" label="Shi&amp;#x27;ism"/>
<link wikidata="Q180465" start="12549" end="12557" title="Rashidun" label="Rāshidun"/>
<link wikidata="Q334923" start="12640" end="12648" title="Abu Bakr" label="Abu Bakr"/>
<link wikidata="Q8467" start="12663" end="12667" title="Umar" label="Umar"/>
<link wikidata="Q37731" start="12683" end="12689" title="Uthman" label="Uthman"/>
<link wikidata="Q39619" start="12708" end="12711" title="Ali" label="Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="12769" end="12775" title="caliph" label="caliph"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="12954" end="12960" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q45646" start="13249" end="13260" title="Banu Umayya" label="Banu Umayya"/>
<link wikidata="Q298577" start="13272" end="13278" title="Marwan I" label="Marwān"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774518" start="13283" end="13297" title="Al-Walid ibn Uqba" label="Walid bin Uqba"/>
<link wikidata="Q181154" start="13459" end="13466" title="Muawiyah I" label="Muāwiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q45646" start="13573" end="13584" title="Banu Umayya" label="Banu Umayya"/>
<link wikidata="Q112128" start="13591" end="13597" title="Husayn ibn Ali" label="Husain"/>
<link wikidata="Q180123" start="13627" end="13633" title="Fatima bint Muhammad" label="Fātima"/>
<link wikidata="Q626058" start="13653" end="13670" title="Battle of Karbala" label="Battle of Karbalā"/>
<link wikidata="Q335430" start="13793" end="13803" title="Abu Sufyan ibn Harb" label="Abu Sufyān"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092033" start="13844" end="13861" title="conquest of Mecca" label="conquest of Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q161165" start="14085" end="14093" title="nepotism" label="nepotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q124058" start="14183" end="14188" title="zakat" label="zakāt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730963" start="14582" end="14587" title="Aisha" label="Aisha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14588" end="14594" title="Talhah#Battle of the Camel and Death" label="Talhah"/>
<link wikidata="Q293565" start="14595" end="14601" title="Zubayr ibn al-Awwam" label="Zubair"/>
<link wikidata="Q189570" start="14633" end="14642" title="Kharjites" label="Khārjites"/>
<link wikidata="Q182914" start="14701" end="14714" title="Hasan ibn Ali" label="Hasan ibn Ali"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14802" end="14809" title="Muāwiya" label="Muāwiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q217442" start="15208" end="15213" title="Yazid I" label="Yazid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452838" start="15257" end="15262" title="Yazid" label="Yazid"/>
<link wikidata="Q626058" start="15548" end="15554" title="Battle of Karbala" label="battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q45646" start="15722" end="15733" title="Banu Umayya" label="Banu Umayya"/>
<link wikidata="Q4437641" start="15838" end="15848" title="Banu Abbas" label="Banu Abbās"/>
<link wikidata="Q190896" start="16211" end="16221" title="Abu Hanifa" label="Abu Hanifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q312299" start="16223" end="16237" title="Malik ibn Anas" label="Malik ibn Anas"/>
<link wikidata="Q82245" start="16239" end="16251" title="Shafi&amp;#x27;i" label="Shāfi&amp;#x27;i"/>
<link wikidata="Q194442" start="16256" end="16272" title="Ahmad ibn Hanbal" label="Ahmad bin Hanbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q170046" start="16317" end="16331" title="Jafar al Sadiq" label="Jafar al Sādiq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989480" start="16363" end="16370" title="imamate" label="imāmate"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="16994" end="17005" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="17013" end="17027" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365432" start="17170" end="17187" title="Khilafat Movement" label="Khilafat Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="17285" end="17293" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="17306" end="17311" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q371394" start="17376" end="17387" title="Bangladesh Independence War" label="partitioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="17406" end="17416" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821698" start="17422" end="17449" title="Abolition of the Caliphate" label="demise of Ottoman caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="17484" end="17496" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q69351" start="17570" end="17596" title="Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab" label="Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab"/>
<link wikidata="Q163140" start="17616" end="17632" title="Wahhabism" label="Wahhabi movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q163140" start="17699" end="17706" title="Wahhabism" label="Wahhabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q191057" start="17714" end="17723" title="Salafi movement" label="Salafiyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q189746" start="17731" end="17739" title="Islamism" label="Islamist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757343" start="17744" end="17752" title="Jihadism" label="Jihadist"/>
<link wikidata="Q491558" start="17816" end="17841" title="Ibn Taymiyyah" label="Taqi Al-Din Ibn Taymiyyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q194442" start="17927" end="17943" title="Ahmad ibn Hanbal" label="Ahmad ibn Hanbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="17965" end="17973" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="18051" end="18060" title="communist" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="18078" end="18082" title="USSR" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="18125" end="18141" title="Taliban" label="Taliban movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980081" start="18209" end="18218" title="Afghan Civil War (1992–1996)" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q21000730" start="18260" end="18278" title="Afghan mujahideen" label="Mujahidin factions"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="18282" end="18293" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q193968" start="18342" end="18355" title="Mullah Omar" label="Mohammed Omar"/>
<link wikidata="Q166382" start="18382" end="18386" title="Emir" label="Emir"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="18521" end="18525" title="9/11" label="9/11"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317" start="18542" end="18557" title="Osama bin Laden" label="Osama bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="18644" end="18657" title="war on terror" label="war on terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="18884" end="18890" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="18892" end="18903" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="18909" end="18916" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q37736" start="18922" end="18936" title="North Caucasus" label="North Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="18945" end="18965" title="Indian sub continent" label="Indian sub continent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3380905" start="19007" end="19023" title="Salafi jihadism" label="Salafi-Jihadists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="19106" end="19110" title="Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant" label="ISIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821724" start="19125" end="19145" title="Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi" label="Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q205766" start="19341" end="19346" title="ummah" label="ummah"/>
<link wikidata="Q369690" start="19525" end="19535" title="Ibn Kathir" label="Ibn Kathir"/>
<link wikidata="Q471046" start="19537" end="19557" title="Muhammad Rashid Rida" label="Muhammad Rashid Rida"/>
<link wikidata="Q335414" start="19588" end="19594" title="Tafsir" label="Tafsir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046554" start="19659" end="19676" title="Isra&amp;#x27;iliyyat" label="Biblical material"/>
<link wikidata="Q151622" start="19974" end="20002" title="Israeli–Palestinian conflict" label="Israeli–Palestinian conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q173959" start="20593" end="20612" title="Al-Azhar University" label="Al-Azhar University"/>
<link wikidata="Q188711" start="21145" end="21155" title="Sahabah" label="companions"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="21159" end="21167" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q423557" start="21384" end="21406" title="Abdullah, son of Masud" label="Abdullah, son of Masud"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="21593" end="21604" title="Quran" label="Qur&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="21638" end="21648" title="Hadith" label="narratives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812992" start="21781" end="21795" title="Mu&amp;#x27;min" label="true believers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21851" end="21876" title="History of the Quran#Collection of the Quran" label="compiling the Qur&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="22022" end="22028" title="sharia" label="sharia"/>
<link wikidata="Q280817" start="22063" end="22068" title="Kalam" label="Kalām"/>
<link wikidata="Q38453" start="22190" end="22198" title="Columbia, South Carolina" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="22200" end="22214" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="22473" end="22492" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q316349" start="22897" end="22920" title="Al-Ash&amp;#x27;ari" label="Abu l-Hasan al-Aschʿari"/>
<link wikidata="Q539918" start="22930" end="22940" title="Ash&amp;#x27;ari" label="Ashʿarites"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827721" start="22963" end="22985" title="Abu Mansur al-Maturidi" label="Abu Mansur al-Maturidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q492501" start="23001" end="23009" title="Maturidi" label="Maturidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q280817" start="23126" end="23131" title="Kalām" label="Kalām"/>
<link wikidata="Q191057" start="23412" end="23421" title="Salafism" label="Salafiyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="23636" end="23642" title="Hadith" label="Hadith"/>
<link wikidata="Q29513759" start="23731" end="23748" title="2016 international conference on Sunni Islam in Grozny" label="Grozny Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q23049041" start="23837" end="23843" title="Tafwid" label="tafwīḍ"/>
<link wikidata="Q316349" start="23959" end="23987" title="Abu al-Hasan al-Ash&amp;#x27;ari" label="Abu al-Hasan al-Ash&amp;#x27;ari"/>
<link wikidata="Q233324" start="24004" end="24022" title="theological school" label="theological school"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574610" start="24055" end="24070" title="Muslim scholars" label="Muslim scholars"/>
<link wikidata="Q9546" start="24135" end="24145" title="al-Ghazali" label="al-Ghazali"/>
<link wikidata="Q192906" start="24253" end="24270" title="divine revelation" label="divine revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="24339" end="24345" title="ethics" label="ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="24557" end="24563" title="hadith" label="hadith"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="24629" end="24642" title="nature of God" label="nature of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q668460" start="24700" end="24714" title="Mu&amp;#x27;tazili" label="Mu&amp;#x27;tazili"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141803" start="25331" end="25342" title="omnipotence" label="omnipotence"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827721" start="25452" end="25474" title="Abu Mansur al-Maturidi" label="Abu Mansur al-Maturidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="25525" end="25537" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q228986" start="25547" end="25553" title="Hanafi" label="Hanafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="25754" end="25760" title="hadith" label="hadith"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="25930" end="25936" title="Ethics" label="Ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708255" start="26054" end="26066" title="Seljuk Turks" label="Seljuk Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="26080" end="26086" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="26104" end="26118" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q228986" start="26298" end="26304" title="Hanafi" label="Hanafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q82245" start="26335" end="26340" title="Shafi" label="Shafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q48221" start="26345" end="26351" title="Maliki" label="Maliki"/>
<link wikidata="Q228986" start="26463" end="26469" title="Hanafi" label="Hanafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q492501" start="26504" end="26512" title="Maturidi" label="Maturidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="26587" end="26592" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q280817" start="26653" end="26658" title="kalam" label="kalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="26722" end="26733" title="Quran" label="Qur&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q234764" start="26750" end="26756" title="sunnah" label="sunnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="26871" end="26877" title="hadith" label="hadith"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26946" end="26965" title="Traditionalist Theology (Islam)#Terminology" label="several other names"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992234" start="27028" end="27033" title="Zahir (Islam)" label="zahir"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="27107" end="27113" title="hadith" label="hadith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584408" start="27349" end="27360" title="ta&amp;#x27;wil" label="ta&amp;#x27;wil"/>
<link wikidata="Q23049041" start="27564" end="27570" title="tafwid" label="tafwid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4902348" start="27682" end="27693" title="Bi-la kaifa" label="Bi-la kaifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q400320" start="27813" end="27826" title="Ahl al-Hadith" label="ahl al-hadith"/>
<link wikidata="Q194442" start="27857" end="27873" title="Ahmad ibn Hanbal" label="Ahmad ibn Hanbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q668460" start="27921" end="27938" title="Mu&amp;#x27;tazilites" label="Mu&amp;#x27;tazilites"/>
<link wikidata="Q316349" start="28101" end="28116" title="al-Ash&amp;#x27;ari" label="al-Ash&amp;#x27;ari"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827721" start="28121" end="28132" title="al-Maturidi" label="al-Maturidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q233387" start="28196" end="28205" title="Hanbalite" label="Hanbalite"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="28547" end="28554" title="Abbasid Caliphate" label="Abbasid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="28555" end="28562" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q539918" start="28571" end="28585" title="Ash&amp;#x27;arism" label="Ash&amp;#x27;arism"/>
<link wikidata="Q492501" start="28590" end="28600" title="Maturidism" label="Maturidism"/>
<link wikidata="Q163140" start="28858" end="28865" title="Wahhabi" label="Wahhabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q191057" start="28891" end="28897" title="Salafi" label="Salafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q233387" start="28955" end="28962" title="Hanbali" label="Hanbali"/>
<link wikidata="Q539918" start="29085" end="29097" title="Ash&amp;#x27;ari" label="Ash&amp;#x27;ari"/>
<link wikidata="Q492501" start="29117" end="29128" title="Maturidi" label="Māturīdites"/>
<link wikidata="Q9546" start="29210" end="29220" title="al-Ghazali" label="al-Ghazali"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="29453" end="29460" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q219669" start="29746" end="29752" title="al-Fatiha" label="Fatiha"/>
<link wikidata="Q317787" start="29972" end="29980" title="Ibn Hazm" label="Ibn Hazm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359550" start="30040" end="30052" title="Murji&amp;#x27;a" label="Murji&amp;#x27;a"/>
<link wikidata="Q878607" start="30154" end="30160" title="Syrians" label="Syrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q179248" start="30161" end="30169" title="Albanians" label="Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q191057" start="30177" end="30183" title="Salafi movement" label="Salafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q560078" start="30195" end="30226" title="Muhammad Nasiruddin al-Albani" label="Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani"/>
<link wikidata="Q539918" start="30259" end="30271" title="Ash&amp;#x27;ari" label="Ash&amp;#x27;ari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322765" start="30514" end="30519" title="Salaf" label="Salaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q235258" start="31040" end="31046" title="aqidah" label="aqidah"/>
<link wikidata="Q233387" start="31300" end="31307" title="Hanbalism" label="Hanbali"/>
<link wikidata="Q491558" start="31316" end="31329" title="Ibn Taymiyyah" label="Ibn Taymiyyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q334923" start="31628" end="31636" title="Abū Bakr" label="Abū Bakr"/>
<link wikidata="Q8467" start="31638" end="31658" title="ʿUmar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb" label="ʿUmar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb"/>
<link wikidata="Q37731" start="31663" end="31681" title="ʿUthmān ibn ʿAffān" label="ʿUthmān ibn ʿAffān"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182614" start="31751" end="31760" title="Rafida" label="Rafidites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2804846" start="31993" end="32003" title="Ibn Kullab" label="Kullabiyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q191057" start="32066" end="32075" title="Salafism" label="Salafiyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q484181" start="32236" end="32240" title="Fiqh" label="Fiqh"/>
<link wikidata="Q280817" start="32249" end="32254" title="Kalām" label="Kalām"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="32260" end="32273" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398150" start="32274" end="32299" title="Muhammad ibn al-Uthaymeen" label="Muhammad Ibn al-ʿUthaimin"/>
<link wikidata="Q668460" start="32648" end="32660" title="Muʿtazila" label="Muʿtazilites"/>
<link wikidata="Q317787" start="32697" end="32705" title="Ibn Hazm" label="Ibn Hazm"/>
<link wikidata="Q179274" start="33001" end="33006" title="fatwa" label="fatwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q179274" start="33035" end="33040" title="fatwa" label="fatwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="33338" end="33343" title="Sufism" label="Sufis"/>
<link wikidata="Q82245" start="33408" end="33422" title="Shafiʽi school" label="Shafi&amp;#x27;ite"/>
<link wikidata="Q557366" start="33431" end="33453" title="Abu Mansur al-Baghdadi" label="Abu Mansur al-Baghdadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365310" start="33472" end="33488" title="heresiography" label="heresiographical"/>
<link wikidata="Q280817" start="33638" end="33643" title="Kalam" label="Kalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q484181" start="33661" end="33665" title="Fiqh" label="Fiqh"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="33699" end="33705" title="Hadith" label="Hadith"/>
<link wikidata="Q346410" start="33723" end="33727" title="Adab (Islam)" label="Adab"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="33758" end="33763" title="Koran" label="Koran"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="33783" end="33787" title="Sufism" label="Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333989" start="33863" end="33868" title="ribat" label="ribat"/>
<link wikidata="Q44311" start="33885" end="33890" title="jihad" label="jihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="34102" end="34109" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="34319" end="34325" title="Hadith" label="Hadith"/>
<link wikidata="Q400320" start="34333" end="34346" title="Ahl al-Hadith" label="ahl al-ḥadīṯh"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="34420" end="34428" title="Quran" label="the Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q234764" start="34466" end="34472" title="Sunnah" label="Sunnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q652172" start="34493" end="34498" title="Ijma" label="Ijmāʿ"/>
<link wikidata="Q539918" start="34636" end="34646" title="Ash&amp;#x27;ari" label="Ashʿarites"/>
<link wikidata="Q228986" start="34655" end="34661" title="Hanafi" label="Hanafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827721" start="34692" end="34714" title="Abu Mansur al-Maturidi" label="Abū Mansūr al-Māturīdī"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542247" start="35120" end="35126" title="Taqlid" label="Taqlīd"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="35226" end="35231" title="Sufism" label="Sufis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120098" start="35437" end="35454" title="Murtada al-Zabidi" label="Murtadā az-Zabīdī"/>
<link wikidata="Q9546" start="35493" end="35508" title="Al-Ghazali" label="Ghazzali&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165276" start="35515" end="35533" title="The Revival of the Religious Sciences" label="Iḥyāʾ ʿulūm ad-dīn"/>
<link wikidata="Q129677237" start="35614" end="35628" title="hadith scholar" label="hadith scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q189459" start="35716" end="35721" title="Ulama" label="ulema"/>
<link wikidata="Q74634" start="36398" end="36407" title="Batiniyya" label="Bātinites"/>
<link wikidata="Q816321" start="36665" end="36671" title="Tariqa" label="Method"/>
<link wikidata="Q735601" start="36688" end="36710" title="Junayd of Baghdad" label="al-Junaid Al- Baghdadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q816321" start="36969" end="36975" title="Tariqa" label="Tariqa"/>
<link wikidata="Q43115" start="37092" end="37097" title="Saint (Islamic)" label="saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q137108" start="37156" end="37165" title="Qadiriyya" label="Qadiriyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q307365" start="37173" end="37191" title="Abdul-Qadir Gilani" label="Abdul-Qadir Gilani"/>
<link wikidata="Q389821" start="37208" end="37219" title="Rifa&amp;#x27;i" label="Rifa&amp;#x27;i"/>
<link wikidata="Q401463" start="37230" end="37250" title="Ahmed al-Rifa&amp;#x27;i" label="Ahmed al-Rifa&amp;#x27;i"/>
<link wikidata="Q137111" start="37267" end="37277" title="Chishti Order" label="Chishtiyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q741545" start="37285" end="37302" title="Moinuddin Chishti" label="Moinuddin Chishti"/>
<link wikidata="Q136886" start="37319" end="37329" title="Shadiliyya" label="Shadiliyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704613" start="37337" end="37360" title="Abul Hasan ash-Shadhili" label="Abul Hasan ash-Shadhili"/>
<link wikidata="Q32078" start="37381" end="37391" title="Naqshbandi" label="Naqshbandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q32075" start="37402" end="37431" title="Baha-ud-Din Naqshband Bukhari" label="Baha-ud-Din Naqshband Bukhari"/>
<link wikidata="Q42865" start="37464" end="37475" title="Orientalism" label="Orientalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q307365" start="37682" end="37707" title="Abdul Qadir Gilani" label="&amp;#x27;Abd al-Qadir Jilani"/>
<link wikidata="Q9546" start="37709" end="37719" title="Al-Ghazali" label="Al-Ghazali"/>
<link wikidata="Q8581" start="37752" end="37759" title="Saladin" label="Saladin"/>
<link wikidata="Q191057" start="37799" end="37805" title="Salafi" label="Salafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q163140" start="37810" end="37817" title="Wahhabi" label="Wahhabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q484181" start="38039" end="38060" title="Fiqh" label="Islamic jurisprudence"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="38592" end="38605" title="Sharia" label="Shari&amp;#x27;ah"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="38613" end="38624" title="Islamic law" label="Islamic law"/>
<link wikidata="Q209928" start="38654" end="38668" title="Madhhab" label="Madh&amp;#x27;habs"/>
<link wikidata="Q235258" start="39033" end="39047" title="aqida" label="Islamic belief"/>
<link wikidata="Q4071836" start="39233" end="39249" title="Ahl al-Ra&amp;#x27;y" label="Ahl al-Ra&amp;#x27;y"/>
<link wikidata="Q400320" start="39359" end="39372" title="Ahl al-Hadith" label="Ahl al-Hadith"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294" start="39507" end="39518" title="Ibn Khaldun" label="Ibn Khaldun"/>
<link wikidata="Q228986" start="39559" end="39565" title="Hanafi" label="Hanafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q140592" start="39598" end="39604" title="Ẓāhirī" label="Ẓāhirī"/>
<link wikidata="Q82245" start="39684" end="39696" title="Shafi&amp;#x27;i" label="Shafi&amp;#x27;i"/>
<link wikidata="Q48221" start="39700" end="39706" title="Maliki" label="Maliki"/>
<link wikidata="Q233387" start="39713" end="39720" title="Hanbali" label="Hanbali"/>
<link wikidata="Q4050071" start="42168" end="42178" title="SUNY Press" label="SUNY Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29403" wikidata="Q14326025" url="?curid=29403" title="Sour mix">
<text>Sour mix (also known as sweet and sour mix) is a mixer that is usually yellow-green in color, and is used in many cocktails. It is made from approximately equal parts lemon and/or lime juice and simple syrup and shaken vigorously with ice. This produces a pearly-white liquid with a pronounced flavor. 

Optionally, egg whites may be added to make the liquid slightly foamy.

Sour mix can be mixed with liquor(s) to make a sour drink; most common are vodka sour (vodka) and whiskey sour (whiskey). It may also be served neat or with juice, club soda, etc., as a soft drink.

Pre-mixed versions are available and are used in many bars. These typically consist of a powder which must be rehydrated by adding water prior to use.

==References==
==See also==
* List of cocktails
* Tom Collins</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14326025" start="0" end="8" title="Sour mix" label="Sour mix"/>
<link wikidata="Q14326025" start="24" end="42" title="Sour mix" label="sweet and sour mix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307705" start="49" end="54" title="Drink mixer" label="mixer"/>
<link wikidata="Q134768" start="114" end="122" title="cocktail" label="cocktail"/>
<link wikidata="Q500" start="167" end="172" title="Lemon juice" label="lemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13195" start="180" end="190" title="lime juice" label="lime juice"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="195" end="207" title="syrup#Simple_syrup" label="simple syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q796758" start="316" end="325" title="egg white" label="egg white"/>
<link wikidata="Q56139" start="403" end="412" title="liquor" label="liquor(s)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928899" start="423" end="433" title="Sour (cocktail)" label="sour drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723060" start="451" end="461" title="vodka sour" label="vodka sour"/>
<link wikidata="Q374" start="463" end="468" title="vodka" label="vodka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279429" start="474" end="486" title="whiskey sour" label="whiskey sour"/>
<link wikidata="Q281" start="488" end="495" title="whiskey" label="whiskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621105" start="520" end="524" title="neat (bartending)" label="neat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8492" start="533" end="538" title="juice" label="juice"/>
<link wikidata="Q55607810" start="540" end="549" title="club soda" label="club soda"/>
<link wikidata="Q147538" start="562" end="572" title="soft drink" label="soft drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507328" start="757" end="774" title="List of cocktails" label="List of cocktails"/>
<link wikidata="Q703541" start="777" end="788" title="Tom Collins" label="Tom Collins"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29405" wikidata="Q582779" url="?curid=29405" title="Sikhs">
<text>Sikhs (singular Sikh: or ; , ) are an ethnoreligious group who adhere to Sikhism, a religion that originated in the late 15th century in the Punjab region of the Indian subcontinent, based on the revelation of Guru Nanak. The term &quot;Sikh&quot; has its origin in the Sanskrit word &quot;&quot;, meaning &#x27;seeker&#x27;, or .

According to Article I of Chapter 1 of the Sikh &quot;Rehat Maryada&quot; (), the definition of Sikh is: Any human being who faithfully believes in

Male Sikhs generally have &quot;Singh&quot; () as their last name, though not all Singhs are necessarily Sikhs; likewise, female Sikhs have &quot;Kaur&quot; () as their last name. These unique last names were given by the Gurus to allow Sikhs to stand out and also as an act of defiance to India&#x27;s caste system, which the Gurus were always against. Sikhs strongly believe in the idea of &quot;sarbat da bhala&quot; () and are often seen on the frontline to provide humanitarian aid across the world.

Sikhs who have undergone the &quot;Amrit Sanchar&quot; (), an initiation ceremony, are known as Khalsa from the day of their initiation and they must at all times have on their bodies the five Ks:

# &quot;kesh&quot;, uncut hair usually kept covered by a dastār, also known as a turban; 
# &quot;kara&quot;, an iron or steel bracelet;
# &quot;kirpan&quot;, a dagger-like sword tucked into a &quot;gatra&quot; strap or a &quot;kamar kasa&quot; waistband; 
# &quot;kachera&quot;, a cotton undergarment; and
# &quot;kanga&quot;, a small wooden comb.

The Punjab region of the Indian subcontinent has been the historic homeland of the Sikhs, having even been ruled by the Sikhs for significant parts of the 18th and 19th centuries. Today, Canada has the largest national Sikh proportion (2.1%) in the world, while the Punjab state in India has the largest Sikh proportion (58%) amongst all administrative divisions in the world. With 25–30 millions, Sikhs represent less than 0.3% of the total world population in 2021. Many countries, such as Canada and the United Kingdom, recognize Sikhs as a designated religion on their censuses and, as of 2020, Sikhs are considered as a separate ethnic group in the United States. The UK also considers Sikhs to be an ethno-religious people, as a direct result of the Mandla v Dowell-Lee case in 1982.

==History==

Guru Nanak (1469–1539), the founder of Sikhism, was born in a Hindu Khatri family to Mehta Kalu and Mata Tripta in the village of Talwandi, present-day Nankana Sahib, near Lahore. Throughout his life, Guru Nanak was a religious leader and social reformer. However, Sikh political history may be said to begin in 1606, with the death of the fifth Sikh guru, Guru Arjan Dev. Religious practices were formalised by Guru Gobind Singh on March 30, 1699, when the Guru initiated five people from a variety of social backgrounds known as the &quot;Panj Piare&quot; (), to form a collective body of initiated Sikhs known as the &quot;Khalsa&quot; ().

The early followers of Guru Nanak were Khatris, but later a large number of Jats joined the faith. Khatris and Brahmins opposed &quot;the demand that the Sikhs set aside the distinctive customs of their castes and families, including the older rituals.&quot;

Pashaura Singh analyzed references made within the 11th ballad of the &quot;Varan&quot; of Bhai Gurdas to form a picture of the caste-makeup of the early Sikh community. At the time of the writing the Vaar, the early Sikh community was composed of various castes and backgrounds, such as:

* Khatris (particularly the Sehgal, Ohri, Uppal, Julka, Bhalla, Passi, Khullar, Vohra, Vij, Kapur, Chaddha, Behl, Kohli, Marwah, Mehra, Soni, Jhanjhi, Sodhi, Beri, Nanda, Wadhawan, Tulli and Puri &quot;gotras&quot;)
* Brahmins (such as the Bhardwaj gotra)
* Jats (particularly the Randhawa, Khehra, Dhillon and Pannu gotras)
* Tarkhans (&#x27;carpenters&#x27;)
* Lohars (&#x27;blacksmiths&#x27;)
* Nais (&#x27;barbers&#x27;)
* Chhimbas (&#x27;cotton-printers&#x27;)
* Machhis (&#x27;water-carriers&#x27;)
* Dhobis (&#x27;washermen&#x27;)
* Kumhars (&#x27;potters&#x27;)
* Telis (&#x27;oil pressers&quot;)
* masons
* goldsmiths
* Outcastes (such as Chandals)
* Muslims

The early Sikhs varied widely in their occupations and position in society&#x27;s hierarchy: some were rich merchants (Seths and Sarrafs), others were heads of villages (Chowdhury), some were labourers, others were enslaved, whilst others still were artisans, craftsmen, shopkeepers or simple peasants.

During the rule of the Mughal Empire in India, two Sikh gurus were martyred. (Guru Arjan was martyred on suspicion of helping in betrayal of Mughal Emperor Jahangir and Guru Tegh Bahadur was martyred by the Mughal Emperor Aurangzeb) As the Sikh faith grew, the Sikhs subsequently militarized to oppose Mughal rule.


After defeating the Afghans and Mughals, sovereign states called Misls were formed under Jassa Singh Ahluwalia. The Confederacy of these states was unified and transformed into the Sikh Empire under Maharaja Ranjit Singh. This era was characterised by religious tolerance and pluralism, including Christians, Muslims and Hindus in positions of power. Its secular administration implemented military, economic and governmental reforms. The empire is considered the zenith of political Sikhism, encompassing Kashmir, Ladakh and Peshawar. Hari Singh Nalwa, the commander-in-chief of the Sikh Khalsa Army in the North-West Frontier, expanded the confederacy to the Khyber Pass.

=== British rule in India ===

After the annexation of the Sikh kingdom by the British, the British Army began recruiting significant numbers of Sikhs and Punjabis. During the 1857 Indian mutiny, the Sikhs stayed loyal to the British, resulting in heavy recruitment from Punjab to the British Indian Army for the next 90 years of the British Raj in colonial India. The distinct turban that differentiates a Sikh from other turban wearers is a relic of the rules of the British Indian Army. The British colonial rule saw the emergence of many reform movements in India, including Punjab, such as the formation of the First and Second Singh Sabha in 1873 and 1879 respectively. The Sikh leaders of the Singh Sabha worked to offer a clear definition of Sikh identity and tried to purify Sikh belief and practice.

The later years of British colonial rule saw the emergence of the Akali movement to bring reform in the gurdwaras during the early 1920s. The movement led to the introduction of &quot;Sikh Gurdwara Bill&quot; in 1925, which placed all the historical Sikh shrines in India under the control of the Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee.

=== Partition and post-Partition ===
At the time of the Indian independence movement, the Sikh ruler of the Kapurthala State fought to oppose the partition of India and advocated for a united, secular country. Sikh organizations, including the Chief Khalsa Dewan and Shiromani Akali Dal led by Master Tara Singh, condemned the Lahore Resolution and the movement to create Pakistan, viewing it as inviting possible persecution, with Akali Dal instead favouring an undivided Azad Punjab as an independent Sikh State or Khalistan, having passed the Sikh State Resolution in 1946. The Sikhs therefore strongly fought against the partition of Punjab. The months leading up to the 1947 partition of Punjab were marked by conflict in the Punjab between Sikhs and Muslims. This caused the religious migration of Punjabi Sikhs and Hindus from West Punjab to the east (modern India), mirroring a simultaneous religious migration of Punjabi Muslims from East Punjab to the west (modern Pakistan).

Following partition, the Government of India had begun to redraw states corresponding to demographic and linguistic boundaries. However, this was not effective in the northern part of the country, as the government reconsidered redrawing states in the north. While states across the country were extensively redrawn on linguistic lines at the behest of linguistic groups, the only languages not considered for statehood were Punjabi, Sindhi and Urdu. Leading to the launch of the Punjabi Suba movement and the presentation for a Punjabi Suba as a policy in April 1948 by Master Tara Singh. Also, on January 26, 1950, Sikh representatives refused to sign the Indian constitution. As Sikhs were recognized as Hindus and Sikhs were not provided with scheduled castes concessions given to Hindu scheduled castes.

The Punjab Suba experienced heavy government crackdown with the Congress Government arresting as many as 21,000 people. Attempted negotiations with Congress-led the agitation to be adjourned twice, though Jawaharlal Nehru continued to reject the demand. On July 4, 1955, government police forces, led by DIG Ashwini Kumar, forced entry into the Golden Temple premises and heavy-handedly arrested protestors and took them into custody, along with the head granthis of the Akal Takht and Golden Temple, volunteer protestors and even cooks of the temple&#x27;s langar. The Guru Ram Das Serai and Shiromani Akali Dal offices were also raided and batons used and tear gas and shells were fired to disperse the protestors gathered on the periphery of the temple, damaging the periphery and Sarovar, or pool, of the temple. The government stopped volunteers on the way to the Golden Temple and troops were ordered to flag-march through the bazaars and streets surrounding the site. Over 200 protestors were killed, thousands arrested, and thousands, including women and children, were injured.

The Congress government agreed to the Punjab Suba in 1966 after protests and recommendation of the States Reorganisation Commission. The state of East Punjab was later split into the states of Himachal Pradesh, the new state Haryana and current day Punjab. However, there was a growing alienation between Punjabi Sikh and Hindu populations. The latter of which reported Hindi rather than Punjabi as their primary language. The result was that Punjabi-speaking areas were left out of the new state and given to Haryana and Himachal Pradesh resulting in the state of Punjab to be roughly 35,000 square miles smaller than the Punjabi-speaking areas based on pre-1947 census figures. Moreover, the 1966 reorganization left Sikhs highly dissatisfied, with the capital Chandigarh being made into a shared a union territory and the capital of Punjab and Haryana.

In the late 1960s, the Green Revolution in India was first introduced in Punjab as part of a development program issued by international donor agencies and the Government of India. While, Green Revolution in Punjab had several positive impacts, the introduction of the mechanised agricultural techniques led to uneven distribution of wealth. The industrial development was not done at the same pace as agricultural development, the Indian government had been reluctant to set up heavy industries in Punjab due to its status as a high-risk border state with Pakistan. The rapid increase in the higher education opportunities without an adequate rise in the jobs resulted in the increase in the unemployment of educated youth.

In 1973 as a result, of unaddressed grievances and increasing inequality the Akali Dal put forward the Anandpur Sahib Resolution. The resolution included both religious and political issues. It asked for recognising Sikhism as a religion, it also demanded the devolution of power from the Central to state governments. The Anandpur Resolution was rejected by the government as a secessionist document. Thousands of people joined the movement, feeling that it represented a real solution to demands such as a larger share of water for irrigation and the return of Chandigarh to Punjab.

After unsuccessful negotiations the Dharam Yuddh Morcha () was launched on August 4, 1982, by the Akali Dal in partnership with Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale, with its stated aim being the fulfillment of a set of devolutionary objectives based on the Anandpur Sahib Resolution. Indian police responded to protestors with high-handed police methods creating state repression affecting a very large segment of Punjab&#x27;s population. Police brutality resulted in retaliatory violence from a section of the Sikh population, widening the scope of the conflict by the use of violence of the state on its own people. A &quot;state of chaos and repressive police methods&quot; combined to create &quot;a mood of overwhelming anger and resentment in the Sikh masses against the authorities.&quot; Leading to Sikh leader Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale gaining prominence and demands of independence gain currency, even amongst moderates and Sikh intellectuals. In 1982 and early 1983, extrajudicial killings by the police of orthodox Sikh youth in rural areas in Punjab provoked reprisals. Over 190 Sikhs had been killed in the first 19 months of the protest movement.

In May 1984, a &quot;Grain Roko morcha&quot; was planned and to be initiated on June3 with protestors practising civil disobedience by refusing to pay land revenue, water or electricity bills and blocking the flow of grain out of Punjab. Indian Prime minister Indira Gandhi launched Operation Blue Star on June1 prior to the Grain Roko morcha in order to remove Bhindranwale from the Golden Temple. This subsequently led to Gandhi&#x27;s assassination by her Sikh bodyguards. Her assassination was followed by government-sponsored pogroms against Sikh communities across India and the killing of thousands of Sikhs throughout India. These events triggered an Insurgency in Punjab which would consume Punjab until the early 1990s.

During the day of Vaisakhi in 1999, Sikhs worldwide celebrated the 300th anniversary of the creation of the Khalsa. Canada Post honoured Sikh Canadians with a commemorative stamp in conjunction with the anniversary. Likewise, on April 9, 1999, Indian president K. R. Narayanan issued a stamp commemorating the 300th anniversary of the Khalsa as well.

==Art and culture==


Sikh art and culture are nearly synonymous with that of Punjab and Sikhs are easily recognised by their distinctive turban (Dastar). Punjab has been called India&#x27;s melting pot, due to the confluence of invading cultures from the rivers from which the region gets its name. Sikh culture is therefore a synthesis of cultures. Sikhism has forged a unique architecture, which S. S. Bhatti described as &quot;inspired by Guru Nanak&#x27;s creative mysticism&quot; and &quot;is a mute harbinger of holistic humanism based on pragmatic spirituality.&quot; The American non-profit organization United Sikhs has fought to have Sikh included on the U.S. census as well, arguing that Sikhs &quot;self-identify as an ethnic minority&quot; and believe &quot;that they are more than just a religion.&quot;

During the Mughal and Afghan persecution of the Sikhs during the 17th and 18th centuries, the latter were concerned with preserving their religion and gave little thought to art and culture. With the rise of Ranjit Singh and the Sikh Raj in Lahore and Delhi, there was a change in the landscape of art and culture in Punjab; Hindus and Sikhs could build decorated shrines without the fear of destruction or looting.

The Sikh Confederacy was the catalyst for a uniquely Sikh form of expression, with Ranjit Singh commissioning forts, palaces, bungas (residential places) and colleges in a Sikh style. Sikh architecture is characterised by gilded fluted domes, cupolas, kiosks, stone lanterns, ornate balusters and square roofs. A pinnacle of Sikh style is Harmandir Sahib (also known as the Golden Temple) in Amritsar.

Sikh culture is influenced by militaristic motifs (with the Khanda the most obvious) and most Sikh artifacts—except for the relics of the Gurus—have a military theme. This theme is evident in the Sikh festivals of Hola Mohalla and Vaisakhi, which feature marching and displays of valor.

Although the art and culture of the Sikh diaspora have merged with that of other Indo-immigrant groups into categories like &quot;British Asian,&quot; &quot;Indo-Canadian&quot; and &quot;Desi-Culture,&quot; a minor cultural phenomenon that can be described as &quot;political Sikh&quot; has arisen. The art of diaspora Sikhs like Amarjeet Kaur Nandhra and Amrit and Rabindra Kaur Singh (The Singh Twins) is influenced by their Sikhism and current affairs in Punjab.

Bhangra and Giddha are two forms of Punjabi folk dancing which have been adapted and pioneered by Sikhs. Punjabi Sikhs have championed these forms of expression worldwide, resulting in Sikh culture becoming linked to Bhangra (although &quot;Bhangra is not a Sikh institution but a Punjabi one&quot;).

===Painting===
Sikh painting is a direct offshoot of the Kangra school of painting. In 1810, Ranjeet Singh (1780–1839) occupied Kangra Fort and appointed Sardar Desa Singh Majithia his governor of the Punjab hills. In 1813, the Sikh army occupied Guler State and Raja Bhup Singh became a vassal of the Sikhs. With the Sikh kingdom of Lahore becoming the paramount power, some of the Pahari painters from Guler migrated to Lahore for the patronage of Maharaja Ranjeet Singh and his Sardars.

The Sikh school adapted Kangra painting to Sikh needs and ideals. Its main subjects are the ten Sikh gurus and stories from Guru Nanak&#x27;s Janamsakhis. The tenth Guru, Gobind Singh, left a deep impression on the followers of the new faith because of his courage and sacrifices. Hunting scenes and portraits are also common in Sikh painting.

===Shrines===
There is an old Sikh shrine called &#x27;Prachin Guru Nanak Math&#x27;, which lies at a small hill, just next to Bishnumati bridge at Balaju. Guru Nanak is said to have visited Nepal during his third Udasi while returning from Mount Kailash in Tibet. Nanak is said to have stayed at Balaju and Thapathali in Kathmandu. The Nanak Math shrine at Balaju is managed by the Guru-Ji and the Udasin Akardha, a sect developed by Guru Nanak&#x27;s son, Sri Chandra.

===Daily routine===
From the Guru Granth Sahib:

The Sikh Rahit Maryada (Code of Conduct) clearly states that initiated Amritdhari Khalsa Sikhs must recite or listen to the recitation of Japji Sahib, Jaap Sahib, the 10 Sawayyas, Sodar Rehraas and Sohila. Every Sikh is also supposed take the Hukam (divine order) from the Guru Granth Sahib after awakening in the ambrosial hours of the morning (three hours before the dawn) before eating.

In his 52 Hukams, Guru Gobind Singh orders his followers to arise during Amritvela (early morning) and to recite the late evening prayer &quot;Sohila&quot; and the verse &quot;Pavan guru pani pita...&quot; before sleeping.

===Five Ks===


The five Ks (&quot;panj kakaar&quot;) are five articles of faith which all initiated (&quot;Amritdhari&quot;) Sikhs are obliged to wear. The symbols represent the ideals of Sikhism: honesty, equality, fidelity, meditating on Waheguru and never bowing to tyranny.
The five symbols are:

#&quot;Kesh&quot;: Uncut hair, usually tied and wrapped in a &quot;turban&quot;.
#&quot;Kanga&quot;: A wooden comb, usually worn under a &quot;turban&quot; to always also keep one&#x27;s hair clean and well-groomed.
#&quot;Kachera&quot;: Cotton undergarments, worn by both sexes; the &quot;kachera&quot; is a symbol of chastity and also a symbol of cleanliness. It is also historically appropriate in battle due to increased mobility and comfort when compared to a &quot;dhoti&quot;.
#&quot;Kara&quot;: An iron bracelet, a symbol of eternity, strength and a constant reminder of the strength of will to keep hands away from any kind of unethical practices.
#&quot;Kirpan&quot;: An iron blade in different sizes. In the UK, Sikhs can wear a small dagger, but in Punjab, they might wear a traditional curved sword from one to three feet in length. &quot;Kirpan&quot; is only a weapon of defense and religious protection, used to serve humanity and to be used against oppression.

=== Music and instruments ===

The Sikhs have a number of musical instruments, including the rebab, dilruba, taus, jori and sarinda. Playing the sarangi was encouraged by Guru Hargobind. The rebab was played by Bhai Mardana as he accompanied Guru Nanak on his journeys. The jori and sarinda were introduced to Sikh devotional music by Guru Arjan. The &quot;taus&quot; (Persian for &quot;peacock&quot;) was designed by Guru Hargobind, who supposedly heard a peacock singing and wanted to create an instrument mimicking its sounds. The dilruba was designed by Guru Gobind Singh at the request of his followers, who wanted a smaller instrument than the taus. After Japji Sahib, all of the shabad in the Guru Granth Sahib were composed as raags. This type of singing is known as Gurmat Sangeet.

When they marched into battle, the Sikhs would play a &quot;Ranjit nagara&quot; () to boost morale. Nagaras (usually two to three feet in diameter, although some were up to five feet in diameter) are played with two sticks. The beat of the large drums and the raising of the Nishan Sahib, meant that the Singhs were on their way.

== Khalistan movement ==
The Khalistan movement is a Sikh separatist movement, which seeks to create a separate country called Khalistān () in the Punjab state of India to serve as a homeland for Sikhs. The territorial definition of the proposed country Khalistan consists of the Punjab, India and includes Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir and Rajasthan.

Khalistan movement began as an expatriate venture. In 1971, the first explicit call for Khalistan was made in an advertisement published in the &quot;New York Times&quot; by an expat (Jagjit Singh Chohan). By proclaiming the formation of Khalistan, he was able to collect millions of dollars from the Sikh diaspora. On April 12, 1980, he declared the formation of the &quot;National Council of Khalistan,&quot; at Anandpur Sahib. He declared himself as the President of the council and named Balbir Singh Sandhu as its Secretary General. In May 1980, Chohan traveled to London and announced the formation of Khalistan. A similar announcement was made by Balbir Singh Sandhu in Amritsar, where he began releasing stamps and currency of Khalistan. The inaction of the authorities in Amritsar and elsewhere was decried as a political stunt by the Congress(I) party of Indira Gandhi by the Akali Dal, headed by the Sikh leader Harchand Singh Longowal.

The movement flourished in the Indian state of Punjab following Operation Blue Star and the Anti-Sikh Pogroms. As proponents were able to generate funding from a grieving diaspora. In June 1985, Air India Flight 182 was bombed by Babbar Khalsa, a pro-Khalistani terrorist organization. In January 1986, the Golden Temple was occupied by militants belonging to All India Sikh Students Federation and Damdami Taksal. On January 26, 1986, a gathering known as the Sarbat Khalsa (a de facto parliament) passed a resolution (&quot;gurmattā&quot;) favouring the creation of Khalistan. Subsequently, a number of rebel militant groups in favour of Khalistan waged a major insurgency against the government of India. Indian security forces suppressed the insurgency in the early 1990s, but Sikh political groups such as the Khalsa Raj Party and SAD (A) continued to pursue an independent Khalistan through non-violent means. Pro-Khalistan organisations such as Dal Khalsa (International) are also active outside India, supported by a section of the Sikh diaspora.

In the 1990s, the insurgency abated, and the movement failed to reach its objective due to multiple reasons including a heavy police crackdown on separatists, divisions among the Sikhs and loss of support from the Sikh population. However, various pro-Khalistan groups, both political and militant, remain committed to the separatist movement. There are claims of funding from Sikhs outside India to attract young people into militant groups. There have also been multiple claims that the movement is motivated and supported by the Pakistan&#x27;s external intelligence agency, the ISI.

==Demographics==
 
Sikhs number about 26–30 million worldwide, of whom 24–28 million live in India, which thus represents around 90 percent of the total Sikh population. About 76 percent of all Indian Sikhs live in the northern Indian state of Punjab, forming a majority of about 58 per cent of the state&#x27;s population, roughly around 16 million. Substantial communities of Sikhs live in the Indian states or union territories of Haryana, where they number around 1.2 million and form 4.9 percent of the population, Rajasthan (872,000 or 1.3 percent of the population), Uttar Pradesh (643,000, 0.3 percent), Delhi (570,000, 3.4 percent), Uttarakhand (236,000, 2.3 percent), Jammu and Kashmir (234,000, 1.9 percent), Chandigarh (138,000, 13.1 percent) and Himachal Pradesh (86,000, 1.2 percent).

Canada is home to the largest national Sikh proportion (2.1 percent of the total population) in the world. A substantial community of Sikhs exist in the western province of British Columbia, numbering nearly 300,000 persons and forming approximately 5.9 percent of the total population. This represents the third-largest Sikh proportion amongst all global administrative divisions, behind only Punjab and Chandigarh in India. Furthermore, British Columbia, Manitoba and Yukon hold the distinction of being three of the only four administrative divisions in the world with Sikhism as the second most followed religion among the population.

=== Census data and official statistics ===
As a religious minority, Sikhs have fought long and hard to get official status and to be counted in many countries across the world. Through the efforts of Sikh organisations and communities in their respective countries, there is now readily available population data on Sikhs as part of the census or official statistics in the following territories:

Note: Official statistics do not count unregistered arrivals or those who have not completed the census or surveys. However, they do provide for a much more accurate depiction of Sikh communities as opposed to estimates from various Sikh organisations whose estimates can vary vastly with no statistically valuable source. Thus, official statistics and census data is highly important and Sikh communities continue to push for census inclusion in many countries where they are still not counted.

=== Migration ===
Sikh migration from British India began in earnest during the second half of the 19th century, when the British completed their annexation of the Punjab, which led to Sikh migration throughout India and the British Empire. During the Raj, semiskilled Sikh artisans were transported from the Punjab to British East Africa to help build railroads. Sikhs emigrated from India after World War II, most going to the United Kingdom but many also to North America. Some Sikhs who had settled in eastern Africa were expelled by Ugandan dictator Idi Amin in 1972. Economics is a major factor in Sikh migration and significant communities exist in the United Kingdom, the United States, Malaysia, East Africa, Australia, Singapore and Thailand.

After the Partition of India in 1947, many Sikhs from what would become the Punjab of Pakistan migrated to India as well as to Afghanistan due to fear of persecution. Afghanistan was home to hundreds of thousands of Sikhs and Hindus as of the 1970s, but due to the wars in Afghanistan in the 2010s, the vast majority of Afghan Sikhs had migrated to India, Pakistan or the west.

Although the rate of Sikh migration from the Punjab has remained high, traditional patterns of Sikh migration favouring English-speaking countries (particularly the United Kingdom) have changed during the past decade due to stricter immigration laws. Moliner (2006) wrote that as a consequence of Sikh migration to the UK becoming &quot;virtually impossible since the late 1970s,&quot; migration patterns evolved to continental Europe. Italy is a rapidly growing destination for Sikh migration, with Reggio Emilia and Vicenza having significant Sikh population clusters. Italian Sikhs are generally involved in agriculture, agricultural processing, the manufacture of machine tools and horticulture.

===Growth===
Johnson and Barrett (2004) estimate that the global Sikh population increases annually by 392,633 (1.7% per year, based on 2004 figures); this percentage includes births, deaths and conversions. Primarily for socio-economic reasons, Indian Sikhs have the lowest adjusted growth rate of any major religious group in India, at 16.9 percent per decade (estimated from 1991 to 2001) and it has further declined to just 8.4 per cent in 2011 census report. Sikhs in the world have the lowest fertility rate of 1.6 children per women as per (2019–20) estimation research. The Sikh population has the lowest gender balance in India, with only 903 women per 1,000 men according to the 2011 Indian census. The estimated world&#x27;s Sikh population was over 30 million in 2020 and it will reach 42 million by 2050. It is expected to increase up to 62 million by 2100, given that the anticipated growth rate of 1.7% per year and adding at least 400,000 followers annually.

Since the Sikh growth rate dropped from 1.7% (16.9% in 1991 to 2001 estimate) to 0.8% (8.4% in 2001–2011) in 2011 report, hence based on their growth rate, their population in India will increase 196,316 (0.8% based on 2011 figures) per year and will reach 36 million in 2050, it expected to reach 52 million in 2100 given that the anticipated growth rate of 0.8% and adding at least 200,000 followers annually.

Sikhism is the fastest growing religion in Canada, Australia and New Zealand. The growth is mainly contributed by the immigration of Indian Sikhs there over the decades. Sikhism is fourth-largest religion in Canada, fifth-largest religion in Australia and New Zealand. The decadal growth of Sikhs is more in those countries as compared to the decadal growth of Sikh population in India, thus making them the fastest-growing religion there. Canada has the highest proportion of Sikhs in the globe, which stands at 2.1% as of 2021, as compared to India which stands at 1.7% as of 2011 respectively.

===Castes===
Sikhs have remained a relatively homogeneous ethnic group with exceptions. Caste may still be practiced by some Sikhs, despite Guru Nanak&#x27;s calls for treating everyone equally in Guru Granth Sahib.

Along with Guru Nanak, other Sikh gurus had also denounced the hierarchy of the caste system, however, they all belonged to the same caste, the Khatris. Most Sikhs belong to the Jat (Jatt), traditionally Agriculturist class in occupation. Despite being very small in numbers, the Khatri and Arora castes wield considerable influence within the Sikh community. Other common Sikh castes include Ahluwalias (Brewers), &quot;Kambojs&quot; or &quot;Kambos&quot; (Rural caste), &quot;Ramgarhias&quot; (Carpenters), Brahmins (Priestly class), Rajputs (Kshatriyas – Warriors), &quot;Sainis&quot;, &quot;Rai&quot; Sikh (Ironsmiths), &quot;Labanas&quot; (Merchants), &quot;Kumhars&quot; (Potters), &quot;Mazhabi&quot; (Cleaners) and the Ramdasia/&quot;Ravidasias&quot;(Chamar – Tanners).

Some Sikhs, especially those belonging to the landowning dominant castes, have not shed all their prejudices against the Dalits. While Dalits were allowed entry into the village gurdwaras, in some gurdwaras, they were not permitted to cook or serve &quot;langar&quot; (communal meal). Therefore, wherever they could mobilize resources, the Sikh Dalits of Punjab have tried to construct their own gurdwara and other local level institutions in order to attain a certain degree of cultural autonomy. In 1953, Sikh leader and activist Master Tara Singh succeeded in persuading the Indian government to include Sikh castes of the converted untouchables in the list of scheduled castes. In the Shiromani Gurdwara Prabandhak Committee, 20 of the 140 seats are reserved for low-caste Sikhs.

Other castes (over 1,000 members) include the Arain, Bhatra, Bairagi, Bania, Basith, Bawaria, Bazigar, Bhabra, Chamar, Chhimba (cotton farmers), Darzi, Dhobi, Gujar, Jhinwar, Kahar, Kalal, Kumhar, Lohar, Mahtam, Megh, Mirasi, Mochi, Nai, Ramgharia, Sansi, Sudh, Tarkhan and Kashyap

Karnail Singh Panjoli, member of the Shiromani Gurdwara Prabandhak Committee, says that there are several communities within the term Nanakpanthis too. Apart from Sindhi Hindus, &quot;There are groups like Sikhligarh, Vanjaarey, Nirmaley, Lubaney, Johri, Satnamiye, Udaasiyas, Punjabi Hindus, etc. who call themselves Nanakpanthis despite being Hindus.

== Diaspora ==
As Sikhs wear turbans and keep beards, Sikh men in Western countries have been mistaken for Muslim, Arab and/or Afghan since the September 11 attacks and the Iraq War. Several days after the 9/11 attacks, Sikh-American gas station owner Balbir Singh Sodhi was murdered in Arizona by a man who took Sodhi to be a member of al-Qaeda, marking the first recorded hate-crime in America motivated by 9/11. CNN would go on to suggest an increase in hate crimes against Sikh men in the US and the UK after the 9/11 attacks.

In an attempt to foster Sikh leaders in the Western world, youth initiatives by a number of organisations exist. The Sikh Youth Alliance of North America sponsors an annual Sikh Youth Symposium.

The Sikh diaspora has been most successful in the UK, and UK Sikhs have the highest percentage of home ownership (82%) of any religious community. UK Sikhs are the second-wealthiest religious group in the UK (after the Jewish community), with a median total household wealth of .

In May 2019, the UK government exempted &quot;Kirpan&quot; from the list of banned knives. The U.K. government passed an amendment by which Sikhs in the country would be allowed to carry kirpans and use them during religious and cultural functions. The bill was amended to ensure that it would not impact the right of the British Sikh community to possess and supply kirpans or religious swords. Similarly, the Sikh American Legal Defense and Education Fund overturned a 1925 Oregon law banning the wearing of turbans by teachers and government officials in 2010.

==Agriculture==
Historically, most Indians have been farmers and 66 per cent of the Indian population are engaged in agriculture. Indian Sikhs are employed in agriculture to a lesser extent; India&#x27;s 2001 census found 39 per cent of the working population of the Punjab employed in this sector. According to the Swedish political scientist Ishtiaq Ahmad, a factor in the success of the Indian green revolution was the &quot;Sikh cultivator, often the Jat and Kamboj or Kamboh, whose courage, perseverance, spirit of enterprise and muscle prowess proved crucial.&quot; However, Indian physicist Vandana Shiva wrote that the green revolution made the &quot;negative and destructive impacts of science (i.e., the green revolution) on nature and society&quot; invisible and was a catalyst for Punjabi Sikh and Hindu tensions despite a growth in material wealth.

== Sikhs in modern history ==


Manmohan Singh is an Indian economist, academic and politician who served as the 13th Prime Minister of India from 2004 to 2014. The first and only Sikh and non-Hindu in office, Singh was also the first prime minister since Jawaharlal Nehru to be re-elected after completing a full five-year term.

Notable Sikhs in science include nuclear scientist Piara Singh Gill, fibre-optics pioneer Narinder Singh Kapany; and physicist, science writer and broadcaster Simon Singh.

In business, the UK-based clothing retailers New Look and the Thai-based JASPAL were founded by Sikhs. India&#x27;s largest pharmaceutical company, Ranbaxy Laboratories, is headed by Sikhs. Apollo Tyres is headed by Onkar Singh Kanwar. In Singapore, Kartar Singh Thakral expanded his family&#x27;s trading business, Thakral Holdings, into assets totalling almost and is Singapore&#x27;s 25th-richest person. Sikh Bob Singh Dhillon is the first Indo-Canadian billionaire. Mastercard&#x27;s CEO was a Sikh named Ajaypal Singh Banga.

In sports, Sikhs include England cricketer Monty Panesar; former 400-metre runner Milkha Singh; his son, professional golfer Jeev Milkha Singh; Indian wrestler and actor Dara Singh; former Indian hockey team captains Sandeep Singh, Ajitpal Singh and Balbir Singh Sr.; former Indian cricket captain Bishen Singh Bedi; Harbhajan Singh, India&#x27;s most successful off spin cricket bowler; Yuvraj Singh, World Cup winning allrounder; Maninder Singh, World Cup winning off spinner; and Navjot Singh Sidhu, former Indian cricketer-turned-politician.

Sikhs in Bollywood, in the arts in general, include poet and lyricist Rajkavi Inderjeet Singh Tulsi; Gulzar; Jagjit Singh; Dharmendra; Sunny Deol; Diljit Dosanjh writer Khushwant Singh; actresses Neetu Singh, Simran Judge, Poonam Dhillon, Mahi Gill, Esha Deol, Parminder Nagra, Gul Panag, Mona Singh, Namrata Singh Gujral; and directors Gurinder Chadha and Parminder Gill.

Sikhs in Punjabi Music industry include Sidhu Moosewala, Diljit Dosanjh, Babu Singh Maan, Surjit Bindrakhia, Ammy Virk, Karan Aujla, Jazzy B, Miss Pooja.

In December 2022, the U.S. Marine Corps was compelled by a court order to allow two Sikhs to wear the turban and grow beards. This was a milestone for religious freedom and in the prevention of employment discrimination against Sikhs.

== In the Indian and British armies ==
According to a 1994 estimate, Punjabi Sikhs and Hindus comprised 10 to 15% of all ranks in the Indian Army. The Indian government does not release religious or ethnic origins of a military personnel, but a 1991 report by Tim McGirk estimated that 20% of Indian Army officers were Sikhs. Together with the Gurkhas recruited from Nepal, the Maratha Light Infantry from Maharashtra and the Jat Regiment, the Sikhs are one of the few communities to have exclusive regiments in the Indian Army. The Sikh Regiment is one of the most-decorated regiments in the army, with 73 Battle Honours, 14 Victoria Crosses, 21 first-class Indian Orders of Merit (equivalent to the Victoria Cross), 15 Theatre Honours, 5 COAS Unit Citations, two Param Vir Chakras, 14 Maha Vir Chakras, 5 Kirti Chakras, 67 Vir Chakras and 1,596 other awards. The highest-ranking general in the history of the Indian Air Force is a Punjabi Sikh, Marshal of the Air Force Arjan Singh. Plans by the United Kingdom Ministry of Defence for a Sikh infantry regiment were scrapped in June 2007.

Sikhs supported the British during the Indian Rebellion of 1857. By the beginning of World War I, Sikhs in the British Indian Army totaled over 100,000 (20 per cent of the force). Until 1945, fourteen Victoria Crosses (VC) were awarded to Sikhs, a per-capita regimental record. In 2002, the names of all Sikh VC and George Cross recipients were inscribed on the monument of the Memorial Gates on Constitution Hill, next to Buckingham Palace. Chanan Singh Dhillon was instrumental in campaigning for the memorial.

During World War I, Sikh battalions fought in Egypt, Palestine, Mesopotamia, Gallipoli and France. Six battalions of the Sikh Regiment were raised during World War II, serving in the Second Battle of El Alamein, the Burma and Italian campaigns and in Iraq, receiving 27 battle honours. Around the world, Sikhs are commemorated in Commonwealth cemeteries.

== See also ==
*History of Punjab
*Sikhism in Jammu and Kashmir
* Ganga Sagar (urn)
* Jat Sikh
* Sikh diaspora
* Sikh Empire
* List of British Sikhs
* Mazhabi Sikh
* Sects of Sikhism
* Sikhism by country
* Sikhism in India
* Turban training centre

== Notes ==

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== General and cited sources ===
* 


== Further reading ==
* &quot;The Sikhs in History: A Millennium Study&quot; by Sangat Singh, Noel Quinton King. New York, 1995. .
* &quot;A History of the Sikhs: Volume 1: 1469–1838&quot; by Khushwant Singh. Oxford India Paperbacks (2005). .
* &quot;The Sikhs&quot; by Patwant Singh. Image (2001). 
* &quot;The Sikhs of the Punjab&quot; by J. S. Grewal. Published by Cambridge University Press (1998). .
* &quot;The Sikhs: History, Religion, and Society&quot; by W. H. McLeod. Published by Columbia University Press (1989). 
* &quot;The Sikh Diaspora: Tradition and Change in an Immigrant Community (Asian Americans – Reconceptualising Culture, History, Politics)&quot; by Michael Angelo. Published by Routledge (1997). .
* &quot;Glory of Sikhism&quot; by R. M. Chopra, Sanbun Publishers, 2001, , .
* &quot;The Philosophical and Religious Thought of Sikhism&quot; by R. M. Chopra, 2014, Sparrow Publication, Kolkata, .
* &quot;The Construction of Religious Boundaries: Culture, Identity, and Diversity in the Sikh Tradition&quot; – H Oberoi – 1994 University of Chicago Press, .
* &quot;Architectural Heritage of a Sikh State: Faridkot&quot; by Subhash Parihar, Delhi: Aryan Books International, 2009, .
* &quot;A Study of Religions&quot; by R. M. Chopra, Anuradha Prakashan, New Delhi, 2015. .
== External links ==
* Sikhism at the BBC</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q582779" start="0" end="5" title="Sikhs" label="Sikhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q582779" start="16" end="20" title="Sikhs" label="Sikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11197007" start="38" end="58" title="ethnoreligious group" label="ethnoreligious group"/>
<link wikidata="Q9316" start="73" end="80" title="Sikhism" label="Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7018" start="121" end="133" title="15th century" label="15th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q169132" start="141" end="147" title="Punjab" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="162" end="181" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q83322" start="210" end="220" title="Guru Nanak" label="Guru Nanak"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="270" end="278" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7513656" start="375" end="405" title="Sikh Rehat Maryada" label="Sikh &amp;quot;Rehat Maryada&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289233" start="513" end="518" title="Singh" label="Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q113570786" start="627" end="631" title="Kaur" label="Kaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q130695" start="771" end="796" title="Caste system in India" label="India&amp;#x27;s caste system"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017520" start="879" end="894" title="sarbat da bhala" label="sarbat da bhala"/>
<link wikidata="Q3614685" start="1022" end="1035" title="Amrit Sanchar" label="Amrit Sanchar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004192" start="1083" end="1089" title="Khalsa" label="Khalsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505882" start="1175" end="1182" title="The Five Ks" label="five Ks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669035" start="1187" end="1203" title="Kesh (Sikhism)" label="&amp;quot;kesh&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q192392" start="1242" end="1248" title="dastār" label="dastār"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460567" start="1266" end="1272" title="turban" label="turban"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992510" start="1277" end="1293" title="Kara (Sikhism)" label="&amp;quot;kara&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573926" start="1330" end="1336" title="kirpan" label="kirpan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6344582" start="1450" end="1457" title="kachera" label="kachera"/>
<link wikidata="Q6362754" start="1494" end="1511" title="Kangha (Sikhism)" label="&amp;quot;kanga&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q582779" start="1618" end="1622" title="Sikh" label="Sikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q83572" start="1642" end="1660" title="Sikh Empire" label="ruled by the Sikhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="1722" end="1728" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q22424" start="1801" end="1807" title="Punjab, India" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="1817" end="1822" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q56061" start="1873" end="1896" title="administrative division" label="administrative division"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="2169" end="2181" title="ethnic group" label="ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q11197007" start="2241" end="2256" title="Ethnoreligious group" label="ethno-religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q6748115" start="2291" end="2310" title="Mandla v Dowell-Lee" label="Mandla v Dowell-Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q83322" start="2339" end="2349" title="Guru Nanak" label="Guru Nanak"/>
<link wikidata="Q9316" start="2378" end="2385" title="Sikhism" label="Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="2401" end="2406" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239254" start="2407" end="2413" title="Khatri" label="Khatri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6809882" start="2424" end="2434" title="Mehta Kalu" label="Mehta Kalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785900" start="2439" end="2450" title="Mata Tripta" label="Mata Tripta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7680405" start="2469" end="2477" title="Talwandi" label="Talwandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353077" start="2491" end="2504" title="Nankana Sahib" label="Nankana Sahib"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739" start="2511" end="2517" title="Lahore" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="Q369920" start="2696" end="2710" title="Arjan Dev" label="Guru Arjan Dev"/>
<link wikidata="Q312967" start="2751" end="2768" title="Guru Gobind Singh" label="Guru Gobind Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3694958" start="2880" end="2890" title="Panj Piare" label="Panj Piare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004192" start="2965" end="2971" title="Khalsa" label="Khalsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239254" start="3022" end="3028" title="Khatri" label="Khatri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645980" start="3059" end="3062" title="Jat" label="Jat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239254" start="3082" end="3088" title="Khatri" label="Khatri"/>
<link wikidata="Q47140" start="3094" end="3101" title="Brahmin" label="Brahmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q48727455" start="3243" end="3257" title="Pashaura Singh (Sikh scholar)" label="Pashaura Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915427" start="3319" end="3324" title="Varan Bhai Gurdas" label="Varan"/>
<link wikidata="Q192302" start="3334" end="3345" title="Bhai Gurdas" label="Bhai Gurdas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239254" start="3535" end="3541" title="Khatri" label="Khatri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332544" start="3735" end="3740" title="gotra" label="gotra"/>
<link wikidata="Q118905917" start="3751" end="3759" title="Brahmin Sikhs" label="Brahmins"/>
<link wikidata="Q37123545" start="3773" end="3781" title="Bhardwaj" label="Bhardwaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q6164703" start="3791" end="3795" title="Jat Sikh" label="Jats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291673" start="3814" end="3822" title="Randhawa" label="Randhawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6401326" start="3824" end="3830" title="Khera" label="Khehra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5269554" start="3832" end="3839" title="Dhillon" label="Dhillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q132180936" start="3844" end="3849" title="Pannu" label="Pannu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686262" start="3860" end="3868" title="Tarkhan (Punjab)" label="Tarkhans"/>
<link wikidata="Q19831612" start="3896" end="3901" title="Lohar (caste)" label="Lohar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7909241" start="3931" end="3935" title="Nai (caste)" label="Nais"/>
<link wikidata="Q6356373" start="3960" end="3967" title="Chhimba" label="Chhimba"/>
<link wikidata="Q17059270" start="4001" end="4008" title="Jhinwar" label="Machhis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361326" start="4040" end="4045" title="Dhobi" label="Dhobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q21872034" start="4073" end="4079" title="Kumhar" label="Kumhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697231" start="4105" end="4109" title="Teli" label="Teli"/>
<link wikidata="Q219517" start="4162" end="4171" title="Dalit" label="Outcastes"/>
<link wikidata="Q615468" start="4181" end="4189" title="Chandala" label="Chandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="4193" end="4200" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q18608878" start="4321" end="4326" title="Seth (surname)" label="Seths"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225077" start="4331" end="4337" title="Sarraf" label="Sarraf"/>
<link wikidata="Q108911685" start="4372" end="4381" title="Chowdhury" label="Chowdhury"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="4529" end="4542" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719071" start="4557" end="4567" title="Sikh gurus" label="Sikh gurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q369920" start="4584" end="4594" title="Guru Arjan" label="Guru Arjan"/>
<link wikidata="Q83653" start="4662" end="4670" title="Jahangir" label="Jahangir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019145" start="4675" end="4692" title="Guru Tegh Bahadur" label="Guru Tegh Bahadur"/>
<link wikidata="Q485547" start="4728" end="4737" title="Aurangzeb" label="Aurangzeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689049" start="4843" end="4850" title="Afghan–Sikh Wars" label="Afghans"/>
<link wikidata="Q24882752" start="4855" end="4862" title="Mughal-Sikh Wars" label="Mughals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578028" start="4888" end="4892" title="Misl" label="Misl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639665" start="4912" end="4933" title="Jassa Singh Ahluwalia" label="Jassa Singh Ahluwalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83572" start="5004" end="5015" title="Sikh Empire" label="Sikh Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q332620" start="5022" end="5043" title="Ranjit Singh" label="Maharaja Ranjit Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002426" start="5099" end="5108" title="Religious pluralism" label="pluralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q43100" start="5329" end="5336" title="Kashmir" label="Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q200667" start="5338" end="5344" title="Ladakh" label="Ladakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113311" start="5349" end="5357" title="Peshawar" label="Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631373" start="5359" end="5375" title="Hari Singh Nalwa" label="Hari Singh Nalwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260236" start="5407" end="5423" title="Sikh Khalsa Army" label="Sikh Khalsa Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412467" start="5431" end="5450" title="North-West Frontier Province" label="North-West Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q191333" start="5484" end="5495" title="Khyber Pass" label="Khyber Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q854323" start="5653" end="5661" title="Punjabis" label="Punjabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q129864" start="5679" end="5692" title="Indian mutiny" label="Indian mutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q642932" start="5783" end="5802" title="British Indian Army" label="British Indian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="5832" end="5843" title="British Raj" label="British Raj"/>
<link wikidata="Q14637172" start="5847" end="5861" title="colonial India" label="colonial India"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523459" start="6131" end="6142" title="Singh Sabha Movement" label="Singh Sabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4700213" start="6375" end="6389" title="Akali movement" label="Akali movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q337986" start="6413" end="6421" title="gurdwara" label="gurdwara"/>
<link wikidata="Q337986" start="6498" end="6506" title="Gurdwara" label="Gurdwara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498941" start="6606" end="6645" title="Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee" label="Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q12444025" start="6704" end="6732" title="Indian independence movement" label="Indian independence movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728782" start="6756" end="6772" title="Kapurthala State" label="Kapurthala State"/>
<link wikidata="Q60774530" start="6783" end="6812" title="opposition to the partition of India" label="oppose the partition of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096822" start="6892" end="6910" title="Chief Khalsa Diwan" label="Chief Khalsa Dewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q148034" start="6915" end="6934" title="Shiromani Akali Dal" label="Shiromani Akali Dal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634008" start="6942" end="6959" title="Master Tara Singh" label="Master Tara Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800631" start="6975" end="6992" title="Lahore Resolution" label="Lahore Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q148034" start="7080" end="7089" title="Shiromani Akali Dal" label="Akali Dal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511031" start="7165" end="7174" title="Khalistan movement" label="Khalistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634008" start="7245" end="7292" title="Tara Singh (activist)" label="strongly fought against the partition of Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q129053" start="7328" end="7347" title="partition of India" label="partition of Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q169132" start="7379" end="7385" title="Punjab" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="7404" end="7411" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="7470" end="7476" title="Hindus" label="Hindus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4478" start="7482" end="7493" title="Punjab (Pakistan)" label="West Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q19893558" start="7570" end="7585" title="Punjabi Muslims" label="Punjabi Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q22424" start="7591" end="7602" title="Punjab (India)" label="East Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q58635" start="8060" end="8067" title="Punjabi language" label="Punjabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33997" start="8069" end="8075" title="Sindhi language" label="Sindhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617" start="8080" end="8084" title="Urdu" label="Urdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260340" start="8115" end="8136" title="Punjabi Suba movement" label="Punjabi Suba movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634008" start="8206" end="8223" title="Tara Singh (activist)" label="Master Tara Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047" start="8650" end="8666" title="Jawaharlal Nehru" label="Jawaharlal Nehru"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261097" start="8749" end="8752" title="Deputy inspector general of police" label="DIG"/>
<link wikidata="Q5596649" start="8900" end="8907" title="granthi" label="granthi"/>
<link wikidata="Q118893" start="8916" end="8926" title="Akal Takht" label="Akal Takht"/>
<link wikidata="Q180422" start="8931" end="8944" title="Golden Temple" label="Golden Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468139" start="9003" end="9009" title="Langar (Sikhism)" label="langar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177" start="9726" end="9742" title="Himachal Pradesh" label="Himachal Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174" start="9758" end="9765" title="Haryana" label="Haryana"/>
<link wikidata="Q22424" start="9782" end="9788" title="Punjab, India" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="9903" end="9908" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q43433" start="10296" end="10306" title="Chandigarh" label="Chandigarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q467745" start="10334" end="10349" title="union territory" label="union territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q186050" start="10413" end="10429" title="Green Revolution" label="Green Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q148034" start="11193" end="11202" title="Akali Dal" label="Akali Dal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751372" start="11219" end="11244" title="Anandpur Sahib Resolution" label="Anandpur Sahib Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q148034" start="11800" end="11809" title="Akali Dal" label="Akali Dal"/>
<link wikidata="Q358874" start="11830" end="11856" title="Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale" label="Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751372" start="11950" end="11975" title="Anandpur Sahib Resolution" label="Anandpur Sahib Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149" start="13118" end="13131" title="Indira Gandhi" label="Indira Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987713" start="13141" end="13160" title="Operation Blue Star" label="Operation Blue Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q180422" start="13242" end="13255" title="Harmandir Sahib" label="Golden Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260321" start="13517" end="13537" title="Insurgency in Punjab" label="Insurgency in Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461213" start="13607" end="13615" title="Vaisakhi" label="Vaisakhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004192" start="13697" end="13703" title="Khalsa" label="Khalsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032001" start="13705" end="13716" title="Canada Post" label="Canada Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q235454" start="13850" end="13865" title="K. R. Narayanan" label="K. R. Narayanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q192392" start="14087" end="14093" title="Dastar" label="Dastar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3621572" start="14320" end="14332" title="Sikh architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q83322" start="14384" end="14394" title="Guru Nanak" label="Guru Nanak"/>
<link wikidata="Q16917503" start="14554" end="14566" title="United Sikhs" label="United Sikhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="14607" end="14611" title="United States" label="U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="14772" end="14778" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433670" start="14783" end="14789" title="Durrani" label="Afghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q332620" start="14969" end="14981" title="Ranjit Singh" label="Ranjit Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q83572" start="14990" end="14998" title="Sikh Raj" label="Sikh Raj"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739" start="15002" end="15008" title="Lahore" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="15013" end="15018" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q658386" start="15461" end="15469" title="baluster" label="baluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q180422" start="15517" end="15532" title="Harmandir Sahib" label="Harmandir Sahib"/>
<link wikidata="Q48403" start="15570" end="15578" title="Amritsar" label="Amritsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570211" start="15641" end="15647" title="Khanda (religious symbol)" label="Khanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3635002" start="15795" end="15807" title="Hola Mohalla" label="Hola Mohalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461213" start="15812" end="15820" title="Vaisakhi" label="Vaisakhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q82575198" start="16256" end="16271" title="The Singh Twins" label="The Singh Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479601" start="16336" end="16343" title="Bhangra (dance)" label="Bhangra"/>
<link wikidata="Q985135" start="16348" end="16354" title="Giddha" label="Giddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q120882895" start="16653" end="16666" title="Sikh painting" label="Sikh painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6362867" start="16695" end="16708" title="Kangra painting" label="Kangra school"/>
<link wikidata="Q6362859" start="16766" end="16777" title="Kangra Fort" label="Kangra Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q17311418" start="16885" end="16896" title="Guler State" label="Guler State"/>
<link wikidata="Q6150751" start="17271" end="17281" title="Janamsakhi" label="Janamsakhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695351" start="17601" end="17611" title="Bishnumati River" label="Bishnumati"/>
<link wikidata="Q229107" start="17715" end="17728" title="Mount Kailash" label="Mount Kailash"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037" start="17796" end="17805" title="Kathmandu" label="Kathmandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q203249" start="17975" end="17992" title="Guru Granth Sahib" label="Guru Granth Sahib"/>
<link wikidata="Q7513656" start="17999" end="18017" title="Sikh Rehat Maryada" label="Sikh Rahit Maryada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3614685" start="18056" end="18065" title="Amrit Sanskar" label="initiated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004192" start="18077" end="18083" title="Khalsa" label="Khalsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q972330" start="18133" end="18144" title="Japji Sahib" label="Japji Sahib"/>
<link wikidata="Q6109744" start="18146" end="18156" title="Jaap Sahib" label="Jaap Sahib"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413657" start="18158" end="18173" title="Tav-Prasad Savaiye" label="the 10 Sawayyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309852" start="18181" end="18188" title="Rehras" label="Rehraas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416200" start="18193" end="18199" title="kirtan Sohila" label="Sohila"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934569" start="18238" end="18243" title="Hukamnama" label="Hukam"/>
<link wikidata="Q203249" start="18268" end="18285" title="Guru Granth Sahib" label="Guru Granth Sahib"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002562" start="18309" end="18369" title="Amrit Velā" label="ambrosial hours of the morning (three hours before the dawn)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17062198" start="18393" end="18402" title="The 52 Hukams of Guru Gobind Singh" label="52 Hukams"/>
<link wikidata="Q312967" start="18404" end="18421" title="Guru Gobind Singh" label="Guru Gobind Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002562" start="18459" end="18468" title="Amrit Velā" label="Amritvela"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416200" start="18529" end="18535" title="Kirtan Sohila" label="Sohila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650920" start="18851" end="18859" title="Waheguru" label="Waheguru"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669035" start="18919" end="18923" title="Kesh (Sikhism)" label="Kesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460567" start="18979" end="18985" title="turban" label="turban"/>
<link wikidata="Q6362754" start="19000" end="19005" title="Kangha (Sikhism)" label="Kanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q6344582" start="19135" end="19142" title="Kachera" label="Kachera"/>
<link wikidata="Q850794" start="19383" end="19388" title="dhoti" label="dhoti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992510" start="19403" end="19407" title="Kara (Sikhism)" label="Kara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573926" start="19576" end="19582" title="Kirpan" label="Kirpan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450625" start="19983" end="19988" title="Seni rebab" label="rebab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818847" start="19990" end="19997" title="Esraj" label="dilruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440075" start="19999" end="20003" title="Taus (instrument)" label="taus"/>
<link wikidata="Q348878" start="20014" end="20021" title="Sarinda (instrument)" label="sarinda"/>
<link wikidata="Q608650" start="20035" end="20042" title="sarangi" label="sarangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q381425" start="20061" end="20075" title="Guru Hargobind" label="Guru Hargobind"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696391" start="20101" end="20113" title="Bhai Mardana" label="Bhai Mardana"/>
<link wikidata="Q369920" start="20225" end="20235" title="Guru Arjan" label="Guru Arjan"/>
<link wikidata="Q312967" start="20448" end="20465" title="Guru Gobind Singh" label="Guru Gobind Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q972330" start="20552" end="20563" title="Japji Sahib" label="Japji Sahib"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892651" start="20576" end="20582" title="shabad (hymn)" label="shabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q203249" start="20590" end="20607" title="Guru Granth Sahib" label="Guru Granth Sahib"/>
<link wikidata="Q216926" start="20625" end="20630" title="raga" label="raags"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328763" start="20665" end="20679" title="Gurmat Sangeet" label="Gurmat Sangeet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508330" start="20957" end="20969" title="Nishan Sahib" label="Nishan Sahib"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511031" start="21042" end="21060" title="Khalistan movement" label="Khalistan movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q22424" start="21160" end="21166" title="Punjab, India" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="21176" end="21181" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q22424" start="21293" end="21306" title="Punjab, India" label="Punjab, India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174" start="21320" end="21327" title="Haryana" label="Haryana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177" start="21329" end="21345" title="Himachal Pradesh" label="Himachal Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180" start="21347" end="21364" title="Jammu and Kashmir (state)" label="Jammu and Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437" start="21369" end="21378" title="Rajasthan" label="Rajasthan"/>
<link wikidata="Q476713" start="21412" end="21422" title="expatriate" label="expatriate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122658" start="21565" end="21584" title="Jagjit Singh Chohan" label="Jagjit Singh Chohan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7513668" start="21682" end="21695" title="Sikh diaspora" label="Sikh diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q589664" start="21795" end="21809" title="Anandpur Sahib" label="Anandpur Sahib"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="21951" end="21957" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q48403" start="22058" end="22066" title="Amritsar" label="Amritsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="22225" end="22236" title="Indian National Congress" label="Congress(I)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5654966" start="22304" end="22327" title="Harchand Singh Longowal" label="Harchand Singh Longowal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987713" start="22394" end="22413" title="Operation Blue Star" label="Operation Blue Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504310" start="22422" end="22439" title="Anti Sikh Riots" label="Anti-Sikh Pogroms"/>
<link wikidata="Q406588" start="22525" end="22556" title="Air India Flight 182" label="Air India Flight 182 was bombed"/>
<link wikidata="Q797601" start="22560" end="22573" title="Babbar Khalsa" label="Babbar Khalsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728983" start="22690" end="22724" title="All India Sikh Students Federation" label="All India Sikh Students Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212110" start="22729" end="22743" title="Damdami Taksal" label="Damdami Taksal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423509" start="22791" end="22804" title="Sarbat Khalsa" label="Sarbat Khalsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260321" start="22988" end="23004" title="Punjab insurgency" label="major insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122658" start="23145" end="23161" title="Khalsa Raj Party" label="Khalsa Raj Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498934" start="23166" end="23173" title="Shiromani Akali Dal (Amritsar)" label="SAD (A)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210126" start="23282" end="23308" title="Dal Khalsa (International)" label="Dal Khalsa (International)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7513668" start="23763" end="23782" title="Sikh diaspora" label="Sikhs outside India"/>
<link wikidata="Q22424" start="24202" end="24224" title="Punjab, India" label="Indian state of Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174" start="24408" end="24415" title="Haryana" label="Haryana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437" start="24494" end="24503" title="Rajasthan" label="Rajasthan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498" start="24548" end="24561" title="Uttar Pradesh" label="Uttar Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="24586" end="24591" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499" start="24616" end="24627" title="Uttarakhand" label="Uttarakhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q66278313" start="24652" end="24669" title="Jammu and Kashmir (union territory)" label="Jammu and Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q43433" start="24694" end="24704" title="Chandigarh" label="Chandigarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177" start="24733" end="24749" title="Himachal Pradesh" label="Himachal Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="24947" end="24963" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q56061" start="25130" end="25154" title="administrative divisions" label="administrative divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q22424" start="25168" end="25174" title="Punjab, India" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="25231" end="25239" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009" start="25244" end="25249" title="Yukon" label="Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q56061" start="25303" end="25327" title="administrative divisions" label="administrative divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385925" start="26348" end="26361" title="British India" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="26535" end="26549" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q876185" start="26629" end="26648" title="British East Africa" label="British East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7513730" start="26739" end="26753" title="Sikhism in United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q48231" start="26865" end="26873" title="Idi Amin" label="Idi Amin"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="27005" end="27013" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="27015" end="27026" title="East Africa" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7513700" start="27028" end="27037" title="Sikhism in Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="27039" end="27048" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="27053" end="27061" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q129053" start="27074" end="27092" title="Partition of India" label="Partition of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q4478" start="27140" end="27158" title="Punjab of Pakistan" label="Punjab of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="27191" end="27202" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360" start="27943" end="27956" title="Reggio Emilia" label="Reggio Emilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537" start="27961" end="27968" title="Vicenza" label="Vicenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="28054" end="28065" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q48803" start="28129" end="28141" title="horticulture" label="horticulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="28366" end="28380" title="socio-economic" label="socio-economic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7513710" start="28390" end="28402" title="Sikhism in India" label="Indian Sikhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q9316" start="29533" end="29540" title="Sikhism" label="Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483773" start="29576" end="29582" title="Sikhism in Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7513700" start="29584" end="29593" title="Sikhism in Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7513716" start="29598" end="29609" title="Sikhism in New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7513710" start="29666" end="29678" title="Sikhism in India" label="Indian Sikhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="29741" end="29747" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="29775" end="29784" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="29789" end="29800" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="29973" end="29979" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="30078" end="30083" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q130695" start="30219" end="30224" title="Caste system in India" label="Caste"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239254" start="30492" end="30498" title="Khatri" label="Khatri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6164703" start="30526" end="30529" title="Jat Sikh" label="Jat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239254" start="30628" end="30634" title="Khatri" label="Khatri"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795589" start="30639" end="30644" title="Arora" label="Arora"/>
<link wikidata="Q127583131" start="30741" end="30751" title="Ahluwalia (caste)" label="Ahluwalias"/>
<link wikidata="Q6356379" start="30763" end="30782" title="Kamboj" label="&amp;quot;Kambojs&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7289507" start="30820" end="30842" title="Ramgarhia" label="&amp;quot;Ramgarhias&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q47140" start="30857" end="30865" title="Brahmins" label="Brahmins"/>
<link wikidata="Q337487" start="30884" end="30890" title="Rajput" label="Rajput"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631449" start="30917" end="30935" title="Saini" label="&amp;quot;Sainis&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283678" start="30937" end="30957" title="Rai Sikh" label="&amp;quot;Rai&amp;quot; Sikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6466750" start="30972" end="30991" title="Labana" label="&amp;quot;Labanas&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q21872034" start="31005" end="31024" title="Kumhar" label="&amp;quot;Kumhars&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581324" start="31042" end="31049" title="Mazhabi" label="Mazhabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7289319" start="31075" end="31083" title="Ramdasia" label="Ramdasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7296690" start="31084" end="31106" title="Ravidasia" label="&amp;quot;Ravidasias&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q337986" start="31305" end="31313" title="gurdwara" label="gurdwara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468139" start="31376" end="31394" title="Langar (Sikhism)" label="&amp;quot;langar&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q11555014" start="31791" end="31807" title="scheduled castes" label="scheduled castes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498941" start="31816" end="31855" title="Shiromani Gurdwara Prabandhak Committee" label="Shiromani Gurdwara Prabandhak Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q294867" start="31958" end="31963" title="Arain" label="Arain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4901424" start="31965" end="31971" title="Bhatra Sikhs" label="Bhatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q48728401" start="31973" end="31980" title="Bairagi" label="Bairagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q185970" start="31982" end="31987" title="Vanika" label="Bania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867597" start="31989" end="31995" title="Basith" label="Basith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875185" start="32006" end="32013" title="Bazigar" label="Bazigar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4900488" start="32015" end="32021" title="Bhabra" label="Bhabra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111240" start="32023" end="32029" title="Chamar" label="Chamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6356373" start="32031" end="32055" title="Chhimba" label="Chhimba (cotton farmers)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361326" start="32064" end="32069" title="Dhobi" label="Dhobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274487" start="32071" end="32076" title="Gujjar" label="Gujar"/>
<link wikidata="Q17059270" start="32078" end="32085" title="Jhinwar" label="Jhinwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q142495" start="32087" end="32092" title="Kahar" label="Kahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6354795" start="32094" end="32099" title="Kalwar, Rajasthan" label="Kalal"/>
<link wikidata="Q21872034" start="32101" end="32107" title="Kumhar" label="Kumhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q19831612" start="32109" end="32114" title="Lohar (caste)" label="Lohar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6734924" start="32116" end="32122" title="Mahtam" label="Mahtam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6809094" start="32124" end="32128" title="Meghwal" label="Megh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6872901" start="32130" end="32136" title="Mirasi" label="Mirasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6887559" start="32138" end="32143" title="Mochi (Sikh)" label="Mochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7909241" start="32145" end="32148" title="Nai (caste)" label="Nai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7289507" start="32150" end="32159" title="Ramgarhia" label="Ramgharia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419000" start="32161" end="32166" title="Sansi people" label="Sansi"/>
<link wikidata="Q37558545" start="32168" end="32172" title="Sood (surname)" label="Sudh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686262" start="32174" end="32181" title="Tarkhan (Punjab)" label="Tarkhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6191089" start="32186" end="32193" title="Kashyap (caste)" label="Kashyap"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498941" start="32232" end="32271" title="Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee" label="Shiromani Gurdwara Prabandhak Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q25302527" start="32329" end="32340" title="Nanakpanthi" label="Nanakpanthi"/>
<link wikidata="Q107074453" start="32358" end="32371" title="Sindhi Hindus" label="Sindhi Hindus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666619" start="32424" end="32432" title="Nirmala (sect)" label="Nirmaley"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055023" start="32472" end="32486" title="Punjabi Hindus" label="Punjabi Hindus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460567" start="32578" end="32584" title="turban" label="turban"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="32615" end="32622" title="Western world" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="32656" end="32662" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="32664" end="32668" title="Arabs" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q16007968" start="32676" end="32682" title="Afghans" label="Afghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="32693" end="32713" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="32722" end="32730" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7513731" start="32769" end="32782" title="Sikhism in the United States" label="Sikh-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q30825090" start="32801" end="32819" title="Balbir Singh Sodhi" label="Balbir Singh Sodhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="32836" end="32843" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="32886" end="32894" title="al-Qaeda" label="al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7513664" start="33254" end="33274" title="Sikh Youth Symposium" label="Sikh Youth Symposium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="33496" end="33502" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573926" start="33604" end="33610" title="Kirpan" label="Kirpan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931523" start="33969" end="34015" title="Sikh American Legal Defense and Education Fund" label="Sikh American Legal Defense and Education Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="34034" end="34040" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="34240" end="34251" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6080672" start="34467" end="34480" title="Ishtiaq Ahmed (political scientist)" label="Ishtiaq Ahmad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100540" start="34513" end="34536" title="Indian green revolution" label="Indian green revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6164703" start="34578" end="34581" title="Jat Sikh" label="Jat"/>
<link wikidata="Q169470" start="34711" end="34720" title="physicist" label="physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q235451" start="34721" end="34734" title="Vandana Shiva" label="Vandana Shiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q41914" start="35018" end="35032" title="Manmohan Singh" label="Manmohan Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047" start="35242" end="35258" title="Jawaharlal Nehru" label="Jawaharlal Nehru"/>
<link wikidata="Q81197" start="35350" end="35357" title="nuclear physics" label="nuclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190235" start="35368" end="35384" title="Piara Singh Gill" label="Piara Singh Gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="35386" end="35398" title="fibre optics" label="fibre-optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q382760" start="35407" end="35428" title="Narinder Singh Kapany" label="Narinder Singh Kapany"/>
<link wikidata="Q442643" start="35476" end="35487" title="Simon Singh" label="Simon Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q12063852" start="35535" end="35543" title="New Look (store)" label="New Look"/>
<link wikidata="Q377214" start="35638" end="35658" title="Ranbaxy Laboratories" label="Ranbaxy Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780362" start="35680" end="35692" title="Apollo Tyres" label="Apollo Tyres"/>
<link wikidata="Q23799195" start="35706" end="35724" title="Onkar Singh Kanwar" label="Onkar Singh Kanwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933992" start="35903" end="35920" title="Bob Singh Dhillon" label="Bob Singh Dhillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150506" start="35934" end="35947" title="Indo-Canadian" label="Indo-Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q489921" start="35961" end="35978" title="Mastercard" label="Mastercard&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="35979" end="35982" title="CEO" label="CEO"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699676" start="36000" end="36019" title="Ajaypal Singh Banga" label="Ajaypal Singh Banga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107272" start="36065" end="36078" title="Monty Panesar" label="Monty Panesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q269014" start="36104" end="36116" title="Milkha Singh" label="Milkha Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379996" start="36147" end="36164" title="Jeev Milkha Singh" label="Jeev Milkha Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q165816" start="36192" end="36202" title="Dara Singh" label="Dara Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416087" start="36239" end="36252" title="Sandeep Singh" label="Sandeep Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q804684" start="36272" end="36287" title="Balbir Singh Sr." label="Balbir Singh Sr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519764" start="36320" end="36337" title="Bishen Singh Bedi" label="Bishen Singh Bedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9475" start="36339" end="36354" title="Harbhajan Singh" label="Harbhajan Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q675614" start="36385" end="36393" title="off spin" label="off spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q597080" start="36394" end="36408" title="bowling (cricket)" label="cricket bowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723790" start="36410" end="36422" title="Yuvraj Singh" label="Yuvraj Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767892" start="36454" end="36468" title="Maninder Singh (cricketer)" label="Maninder Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q270100" start="36505" end="36523" title="Navjot Singh Sidhu" label="Navjot Singh Sidhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q19594750" start="36639" end="36668" title="Rajkavi Inderjeet Singh Tulsi" label="Rajkavi Inderjeet Singh Tulsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q468339" start="36670" end="36676" title="Gulzar" label="Gulzar"/>
<link wikidata="Q107067" start="36678" end="36690" title="Jagjit Singh" label="Jagjit Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q379157" start="36692" end="36702" title="Dharmendra" label="Dharmendra"/>
<link wikidata="Q944546" start="36704" end="36714" title="Sunny Deol" label="Sunny Deol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276830" start="36716" end="36730" title="Diljit Dosanjh" label="Diljit Dosanjh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740716" start="36738" end="36753" title="Khushwant Singh" label="Khushwant Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q12069158" start="36765" end="36776" title="Neetu Singh" label="Neetu Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q17509774" start="36778" end="36790" title="Simran Judge" label="Simran Judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595934" start="36792" end="36806" title="Poonam Dhillon" label="Poonam Dhillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q487198" start="36808" end="36817" title="Mahi Gill" label="Mahi Gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q48622" start="36819" end="36828" title="Esha Deol" label="Esha Deol"/>
<link wikidata="Q236374" start="36830" end="36845" title="Parminder Nagra" label="Parminder Nagra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700181" start="36847" end="36856" title="Gul Panag" label="Gul Panag"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897722" start="36858" end="36868" title="Mona Singh" label="Mona Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q29533795" start="36870" end="36890" title="Namrata Singh Gujral" label="Namrata Singh Gujral"/>
<link wikidata="Q259348" start="36906" end="36921" title="Gurinder Chadha" label="Gurinder Chadha"/>
<link wikidata="Q55759824" start="36983" end="36998" title="Sidhu Moosewala" label="Sidhu Moosewala"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276830" start="37000" end="37014" title="Diljit Dosanjh" label="Diljit Dosanjh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838061" start="37016" end="37031" title="Babu Singh Maan" label="Babu Singh Maan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646397" start="37033" end="37050" title="Surjit Bindrakhia" label="Surjit Bindrakhia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20894408" start="37052" end="37061" title="Ammy Virk" label="Ammy Virk"/>
<link wikidata="Q58008320" start="37063" end="37074" title="Karan Aujla" label="Karan Aujla"/>
<link wikidata="Q6168478" start="37076" end="37083" title="Jazzy B" label="Jazzy B"/>
<link wikidata="Q3635993" start="37085" end="37095" title="Miss Pooja" label="Miss Pooja"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="37120" end="37137" title="United States Marine Corps" label="U.S. Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q355771" start="37468" end="37479" title="Indian Army" label="Indian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q207962" start="37678" end="37684" title="Gurkha" label="Gurkha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633326" start="37712" end="37734" title="Maratha Light Infantry" label="Maratha Light Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634294" start="37760" end="37772" title="Jat Regiment" label="Jat Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630099" start="37867" end="37880" title="Sikh Regiment" label="Sikh Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q52371" start="37910" end="37918" title="regiment" label="regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q262775" start="37941" end="37955" title="Battle Honours" label="Battle Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="37960" end="37974" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q764256" start="37993" end="38015" title="Indian Order of Merit" label="Indian Orders of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q262775" start="38055" end="38070" title="Battle honour" label="Theatre Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650629" start="38099" end="38115" title="Param Vir Chakra" label="Param Vir Chakra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2684997" start="38121" end="38136" title="Maha Vir Chakra" label="Maha Vir Chakra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860255" start="38141" end="38153" title="Kirti Chakra" label="Kirti Chakra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640487" start="38159" end="38169" title="Vir Chakra" label="Vir Chakra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791529" start="38306" end="38317" title="Arjan Singh" label="Arjan Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143261" start="38332" end="38366" title="Ministry of Defence (United Kingdom)" label="United Kingdom Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="38378" end="38386" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q129864" start="38464" end="38488" title="Indian Rebellion of 1857" label="Indian Rebellion of 1857"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="38510" end="38521" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q642932" start="38536" end="38555" title="British Indian Army" label="British Indian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="38626" end="38640" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143510" start="38741" end="38753" title="George Cross" label="George Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815408" start="38803" end="38817" title="Memorial Gates (Constitution Hill)" label="Memorial Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689806" start="38821" end="38838" title="Constitution Hill, London" label="Constitution Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q42182" start="38848" end="38865" title="Buckingham Palace" label="Buckingham Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5070665" start="38867" end="38887" title="Chanan Singh Dhillon" label="Chanan Singh Dhillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q192860" start="39016" end="39025" title="Gallipoli" label="Gallipoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630099" start="39060" end="39073" title="Sikh Regiment" label="Sikh Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="39093" end="39105" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q153376" start="39122" end="39149" title="Second Battle of El Alamein" label="Second Battle of El Alamein"/>
<link wikidata="Q221519" start="39155" end="39160" title="Burma Campaign" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q162333" start="39165" end="39182" title="Italian Campaign (World War II)" label="Italian campaigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q696848" start="39190" end="39194" title="Anglo-Iraqi War" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117074" start="39269" end="39281" title="Commonwealth War Graves Commission" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250734" start="39311" end="39328" title="History of Punjab" label="History of Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q122800072" start="39330" end="39358" title="Sikhism in Jammu and Kashmir" label="Sikhism in Jammu and Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q19891543" start="39361" end="39378" title="Ganga Sagar (urn)" label="Ganga Sagar (urn)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6164703" start="39381" end="39389" title="Jat Sikh" label="Jat Sikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7513668" start="39392" end="39405" title="Sikh diaspora" label="Sikh diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q83572" start="39408" end="39419" title="Sikh Empire" label="Sikh Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q55617020" start="39422" end="39443" title="List of British Sikhs" label="List of British Sikhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581324" start="39446" end="39458" title="Mazhabi Sikh" label="Mazhabi Sikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q24943451" start="39461" end="39477" title="Sects of Sikhism" label="Sects of Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7513696" start="39480" end="39498" title="Sikhism by country" label="Sikhism by country"/>
<link wikidata="Q7513710" start="39501" end="39517" title="Sikhism in India" label="Sikhism in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q7853734" start="39520" end="39542" title="Turban training centre" label="Turban training centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="40965" end="40968" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29407" wikidata="Q3978067" url="?curid=29407" title="Superworld">
<text>Superworld is a superhero-themed role-playing game published by Chaosium in 1983 that uses the generic &quot;Basic Role-Playing&quot; rules system. The game began as just one part of the &quot;Worlds of Wonder&quot; product before being published as a stand-alone game. In competition against other well-established and popular superhero games, &quot;Superworld&quot; never found an audience, and was discontinued after only three supplements were published for it.

==Game system==
&quot;Superworld&quot; uses Chaosium&#x27;s &quot;Basic Role-Playing&quot; system, with the addition of rules for super-powers.

===Components===
The game box contains 
*three rules booklets
** &quot;Superheroes Book&quot; (32 pages): character creation rules, the game system itself, and two character sheets with a male and female standing silhouette.
** &quot;Superpowers Book&quot; (40 pages): the Powers available to the characters, Advantages and Disadvantages that can be applied to them, and Disabilities that can affect the character. The interior covers have two more character sheets, this time with silhouettes of a male and female in flight.
** &quot;Gamemasters Book&quot; (40 pages): various aspects of a campaign, the legal system, animals, and the creation of organizations adapted to a superhero universe, with three specific examples: FIRE for Free Investigatory Research Enterprise, FORCE for Federal Organization for the Registration and Certification of Exotics, and the Omega Institute. The &quot;Gamemasters Book&quot; also includes two scenarios: &quot;Deadly Devices of Doctor Dread&quot;, which pits a team of heroes against the Dr. Dread of the title and his subordinates, and &quot;The Haunting&quot;, which describes a mysterious and ancient tome desired by a mystical super-villain.
* a booklet of character sheets, 
*a booklet of tables for the Gamemaster, 
* a page of cardboard figure silhouettes to be cut out, 
* some 6-sided, 8-sided, and 20-sided dice. 
Editions printed in 1984 and later also contain a 4-page booklet of errata.

===Skills resolution===
As with all games using the &quot;Basic Role-Playing&quot; rules, skill tests and combat are resolved by rolling percentile dice against skills. Rolls that are much lower than needed can result in increased effect, while high rolls can cause critical failures. Combat rules have many options and take into account three types of energy for damage: Kinetic, Electric, and Radiation.

==Publication history==
In 1982, Chaosium published &quot;Worlds of Wonder&quot; to demonstrate the flexibility of its generic &quot;Basic Role-Playing System&quot;; the game included three separate settings with the idea that player characters could be moved from setting to setting using the same rules system: 
* a fantasy setting called &quot;Magic World&quot;
* a science fiction setting, &quot;Future World&quot;
* a modern-day superhero setting, &quot;Superworld&quot;

The following year, &quot;Superworld&quot; was published as a stand-alone boxed set designed by Steve Perrin, with interior illustrations by Chris Marrinan, Markus Harrison, and cover art by Michael Dooney.
Three supplements followed:
*&quot;Trouble for HAVOC&quot; (1984), three linked &quot;Superworld&quot; adventures by Stephen Perrin, Yurek Chodak, Donald Harrington, and Charles Huber. The adventures could be converted for use with rival superhero games &quot;Villains &amp; Vigilantes&quot; or &quot;Champions&quot;. 
*&quot;Bad Medicine for Dr. Drugs&quot; (1984), a &quot;Superworld&quot; adventure by Ken Rolston: Teen-aged heroes try to uncover a drug distribution ring in their high school after a classmate dies of an overdose. The adventure could be converted for use with &quot;Champions&quot;.
*&quot;Superworld Companion&quot; (1985), a rules supplement that included new super powers, a detailed plan of a superhero base, and effects of climate on play.

Up against well-established rival superhero games &quot;Villains &amp; Vigilantes&quot; (Fantasy Games Unlimited) and including &quot;Champions&quot; (Hero Games), &quot;Superworld&quot; was not able to establish a strong player base, and no further supplements were released by Chaosium.

==Reception==
Jon Sutherland reviewed &quot;Superworld&quot; for &quot;White Dwarf&quot; #51, giving it an overall rating of 7 out of 10, and stated that &quot;This represents an intelligent attempt to provide a playable format for a difficult topic to simulate. The only rules that I have ever seen with anything like this in scope was the &quot;Golden Heroes&quot; FRP which may soon be available in a modified form from &quot;GW&quot;.&quot;

Steve Marsh reviewed &quot;Superworld&quot; in &quot;Ares Magazine&quot; #17 and commented that &quot;The game is anything but chaotic, but should create change in any gaming group that sees it. It is well done, and worth the price.&quot;

Crede Lambard reviewed &quot;Superworld&quot; in &quot;Space Gamer&quot; No. 70. Lambard commented that &quot;&quot;Superworld&quot; is very good. I doubt that it will ever supplant &quot;Champions&quot;, but it certainly supplements it . . . especially now that both Hero Games and Chaosium are putting out adventures with stats for both games.&quot;

==&quot;Wild Cards&quot;==
The &quot;Wild Cards&quot; series of science fiction books came from a &quot;Superworld&quot; campaign gamemastered by George R. R. Martin, and played in by other science fiction writers.

==See also==
* Metahuman
* George R. R. Martin

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q188784" start="16" end="25" title="superhero" label="superhero"/>
<link wikidata="Q160738" start="33" end="50" title="role-playing game" label="role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062574" start="64" end="72" title="Chaosium" label="Chaosium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2812867" start="76" end="80" title="1983 in games" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633765" start="109" end="127" title="Basic Role-Playing" label="Basic Role-Playing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036746" start="193" end="209" title="Worlds of Wonder (game)" label="Worlds of Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633765" start="533" end="551" title="Basic Role-Playing" label="Basic Role-Playing"/>
<link wikidata="Q930701" start="1860" end="1870" title="Gamemaster" label="Gamemaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036746" start="2517" end="2533" title="Worlds of Wonder (game)" label="Worlds of Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062345" start="2686" end="2703" title="player characters" label="player characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q394970" start="3010" end="3019" title="boxed set" label="boxed set"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499056" start="3032" end="3044" title="Steve Perrin" label="Steve Perrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q65076798" start="3178" end="3195" title="Trouble for HAVOC" label="Trouble for HAVOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4012863" start="3403" end="3428" title="Villains &amp;amp; Vigilantes" label="Villains &amp;amp; Vigilantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q281056" start="3444" end="3453" title="Champions (role-playing game)" label="Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q65062602" start="3469" end="3495" title="Bad Medicine for Dr. Drugs" label="Bad Medicine for Dr. Drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q287063" start="3548" end="3559" title="Ken Rolston" label="Ken Rolston"/>
<link wikidata="Q499271" start="3999" end="4022" title="Fantasy Games Unlimited" label="Fantasy Games Unlimited"/>
<link wikidata="Q281056" start="4044" end="4053" title="Champions (role-playing game)" label="Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q682202" start="4271" end="4282" title="White Dwarf (magazine)" label="White Dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789074" start="4699" end="4712" title="Ares (magazine)" label="Ares Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118748" start="4941" end="4952" title="Space Gamer" label="Space Gamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570312" start="5276" end="5286" title="Wild Cards" label="Wild Cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q930701" start="5369" end="5379" title="gamemaster" label="gamemaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q181677" start="5385" end="5404" title="George R. R. Martin" label="George R. R. Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3855553" start="5470" end="5479" title="Metahuman" label="Metahuman"/>
<link wikidata="Q181677" start="5482" end="5501" title="George R. R. Martin" label="George R. R. Martin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29408" wikidata="Q82409" url="?curid=29408" title="Samuel Taylor Coleridge">
<text>Samuel Taylor Coleridge ( ; 21 October 177225 July 1834) was an English poet, literary critic, philosopher, and theologian who was a founder of the Romantic Movement in England and a member of the Lake Poets with his friend William Wordsworth. He also shared volumes and collaborated with Charles Lamb, Robert Southey, and Charles Lloyd. 

He wrote the poems &quot;The Rime of the Ancient Mariner&quot; and &quot;Kubla Khan&quot;, as well as the major prose work &quot;Biographia Literaria&quot;. His critical works were highly influential, especially in relation to William Shakespeare, and he helped introduce German idealist philosophy to English-speaking cultures. Coleridge coined many familiar words and phrases, including &quot;suspension of disbelief&quot;. He had a major influence on Ralph Waldo Emerson and American transcendentalism.
Throughout his adult life, Coleridge had crippling bouts of anxiety and depression; it has been speculated that he had bipolar disorder, which had not been defined during his lifetime. He was physically unhealthy, which may have stemmed from a bout of rheumatic fever and other childhood illnesses. He was treated for these conditions with laudanum, which fostered a lifelong opium addiction.

Coleridge had a turbulent career and personal life with a variety of highs and lows, but his public esteem grew after his death, and he became considered one of the most influential figures in English literature. For instance, a 2018 report by &quot;The Guardian&quot; labelled him &quot;a genius&quot; who had progressed into &quot;one of the most renowned English poets.&quot; Organisations such as the Church of England celebrate his work during public events, such as a &quot;Coleridge Day&quot; in June, with activities including literary recitals.

==Early life and education==
Coleridge was born on 21 October 1772 in the town of Ottery St Mary in Devon, England. Samuel&#x27;s father was the Reverend John Coleridge, the well-respected vicar of St Mary&#x27;s Church, Ottery St Mary and was headmaster of the King&#x27;s School, a free grammar school established by King Henry VIII in the town. He had previously been master of Hugh Squier&#x27;s School in South Molton, Devon, and lecturer of nearby Molland.

John Coleridge had three children by his first wife. Samuel was the youngest of ten by the Reverend Mr. Coleridge&#x27;s second wife, Anne Bowden (1726–1809), probably the daughter of John Bowden, mayor of South Molton, Devon, in 1726. Coleridge suggests that he &quot;took no pleasure in boyish sports&quot; but instead read &quot;incessantly&quot; and played by himself. 

After John Coleridge died in 1781, 8-year-old Samuel was sent to Christ&#x27;s Hospital, a charity school which was founded in the 16th century in Greyfriars, London, where he remained throughout his childhood, studying and writing poetry. At that school Coleridge became friends with Charles Lamb, a schoolmate, and studied the works of Virgil and William Lisle Bowles.

In one of a series of autobiographical letters written to Thomas Poole, Coleridge wrote: &quot;At six years old I remember to have read &quot;Belisarius&quot;, &quot;Robinson Crusoe&quot;, and &quot;Philip Quarll&quot; – and then I found the &quot;Arabian Nights&#x27; Entertainments&quot; – one tale of which (the tale of a man who was compelled to seek for a pure virgin) made so deep an impression on me (I had read it in the evening while my mother was mending stockings) that I was haunted by spectres whenever I was in the dark – and I distinctly remember the anxious and fearful eagerness with which I used to watch the window in which the books lay – and whenever the sun lay upon them, I would seize it, carry it by the wall, and bask, and read.&quot;

Coleridge seems to have appreciated his teacher, as he wrote in recollections of his school days in &quot;Biographia Literaria&quot;: I enjoyed the inestimable advantage of a very sensible, though at the same time, a very severe master...At the same time that we were studying the Greek Tragic Poets, he made us read Shakespeare and Milton as lessons: and they were the lessons too, which required most time and trouble to bring up, so as to escape his censure. I learnt from him, that Poetry, even that of the loftiest, and, seemingly, that of the wildest odes, had a logic of its own, as severe as that of science; and more difficult, because more subtle, more complex, and dependent on more, and more fugitive causes...In our own English compositions (at least for the last three years of our school education) he showed no mercy to phrase, metaphor, or image, unsupported by a sound sense, or where the same sense might have been conveyed with equal force and dignity in plainer words...In fancy I can almost hear him now, exclaiming &quot;Harp? Harp? Lyre? Pen and ink, boy, you mean! Muse, boy, Muse? your Nurse&#x27;s daughter, you mean! Pierian spring? Oh aye! the cloister-pump, I suppose!&quot;...Be this as it may, there was one custom of our master&#x27;s, which I cannot pass over in silence, because I think it ...worthy of imitation. He would often permit our theme exercises...to accumulate, till each lad had four or five to be looked over. Then placing the whole number abreast on his desk, he would ask the writer, why this or that sentence might not have found as appropriate a place under this or that other thesis: and if no satisfying answer could be returned, and two faults of the same kind were found in one exercise, the irrevocable verdict followed, the exercise was torn up, and another on the same subject to be produced, in addition to the tasks of the day.

He later wrote of his loneliness at school in the poem &quot;Frost at Midnight&quot;:
&quot;With unclosed lids, already had I dreamt/Of my sweet birth-place.&quot;

From 1791 until 1794, Coleridge attended Jesus College, Cambridge. In 1792, he won the Browne Gold Medal for an ode that he wrote attacking the slave trade. 

In December 1793, he left the college and enlisted in the 15th (The King&#x27;s) Light Dragoons using the false name &quot;Silas Tomkyn Comberbache&quot;, perhaps because of debt or because the girl that he loved, Mary Evans, had rejected him. His brothers arranged for his discharge a few months later under the reason of &quot;insanity&quot; and he was readmitted to Jesus College, though he would never receive a degree from the university.

==Pantisocracy and marriage==


===Cambridge and Somerset===
At Jesus College, Coleridge was introduced to political and theological ideas then considered radical, including those of the poet Robert Southey with whom he collaborated on the play &quot;The Fall of Robespierre&quot;. Coleridge joined Southey in a plan, later abandoned, to found a utopian commune-like society, called Pantisocracy, in the wilderness of Pennsylvania. 

In 1795, the two friends became engaged to sisters Sara and Edith Fricker, with Sara becoming the subject of Coleridge&#x27;s poem, &quot;The Eolian Harp&quot;. They wed that year in St Mary Redcliffe, Bristol, but Coleridge&#x27;s marriage with Sara proved unhappy. By 1804, they were separated. When Coleridge wrote to his brother he laid all the blame on Sara: &quot;The few friends who have been Witnesses of my domestic life have long advised separation as the necessary condition of everything desirable for me...&quot; Subsequent biographers have not agreed with Coleridge&#x27;s negative view of the wife he called his &#x27;Sally Pally&#x27; when he first married her.

A third sister, Mary, had already married a third poet, Robert Lovell, and both became partners in Pantisocracy. Lovell also introduced Coleridge and Southey to their future patron Joseph Cottle, but died of a fever in April 1796. Coleridge was with him at his death.

In 1796, he released his first volume of poems entitled &quot;Poems on Various Subjects&quot;, which also included four poems by Charles Lamb as well as a collaboration with Robert Southey and a work suggested by his and Lamb&#x27;s schoolfriend Robert Favell. Among the poems were &quot;Religious Musings&quot;, &quot;Monody on the Death of Chatterton&quot; and an early version of &quot;The Eolian Harp&quot; entitled &quot;Effusion 35&quot;. A second edition was printed in 1797, this time including an appendix of works by Lamb and Charles Lloyd, a young poet to whom Coleridge had become a private tutor.

In 1796, he also privately printed &quot;Sonnets from Various Authors&quot;, including sonnets by Lamb, Lloyd, Southey and himself as well as older poets such as William Lisle Bowles.

Coleridge made plans to establish a journal, &quot;The Watchman&quot;, to be printed every eight days to avoid a weekly newspaper tax. The first issue of the short-lived journal was published in March 1796. It had ceased publication by May of that year.

The years 1797 and 1798, during which he lived in what is now known as Coleridge Cottage, in Nether Stowey, Somerset, were among the most fruitful of Coleridge&#x27;s life. In 1795, Coleridge met poet William Wordsworth and his sister Dorothy. (Wordsworth, having visited him and being enchanted by the surroundings, rented Alfoxton Park, a little over three miles [5 km] away.) Besides &quot;The Rime of the Ancient Mariner&quot;, Coleridge composed the symbolic poem &quot;Kubla Khan&quot;, written—Coleridge claimed—as a result of an opium dream, in &quot;a kind of a reverie&quot;; and the first part of the narrative poem &quot;Christabel&quot;. The writing of &quot;Kubla Khan&quot;, written about the Mongol emperor Kublai Khan and his legendary palace at Xanadu, was said to have been interrupted by the arrival of &quot;a person on business from Porlock&quot; – an event that has been embellished upon in such varied contexts as science fiction and Nabokov&#x27;s &quot;Lolita&quot;. During this period, he also produced his much-praised &quot;conversation poems&quot; &quot;This Lime-Tree Bower My Prison&quot;, &quot;Frost at Midnight&quot;, and &quot;The Nightingale&quot;.

In 1798, Coleridge and Wordsworth published a joint volume of poetry, &quot;Lyrical Ballads&quot;, which proved to be the starting point for the English romantic age. Wordsworth may have contributed more poems, but the real star of the collection was Coleridge&#x27;s first version of &quot;The Rime of the Ancient Mariner&quot;. It was the longest work and drew more praise and attention than anything else in the volume. In the spring Coleridge temporarily took over for Rev. Joshua Toulmin at Taunton&#x27;s Mary Street Unitarian Chapel while Rev. Toulmin grieved over the drowning death of his daughter Jane. Poetically commenting on Toulmin&#x27;s strength, Coleridge wrote in a 1798 letter to John Prior Estlin, &quot;I walked into Taunton (eleven miles) and back again, and performed the divine services for Dr. Toulmin. I suppose you must have heard that his daughter, (Jane, on 15 April 1798) in a melancholy derangement, suffered herself to be swallowed up by the tide on the sea-coast between Sidmouth and Bere (Beer). These events cut cruelly into the hearts of old men: but the good Dr. Toulmin bears it like the true practical Christian, – there is indeed a tear in his eye, but that eye is lifted up to the Heavenly Father.&quot;

===West Midlands and the North===

Coleridge also worked briefly in Shropshire, where he came in December 1797 as locum to its local Unitarian minister, Dr. Rowe, in their church in the High Street at Shrewsbury. He is said to have read his &quot;Rime of the Ancient Mariner&quot; at a literary evening in Mardol. He was then contemplating a career in the ministry, and gave a probationary sermon in High Street church on Sunday, 14 January 1798. William Hazlitt, a Unitarian minister&#x27;s son, was in the congregation, having walked from Wem to hear him. Coleridge later visited Hazlitt and his father at Wem but within a day or two of preaching he received a letter from Josiah Wedgwood II, who had offered to help him out of financial difficulties with an annuity of £150 (approximately £13,000 in today&#x27;s money) per year on condition he give up his ministerial career. Coleridge accepted this, to the disappointment of Hazlitt who hoped to have him as a neighbour in Shropshire.

From 16 September 1798, Coleridge and the Wordsworths left for a stay in Germany; Coleridge soon went his own way and spent much of his time in university towns. In February 1799 he enrolled at the University of Göttingen, where he attended lectures by Johann Friedrich Blumenbach and Johann Gottfried Eichhorn. During this period, he became interested in German philosophy, especially the transcendental idealism and critical philosophy of Immanuel Kant, and in the literary criticism of the 18th-century dramatist Gotthold Lessing. Coleridge studied German and, after his return to England, translated the dramatic trilogy &quot;Wallenstein&quot; by the German Classical poet Friedrich Schiller into English. He continued to pioneer these ideas through his own critical writings for the rest of his life (sometimes without attribution), although they were unfamiliar and difficult for a culture dominated by empiricism.

In 1799, Coleridge and the Wordsworths stayed at Thomas Hutchinson&#x27;s farm on the River Tees at Sockburn, near Darlington.
It was at Sockburn that Coleridge wrote his ballad-poem &quot;Love&quot;, addressed to Sara Hutchinson. The knight mentioned is the mailed figure on the Conyers tomb in ruined Sockburn church. The figure has a wyvern at his feet, a reference to the Sockburn Worm slain by Sir John Conyers (and a possible source for Lewis Carroll&#x27;s &quot;Jabberwocky&quot;). The worm was supposedly buried under the rock in the nearby pasture; this was the &quot;greystone&quot; of Coleridge&#x27;s first draft, later transformed into a &quot;mount&quot;. The poem was a direct inspiration for John Keats&#x27; famous poem &quot;La Belle Dame Sans Merci&quot;.

Coleridge&#x27;s early intellectual debts, besides German idealists like Kant and critics like Lessing, were first to William Godwin&#x27;s &quot;Political Justice&quot;, especially during his Pantisocratic period, and to David Hartley&#x27;s &quot;Observations on Man&quot;, which is the source of the psychology which is found in &quot;Frost at Midnight&quot;. Hartley argued that one becomes aware of sensory events as impressions, and that &quot;ideas&quot; are derived by noticing similarities and differences between impressions and then by naming them. Connections resulting from the coincidence of impressions create linkages, so that the occurrence of one impression triggers those links and calls up the memory of those ideas with which it is associated (See Dorothy Emmet, &quot;Coleridge and Philosophy&quot;).

Coleridge was critical of the literary taste of his contemporaries, and a literary conservative insofar as he was afraid that the lack of taste in the ever growing masses of literate people would mean a continued desecration of literature.

In 1800, he returned to England and shortly thereafter settled with his family and friends in Greta Hall at Keswick in the Lake District of Cumberland to be near Grasmere, where Wordsworth had moved. He stayed with the Wordsworths for eighteen months, but was a difficult houseguest, as his dependency on laudanum grew and his frequent nightmares would wake the children. He was also a fussy eater, to the frustration of Dorothy Wordsworth, who had to cook. For example, not content with salt, Coleridge sprinkled cayenne pepper on his eggs, which he ate from a teacup. His marital problems, nightmares, illnesses, increased opium dependency, tensions with Wordsworth, and a lack of confidence in his poetic powers fuelled the composition of &quot;Dejection: An Ode&quot; and an intensification of his philosophical studies.

In 1802, Coleridge took a nine-day walking holiday in the fells of the Lake District. Coleridge is credited with the first recorded descent of Scafell to Mickledore via Broad Stand, although this may have been more due to his getting lost than a purposeful new route. He coined the term mountaineering.

==Later life and increasing drug use==

===Travel and &quot;The Friend&quot;===
In 1804, he travelled to Sicily and Malta, working for a time as Acting Public Secretary of Malta under the Civil Commissioner, Alexander Ball, a task he performed successfully. He lived in San Anton Palace in the village of Attard. He gave this up and returned to England in 1806. Dorothy Wordsworth was shocked at his condition upon his return. 

From 1807 to 1808, Coleridge returned to Malta and then travelled in Sicily and Italy, in the hope that leaving Britain&#x27;s damp climate would improve his health and thus enable him to reduce his consumption of opium. Thomas De Quincey alleges in his &quot;Recollections of the Lakes and the Lake Poets&quot; that it was during this period that Coleridge became a full-blown opium addict, using the drug as a substitute for the lost vigour and creativity of his youth. It has been suggested that this reflects De Quincey&#x27;s own experiences more than Coleridge&#x27;s.

His opium addiction (he was using as much as two quarts of laudanum a week) now began to take over his life: he separated from his wife Sara in 1808, quarrelled with Wordsworth in 1810, lost part of his annuity in 1811, and put himself under the care of Dr. Daniel in 1814. His addiction caused severe constipation, which required regular and humiliating enemas.

In 1809, Coleridge made his second attempt to become a newspaper publisher with the publication of the journal entitled &quot;The Friend&quot;. It was a weekly publication that, in Coleridge&#x27;s typically ambitious style, was written, edited, and published almost entirely single-handedly. Given that Coleridge tended to be highly disorganised and had no head for business, the publication was probably doomed from the start. Coleridge financed the journal by selling over five hundred subscriptions, over two dozen of which were sold to members of Parliament, but in late 1809, publication was crippled by a financial crisis and Coleridge was obliged to approach &quot;Conversation Sharp&quot;, Tom Poole and one or two other wealthy friends for an emergency loan to continue. &quot;The Friend&quot; was an eclectic publication that drew upon every corner of Coleridge&#x27;s remarkably diverse knowledge of law, philosophy, morals, politics, history, and literary criticism. 

Although it was often turgid, rambling, and inaccessible to most readers, it ran for 25 issues and was republished in book form a number of times. Years after its initial publication, a revised and expanded edition of &quot;The Friend&quot;, with added philosophical content including his &#x27;Essays on the Principles of Method&#x27;, became a highly influential work and its effect was felt on writers and philosophers from John Stuart Mill to Ralph Waldo Emerson.

===London: final years and death===

From 1810 to 1820, Coleridge gave a series of lectures in London and Bristol – those on Shakespeare renewed interest in the playwright as a model for contemporary writers. Much of Coleridge&#x27;s reputation as a literary critic is founded on the lectures that he undertook in the winter of 1810–11, which were sponsored by the Philosophical Institution and given at Scot&#x27;s Corporation Hall off Fetter Lane, Fleet Street. These lectures were heralded in the prospectus as &quot;A Course of Lectures on Shakespeare and Milton, in Illustration of the Principles of Poetry.&quot; Coleridge&#x27;s ill-health, opium-addiction problems, and somewhat unstable personality meant that all his lectures were plagued with problems of delays and a general irregularity of quality from one lecture to the next. 

As a result of these factors, Coleridge often failed to prepare anything but the loosest set of notes for his lectures and regularly entered into extremely long digressions which his audiences found difficult to follow. However, it was the lecture on &quot;Hamlet&quot; given on 2 January 1812 that was considered the best and has influenced &quot;Hamlet&quot; studies ever since. Before Coleridge, &quot;Hamlet&quot; was often denigrated and belittled by critics from Voltaire to Dr. Johnson. Coleridge rescued the play&#x27;s reputation, and his thoughts on it are often still published as supplements to the text.

In 1812, he allowed Robert Southey to make use of extracts from his vast number of private notebooks in their collaboration &quot;Omniana; Or, Horae Otiosiores&quot;.

In August 1814, Coleridge was approached by John Murray, Lord Byron&#x27;s publisher, about the possibility of translating Goethe&#x27;s classic &quot;Faust&quot; (1808). Coleridge was regarded by many as the greatest living writer on the demonic and he accepted the commission, only to abandon work on it after six weeks. Until recently, scholars were in agreement that Coleridge never returned to the project, despite Goethe&#x27;s own belief in the 1820s that he had in fact completed a long translation of the work. In September 2007, Oxford University Press sparked a heated scholarly controversy by publishing an English translation of Goethe&#x27;s work that purported to be Coleridge&#x27;s long-lost masterpiece (the text in question first appeared anonymously in 1821).

From 1814 to 1816, Coleridge rented from a local surgeon, Mr Page, in Calne, Wiltshire. He seemed able to focus on his work and manage his addiction, drafting &quot;Biographia Literaria&quot;. A blue plaque marks the property today.

In April 1816, Coleridge, with his addiction worsening, his spirits depressed, and his family alienated, took residence in the Highgate homes, then just north of London, of the physician James Gillman, first at South Grove and later at the nearby 3, The Grove. It is unclear whether his growing use of opium (and the brandy in which it was dissolved) was a symptom or a cause of his growing depression. Gillman was partially successful in controlling the poet&#x27;s addiction. Coleridge remained in Highgate for the rest of his life, and the house became a place of literary pilgrimage for writers including Carlyle and Emerson.

In Gillman&#x27;s home, Coleridge finished his major prose work, the &quot;Biographia Literaria&quot; (mostly drafted in 1815, and finished in 1817), a volume composed of 23 chapters of autobiographical notes and dissertations on various subjects, including some incisive literary theory and criticism. He composed a considerable amount of poetry, of variable quality. He published other writings while he was living at the Gillman homes, notably the &quot;Lay Sermons&quot; of 1816 and 1817, &quot;Sibylline Leaves&quot; (1817), &quot;Hush&quot; (1820), &quot;Aids to Reflection&quot; (1825), and &quot;On the Constitution of the Church and State&quot; (1830). He also produced essays published shortly after his death, such as &quot;Essay on Faith&quot; (1838) and &quot;Confessions of an Inquiring Spirit&quot; (1840). A number of his followers were central to the Oxford Movement, and his religious writings profoundly shaped Anglicanism in the mid-nineteenth century.

Coleridge also worked extensively on the various manuscripts which form his &quot;Opus Maximum&quot;, a work which was in part intended as a post-Kantian work of philosophical synthesis. The work was never published in his lifetime, and has frequently been seen as evidence for his tendency to conceive grand projects which he then had difficulty in carrying through to completion. But while he frequently berated himself for his &quot;indolence&quot;, the long list of his published works calls this myth into question. Critics are divided on whether the &quot;Opus Maximum&quot;, first published in 2002, successfully resolved the philosophical issues he had been exploring for most of his adult life.

Coleridge died in Highgate, London on 25 July 1834 as a result of heart failure compounded by an unknown lung disorder, possibly linked to his use of opium. Coleridge had spent 18 years under the roof of the Gillman family, who built an addition onto their home to accommodate the poet.Faith may be defined as fidelity to our own being, so far as such being is not and cannot become an object of the senses; and hence, by clear inference or implication to being generally, as far as the same is not the object of the senses; and again to whatever is affirmed or understood as the condition, or concomitant, or consequence of the same. This will be best explained by an instance or example. That I am conscious of something within me peremptorily commanding me to do unto others as I would they should do unto me; in other words a categorical (that is, primary and unconditional) imperative; that the maxim (&quot;regula maxima&quot;, or supreme rule) of my actions, both inward and outward, should be such as I could, without any contradiction arising therefrom, will to be the law of all moral and rational beings. &quot;Essay on Faith&quot;

Carlyle described him at Highgate: &quot;Coleridge sat on the brow of Highgate Hill, in those years, looking down on London and its smoke-tumult, like a sage escaped from the inanity of life&#x27;s battle...The practical intellects of the world did not much heed him, or carelessly reckoned him a metaphysical dreamer: but to the rising spirits of the young generation he had this dusky sublime character; and sat there as a kind of &quot;Magus&quot;, girt in mystery and enigma; his Dodona oak-grove (Mr. Gilman&#x27;s house at Highgate) whispering strange things, uncertain whether oracles or jargon.&quot;

== Remains ==

Coleridge is now buried in St Michael&#x27;s Church, Highgate, London. He was originally buried at the Old Highgate Chapel, next to the main entrance of Highgate School. Coleridge could see the red door of the then new St Michael&#x27;s Church from his last residence across the green, where he lived with a doctor he had hoped might cure him (in a house owned by Kate Moss until 2022). 

When it was discovered Coleridge&#x27;s vault had become derelict, the coffins – Coleridge&#x27;s and those of his wife Sarah, daughter Sara Coleridge, son-in-law Henry Nelson Coleridge, and grandson Herbert Coleridge, were moved to St Michael&#x27;s Highgate after an international fundraising appeal in 1961.

A recent excavation revealed the coffins were not in the location most believed, the far corner of the crypt, but below a memorial slab in the nave inscribed with: &quot;Beneath this stone lies the body of Samuel Taylor Coleridge&quot;. St Michael&#x27;s plans to restore the crypt and allow public access.

==Poetry==

Coleridge is one of the most important figures in English poetry. His poems directly and deeply influenced all the major poets of the age. He was known by his contemporaries as a meticulous craftsman who was more rigorous in his careful reworking of his poems than any other poet, and Southey and Wordsworth were dependent on his professional advice. His influence on Wordsworth is particularly important because many critics have credited Coleridge with the very idea of &quot;Conversational Poetry&quot;. The idea of utilising common, everyday language to express profound poetic images and ideas for which Wordsworth became so famous may have originated almost entirely in Coleridge&#x27;s mind. It is difficult to imagine Wordsworth&#x27;s great poems, &quot;The Excursion&quot; or &quot;The Prelude&quot;, ever having been written without the direct influence of Coleridge&#x27;s originality.

As important as Coleridge was to poetry as a poet, he was equally important to poetry as a critic. His philosophy of poetry, which he developed over many years, has been deeply influential in the field of literary criticism. This influence can be seen in such critics as A. O. Lovejoy and I. A. Richards.

===&quot;The Rime of the Ancient Mariner&quot;, &quot;Christabel&quot;, and &quot;Kubla Khan&quot;===

Coleridge is arguably best known for his longer poems, particularly &quot;The Rime of the Ancient Mariner&quot; and &quot;Christabel&quot;. Even those who have never read the &quot;Rime&quot; have come under its influence: its words have given the English language the metaphor of an albatross around one&#x27;s neck, the quotation of &quot;water, water everywhere, nor any drop to drink&quot; (almost always rendered as &quot;but not a drop to drink&quot;), and the phrase &quot;a sadder and a wiser man&quot; (usually rendered as &quot;a sadder but wiser man&quot;). The phrase &quot;All creatures great and small&quot; may have been inspired by &quot;The Rime&quot;: &quot;He prayeth best, who loveth best;/ All things both great and small;/ For the dear God who loveth us;/ He made and loveth all.&quot; Millions more who have never read the poem nonetheless know its story thanks to the 1984 song &quot;Rime of the Ancient Mariner&quot; by the English heavy metal band Iron Maiden. &quot;Christabel&quot; is known for its musical rhythm, language, and its Gothic tale.

&quot;Kubla Khan&quot;, or, &quot;A Vision in a Dream, A Fragment&quot;, although shorter, is also widely known. Both &quot;Kubla Khan&quot; and &quot;Christabel&quot; have an additional &quot;Romantic&quot; aura because they were never finished. Stopford Brooke characterised both poems as having no rival due to their &quot;exquisite metrical movement&quot; and &quot;imaginative phrasing&quot;.

===Conversation poems===
The eight of Coleridge&#x27;s poems listed above are now often discussed as a group entitled &quot;Conversation poems&quot;. The term was coined in 1928 by George McLean Harper, who borrowed the subtitle of &quot;The Nightingale: A Conversation Poem&quot; (1798) to describe the seven other poems as well. The poems are considered by many critics to be among Coleridge&#x27;s finest verses; thus Harold Bloom has written, &quot;With &quot;Dejection&quot;, &quot;The Ancient Mariner&quot;, and &quot;Kubla Khan&quot;, &quot;Frost at Midnight&quot; shows Coleridge at his most impressive.&quot; They are also among his most influential poems, as discussed further below.

Harper considered that the eight poems represented a form of blank verse that is &quot;...more fluent and easy than Milton&#x27;s, or any that had been written since Milton&quot;. In 2006, Robert Koelzer wrote about another aspect of this apparent &quot;easiness&quot;, noting that Conversation poems such as &quot;Coleridge&#x27;s &quot;The Eolian Harp&quot; and &quot;The Nightingale&quot; maintain a middle register of speech, employing an idiomatic language that is capable of being construed as un-symbolic and un-musical: language that lets itself be taken as &#x27;merely talk&#x27; rather than rapturous &#x27;song&#x27;.&quot;

The last ten lines of &quot;Frost at Midnight&quot; were chosen by Harper as the &quot;best example of the peculiar kind of blank verse Coleridge had evolved, as natural-seeming as prose, but as exquisitely artistic as the most complicated sonnet.&quot; The speaker of the poem is addressing his infant son, asleep by his side:
&lt;poem&gt;
Therefore all seasons shall be sweet to thee,
Whether the summer clothe the general earth
With greenness, or the redbreast sit and sing
Betwixt the tufts of snow on the bare branch
Of mossy apple-tree, while the nigh thatch
Smokes in the sun-thaw; whether the eave-drops fall
Heard only in the trances of the blast,
Or if the secret ministry of frost
Shall hang them up in silent icicles,
Quietly shining to the quiet Moon.
&lt;/poem&gt;

In 1965, M. H. Abrams wrote a broad description that applies to the Conversation poems: &quot;The speaker begins with a description of the landscape; an aspect or change of aspect in the landscape evokes a varied by integral process of memory, thought, anticipation, and feeling which remains closely intervolved with the outer scene. In the course of this meditation the lyric speaker achieves an insight, faces up to a tragic loss, comes to a moral decision, or resolves an emotional problem. Often the poem rounds itself to end where it began, at the outer scene, but with an altered mood and deepened understanding which is the result of the intervening meditation.&quot; In fact, Abrams was describing both the Conversation poems and later poems influenced by them. Abrams&#x27; essay has been called a &quot;touchstone of literary criticism&quot;. As Paul Magnuson described it in 2002, &quot;Abrams credited Coleridge with originating what Abrams called the &#x27;greater Romantic lyric&#x27;, a genre that began with Coleridge&#x27;s &#x27;Conversation&#x27; poems, and included Wordsworth&#x27;s &quot;Tintern Abbey&quot;, Shelley&#x27;s &quot;Stanzas Written in Dejection&quot; and Keats&#x27;s &quot;Ode to a Nightingale&quot;, and was a major influence on more modern lyrics by Matthew Arnold, Walt Whitman, Wallace Stevens, and W. H. Auden.&quot;

==Literary criticism==

===&quot;Biographia Literaria&quot;===
In addition to his poetry, Coleridge also wrote influential pieces of literary criticism including &quot;Biographia Literaria&quot;, a collection of his thoughts and opinions on literature which he published in 1817. The work delivered both biographical explanations of the author&#x27;s life as well as his impressions on literature. The collection also contained an analysis of a broad range of philosophical principles of literature ranging from Aristotle to Immanuel Kant and Schelling and applied them to the poetry of peers such as William Wordsworth. Coleridge&#x27;s explanation of metaphysical principles were popular topics of discourse in academic communities throughout the 19th and 20th centuries, and T.S. Eliot stated that he believed that Coleridge was &quot;perhaps the greatest of English critics, and in a sense the last.&quot; Eliot suggests that Coleridge displayed &quot;natural abilities&quot; far greater than his contemporaries, dissecting literature and applying philosophical principles of metaphysics in a way that brought the subject of his criticisms away from the text and into a world of logical analysis that mixed logical analysis and emotion. However, Eliot also criticises Coleridge for allowing his emotion to play a role in the metaphysical process, believing that critics should not have emotions that are provoked by the work being studied. Hugh Kenner in &quot;Historical Fictions&quot;, discusses Norman Fruman&#x27;s &quot;Coleridge, the Damaged Archangel&quot; and suggests that the term &quot;criticism&quot; is too often applied to &quot;Biographia Literaria&quot;, which both he and Fruman describe as having failed to explain or help the reader understand works of art. To Kenner, Coleridge&#x27;s attempt to discuss complex philosophical concepts without describing the rational process behind them displays a lack of critical thinking that makes the volume more of a biography than a work of criticism.

In &quot;Biographia Literaria&quot; and his poetry, symbols are not merely &quot;objective correlatives&quot; to Coleridge, but instruments for making the universe and personal experience intelligible and spiritually covalent. To Coleridge, the &quot;cinque spotted spider,&quot; making its way upstream &quot;by fits and starts,&quot; [Biographia Literaria] is not merely a comment on the intermittent nature of creativity, imagination, or spiritual progress, but the journey and destination of his life. The spider&#x27;s five legs represent the central problem that Coleridge lived to resolve, the conflict between Aristotelian logic and Christian philosophy. Two legs of the spider represent the &quot;me-not me&quot; of thesis and antithesis, the idea that a thing cannot be itself and its opposite simultaneously, the basis of the clockwork Newtonian world view that Coleridge rejected. The remaining three legs—exothesis, mesothesis and synthesis or the Holy trinity—represent the idea that things can diverge without being contradictory. Taken together, the five legs—with synthesis in the center, form the Holy Cross of Ramist logic. The cinque-spotted spider is Coleridge&#x27;s emblem of holism, the quest and substance of Coleridge&#x27;s thought and spiritual life.

===Coleridge and the influence of the Gothic===

Coleridge wrote reviews of Ann Radcliffe&#x27;s books and &quot;The Mad Monk&quot;, among others. He comments in his reviews: &quot;Situations of torment, and images of naked horror, are easily conceived; and a writer in whose works they abound, deserves our gratitude almost equally with him who should drag us by way of sport through a military hospital, or force us to sit at the dissecting-table of a natural philosopher. To trace the nice boundaries, beyond which terror and sympathy are deserted by the pleasurable emotions, – to reach those limits, yet never to pass them, hic labor, hic opus est.&quot; and &quot;The horrible and the preternatural have usually seized on the popular taste, at the rise and decline of literature. Most powerful stimulants, they can never be required except by the torpor of an unawakened, or the languor of an exhausted, appetite...We trust, however, that satiety will banish what good sense should have prevented; and that, wearied with fiends, incomprehensible characters, with shrieks, murders, and subterraneous dungeons, the public will learn, by the multitude of the manufacturers, with how little expense of thought or imagination this species of composition is manufactured.&quot;

However, Coleridge used these elements in poems such as &quot;The Rime of the Ancient Mariner&quot; (1798), &quot;Christabel&quot; and &quot;Kubla Khan&quot; (published in 1816, but known in manuscript form before then) and certainly influenced other poets and writers of the time. Poems like these both drew inspiration from and helped to inflame the craze for Gothic romance. Coleridge also made considerable use of Gothic elements in his commercially successful play &quot;Remorse&quot;.

Mary Shelley, who knew Coleridge well, mentions &quot;The Rime of the Ancient Mariner&quot; twice directly in &quot;Frankenstein&quot;, and some of the descriptions in the novel echo it indirectly. Although William Godwin, her father, disagreed with Coleridge on some important issues, he respected his opinions and Coleridge often visited the Godwins. Mary Shelley later recalled hiding behind the sofa and hearing his voice chanting &quot;The Rime of the Ancient Mariner&quot;.

C. S. Lewis also makes mention of his name in &quot;The Screwtape Letters&quot; (as a poor example of prayer, in which the devils should encourage).

==Religious beliefs==

His father was an Anglican vicar; although Coleridge worked as a Unitarian preacher from 1796 to 1797, he eventually returned to the Church of England in 1814. His most noteworthy writings on religion are &quot;Lay Sermons&quot; (1817), &quot;Aids to Reflection&quot; (1825) and &quot;The Constitution of Church and State&quot; (1830).

===Theological legacy===
Despite being mostly remembered today for his poetry and literary criticism, Coleridge was also a theologian. His writings include discussions of the status of scripture, the doctrines of the Fall, justification and sanctification, and the personality and infinity of God. A major figure in the Anglican theology of his day, his writings are still regularly referred to by contemporary Anglican theologians. F. D. Maurice, F. J. A. Hort, F. W. Robertson, B. F. Westcott, John Oman and Thomas Erskine (once called the &quot;Scottish Coleridge&quot;) were all influenced by him.

==Political thinking==
Coleridge was also a political thinker. Early in life he was a political radical, and an enthusiast for the French Revolution. However, he subsequently developed a more conservative view of society, somewhat in the manner of Edmund Burke. He was critical of the French Constitution of 1799, adopted following the Coup of 18 Brumaire, which he regarded as oligarchic.

Although seen as cowardly treachery by the next generation of Romantic poets, Coleridge&#x27;s later thought became a fruitful source for the evolving radicalism of J. S. Mill. Mill found three aspects of Coleridge&#x27;s thought especially illuminating:

# First, there was Coleridge&#x27;s insistence on what he called &quot;the Idea&quot; behind an institution – its social function, in later terminology – as opposed to the possible flaws in its actual implementation. Coleridge sought to understand meaning from within a social matrix, not outside it, using an imaginative reconstruction of the past (&quot;Verstehen&quot;) or of unfamiliar systems.
# Secondly, Coleridge explored the necessary conditions for social stability – what he termed Permanence, in counterbalance to Progress, in a polity – stressing the importance of a shared public sense of community, and national education.
# Coleridge also usefully employed the organic metaphor of natural growth to shed light on the historical development of British history, as exemplified in the common law tradition – working his way thereby towards a sociology of jurisprudence.
Coleridge also despised Adam Smith.

==References in popular culture==
* Orson Welles&#x27;s &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; alludes to &quot;Kubla Khan&quot; (Kane builds a palace called Xanadu, and the poem is quoted in the newsreel segment).
* In &quot;Dirk Gently&#x27;s Holistic Detective Agency&quot; by Douglas Adams&quot;,&quot; Coleridge and his poems &quot;Kubla Khan&quot; and &quot;The Rime of the Ancient Mariner&quot; feature prominently in the plot.
* The song &quot;Xanadu&quot; by Rush was inspired by &quot;Kubla Khan&quot; (Neil Peart says it was also influenced by &quot;Citizen Kane&quot;).
* The American Disney cartoonist Don Rosa draw inspiration from &quot;Kubla Khan&quot; for his comic-story &quot;Return to Xanadu&quot;, sequel of Carl Barks&#x27;classic &quot;Tralla La&quot;. 
* The English heavy metal band Iron Maiden set &quot;The Rime of the Ancient Mariner&quot; to music.
* In the 2003 mystery thriller &quot;In the Cut&quot; by Jane Campion, Meg Ryan portrays a New York City English teacher named Annie Avery who recites lines from Coleridge&#x27;s poem &quot;The Picture, or The Lover&#x27;s Resolution&quot;.
* In the 1990 film &quot;Shipwrecked&quot;, a female character repeatedly quotes from &quot;Kubla Khan&quot;.
* The 1984 Frankie Goes to Hollywood song (and album), &quot;Welcome to the Pleasuredome&quot; is inspired by the poem &quot;Kubla Khan&quot; with a few lines mentioned in the title track.
* Tim Powers&#x27; 1983 fantasy book &quot;The Anubis Gates&quot; has Coleridge as a character, whom the principal cast travels back in time to meet, setting in motion the rest of the story&#x27;s events

==Collected works==
The current standard edition is &quot;The Collected Works of Samuel Taylor Coleridge,&quot; edited by Kathleen Coburn and many others from 1969 to 2002. This collection appeared across 16 volumes as Bollingen Series 75, published variously by Princeton University Press and Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul. The set is broken down as follows into further parts, resulting in a total of 34 separate printed volumes:
# &quot;Lectures 1795 on Politics and Religion&quot; (1971);
# &quot;The Watchman&quot; (1970);
# &quot;Essays on his Times in the Morning Post and the Courier&quot; (1978) in 3 vols;
# &quot;The Friend&quot; (1969) in 2 vols;
# &quot;Lectures, 1808–1819, on Literature&quot; (1987) in 2 vols;
# &quot;Lay Sermons&quot; (1972);
# &quot;Biographia Literaria&quot; (1983) in 2 vols;
# &quot;Lectures 1818–1819 on the History of Philosophy&quot; (2000) in 2 vols;
# &quot;Aids to Reflection&quot; (1993);
# &quot;On the Constitution of the Church and State&quot; (1976);
# &quot;Shorter Works and Fragments&quot; (1995) in 2 vols;
# &quot;Marginalia&quot; (1980 and following) in 6 vols; 
# &quot;Logic&quot; (1981);
# &quot;Table Talk&quot; (1990) in 2 vols;
# &quot;Opus Maximum&quot; (2002);
# &quot;Poetical Works&quot; (2001) in 6 vols (part 1 – Reading Edition in 2 vols; part 2 – Variorum Text in 2 vols; part 3 – Plays in 2 vols).

In addition, Coleridge&#x27;s letters are available in: &quot;The Collected Letters of Samuel Taylor Coleridge&quot; (1956–71), ed. Earl Leslie Griggs, 6 vols. (Oxford: Clarendon Press).

==See also==

* Coleridge&#x27;s theory of life
* Lake Poets
* Organic form
* Romantic epistemology

==References==
===Notes===
===Citations===
==Further reading==
*Barfield, Owen. &quot;What Coleridge Thought&quot; (Middletown: Wesleyan University Press, 1971). (Extensive study of Coleridge as philosopher.)
*Barth, J. Robert. &quot;Coleridge and Christian Doctrine&quot; (Cambridge: Harvard, 1969). (Examines Coleridge&#x27;s theology.)
*Barth, J. Robert. &quot;The Symbolic Imagination&quot; (New York: Fordham, 2001). (Examines Coleridge&#x27;s concept of &quot;symbol&quot;)
*
*Beer, John B. &quot;Coleridge the Visionary&quot; (London: Chatto and Windus, 1970). (Places Coleridge&#x27;s poems in the context of his thought.)
*Berkeley, Richard. &quot;Coleridge and the Crisis of Reason&quot; (Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan, 2007).
* (Close readings of all of the Conversation Poems)
*Bloom Harold (2010). Samuel Taylor Coleridge. ISBN 9781604138092.
*Boulger, J.D. &quot;Twentieth Century Interpretations of The Rime of the Ancient Mariner&quot; (Englewood Cliffs NJ: Prentice Hall, 1969). (Contains 20th-century readings of the &#x27;Rime&#x27;, including Robert Penn Warren, Humphrey House.)
*Cheyne, Peter. &quot;Coleridge&#x27;s Contemplative Philosophy&quot; (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2020).
*Class, Monika. &quot;Coleridge and the Kantian Ideas in England, 1796–1817&quot; (London: Bloomsbury, 2012).
*Coffman, Ralph J. “The Working Library of Samuel Taylor Coleridge.” &quot;The Journal of Library History.&quot; 21, no. 2 (1986): 277–99.
*Cutsinger, James S. &quot;The Form of Transformed Vision&quot; (Macon GA: Mercer, 1987). (Argues that Coleridge wants to transform his reader&#x27;s consciousness, to see nature as a living presence.)
*Engell, James. &quot;The Creative Imagination&quot; (Cambridge: Harvard, 1981). (Surveys the various German theories of imagination in the eighteenth century)
*Engell, James (2023). Samuel Taylor Coleridge, in Then &amp; Now: Romantic-Era Poets in the Encyclopedia Britannica, 1910-1911 
*Fruman, Norman. &quot;Coleridge the Damaged Archangel&quot; (London: George Allen and Unwin). (Examines Coleridge&#x27;s plagiarisms, taking a critical view)
*
*Hough, Barry, and Davis, Howard. &quot;Coleridge&#x27;s Laws: A Study of Coleridge in Malta&quot; (Cambridge: Open Book Publishers, 2010). .
* (Detailed, recent discussion of the Conversation Poems.)
*Leadbetter, Gregory. &quot;Coleridge and the Daemonic Imagination&quot; (Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan, 2011).
* Lefebure, Molly (1987). The bondage of love: a life of Mrs Samuel Taylor Coleridge (Repr., 1. American ed.). New York: Norton. ISBN 9780393024432.
* Lefebure, Molly (2013). Private lives of the ancient mariner: Coleridge and his children. Cambridge: Lutterworth Press. ISBN 071889300X.
*Lowes, John Livingston. &quot;The Road to Xanadu&quot; (London: Constable, 1930). (Examines sources for Coleridge&#x27;s poetry).
*Magnuson, Paul. &quot;Coleridge and Wordsworth: A Lyrical Dialogue&quot; (Princeton: Princeton UP, 1988). (A &#x27;dialogical&#x27; reading of Coleridge and Wordsworth.)
*McFarland, Thomas. &quot;Coleridge and the Pantheist Tradition&quot; (Oxford: OUP, 1969). (Examines the influence of German philosophy on Coleridge, with particular reference to pantheism)
*Modiano, Raimonda. &quot;Coleridge and the Concept of Nature&quot; (London: Macmillan, 1985). (Examines the influence of German philosophy on Coleridge, with particular reference to nature)
*Muirhead, John H. &quot;Coleridge as Philosopher&quot; (London: George Allen and Unwin, 1930). (Examines Coleridge&#x27;s philosophical texts)
*Murray, Chris. &quot;Tragic Coleridge&quot; (Farnham: Ashgate, 2013).link
*Parker, Reeve, &quot;Romantic Tragedies&quot; (Cambridge: CUP, 2011).
*Perkins, Mary Anne. &quot;Coleridge&#x27;s Philosophy: The Logos as Unifying Principle&quot; (Oxford: OUP, 1994). (Draws the various strands of Coleridge&#x27;s theology and philosophy together under the concept of the &#x27;Logos&#x27;.)
*Perry, Seamus. &quot;Coleridge and the Uses of Division&quot; (Oxford: OUP, 1999). (Brings out the play of language in Coleridge&#x27;s notebooks.)
*Riem, Natale Antonella. &quot;The One Life. Coleridge and Hinduism&quot; (Jaipur-New Delhi: Rawat, 2005).
*Reid, Nicholas. &quot;Coleridge, Form and Symbol: Or the Ascertaining Vision&quot; (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2006). (Argues for the importance of Schelling as a source for Coleridge&#x27;s philosophical texts).
*Richards, I. A. &quot;Coleridge on Imagination&quot; (London: Kegan Paul, 1934). (Examines Coleridge&#x27;s concept of the imagination)
*Richardson, Alan. &quot;British Romanticism and the Science of the Mind&quot; (Cambridge: CUP, 2001). (Examines the sources for Coleridge&#x27;s interest in psychology.)
*Shaffer, Elinor S. &quot;Kubla Khan and the Fall of Jerusalem&quot; (Cambridge: CUP, 1975). (A broadly structuralist reading of Coleridge&#x27;s poetical sources.)
*Stockitt, Robin. &quot;Imagination and the Playfulness of God: The Theological Implications of Samuel Taylor Coleridge&#x27;s Definition of the Human Imagination&quot; (Eugene, OR, 2011) (Distinguished Dissertations in Christian Theology).
*Toor, Kiran. &quot;Coleridge&#x27;s Chrysopoetics: Alchemy, Authorship and Imagination&quot; (Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars, 2011).
*Vallins, David. &quot;Coleridge and the Psychology of Romanticism: Feeling and Thought&quot; (London: Macmillan, 2000). (Examines Coleridge&#x27;s psychology.)
*Wheeler, K.M. &quot;Sources, Processes and Methods in Coleridge&#x27;s Biographia Literaria&quot; (Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1980). (Examines the idea of the active reader in Coleridge.)
*Woudenberg, Maximiliaan van. &quot;Coleridge and Cosmopolitan Intellectualism 1794–1804. The Legacy of Göttingen University&quot; (London: Routledge, 2018).
*Wright, Luke S. H., &quot;Samuel Taylor Coleridge and the Anglican Church&quot; (Notre Dame: Notre Dame University Press, 2010).

==External links==

* 
* Poems by Coleridge from the Poetry Foundation. Retrieved 19 October 2010
* Works of Coleridge at the University of Toronto. Retrieved 19 October 2010
* Friends of Coleridge Society. Retrieved 19 October 2010
* Selected works at Poetry-Index
* The re-opening of Coleridge Cottage near Exmoor.
*Celebrating a cave&#x27;s link to town&#x27;s most famous son – Samuel Taylor Coleridge by Martin Hesp at Western Morning Press
*Samuel Taylor Coleridge at the British Library
* Romantic but hardly romantic: Sarah Fricker&#x27;s life as Coleridge&#x27;s wife article by Pamela Davenport

=== Archival materials ===
* Coleridge archive at the Victoria University. Retrieved 19 October 2010
* . Retrieved 19 October 2010
* . General Collection, Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library, Yale University.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q82409" start="0" end="23" title="Samuel Taylor Coleridge" label="Samuel Taylor Coleridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="148" end="165" title="Romantic Movement" label="Romantic Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q583338" start="197" end="207" title="Lake Poets" label="Lake Poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q45546" start="224" end="242" title="William Wordsworth" label="William Wordsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q372984" start="289" end="301" title="Charles Lamb" label="Charles Lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q216838" start="303" end="317" title="Robert Southey" label="Robert Southey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5080292" start="323" end="336" title="Charles Lloyd (poet)" label="Charles Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q708177" start="365" end="396" title="The Rime of the Ancient Mariner" label="The Rime of the Ancient Mariner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089037" start="413" end="423" title="Kubla Khan" label="Kubla Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q803863" start="469" end="489" title="Biographia Literaria" label="Biographia Literaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="567" end="586" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q679842" start="612" end="627" title="German idealist" label="German idealist"/>
<link wikidata="Q951982" start="735" end="758" title="suspension of disbelief" label="suspension of disbelief"/>
<link wikidata="Q48226" start="794" end="813" title="Ralph Waldo Emerson" label="Ralph Waldo Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q331563" start="827" end="844" title="transcendentalism" label="transcendentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="965" end="981" title="bipolar disorder" label="bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q753904" start="1098" end="1113" title="rheumatic fever" label="rheumatic fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q898739" start="1186" end="1194" title="laudanum" label="laudanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="1490" end="1502" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="1645" end="1662" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247828" start="1877" end="1891" title="Ottery St Mary" label="Ottery St Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q23156" start="1895" end="1900" title="Devon" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17526083" start="1993" end="2030" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Church, Ottery St Mary" label="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Church, Ottery St Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744477" start="2053" end="2075" title="The King&amp;#x27;s School, Ottery St Mary" label="the King&amp;#x27;s School"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="2119" end="2129" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q21061967" start="2176" end="2187" title="Hugh Squier" label="Hugh Squier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247777" start="2205" end="2217" title="South Molton" label="South Molton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337761" start="2249" end="2256" title="Molland" label="Molland"/>
<link wikidata="Q677579" start="2699" end="2721" title="Christ&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="Christ&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608368" start="2781" end="2799" title="Greyfriars, London" label="Greyfriars, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q372984" start="2919" end="2931" title="Charles Lamb (writer)" label="Charles Lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="2972" end="2978" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5584023" start="2983" end="3003" title="William Lisle Bowles" label="William Lisle Bowles"/>
<link wikidata="Q18759411" start="3064" end="3076" title="Thomas Poole (tanner)" label="Thomas Poole"/>
<link wikidata="Q483034" start="3172" end="3187" title="Robinson Crusoe" label="Robinson Crusoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q657246" start="4049" end="4067" title="Ancient Greek literature" label="Greek Tragic Poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="4085" end="4096" title="Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q79759" start="4101" end="4107" title="John Milton" label="Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506178" start="5719" end="5736" title="Frost at Midnight" label="Frost at Midnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146700" start="5864" end="5888" title="Jesus College, Cambridge" label="Jesus College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4976481" start="5910" end="5927" title="Browne Medal" label="Browne Gold Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="5967" end="5978" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779496" start="6196" end="6206" title="Mary Evans" label="Mary Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q97570923" start="6582" end="6589" title="Radical politics" label="radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q216838" start="6619" end="6633" title="Robert Southey" label="Robert Southey"/>
<link wikidata="Q29024991" start="6678" end="6701" title="The Fall of Robespierre" label="The Fall of Robespierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q131156" start="6773" end="6779" title="utopia" label="utopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373919" start="6781" end="6788" title="Commune (intentional community)" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q7131857" start="6810" end="6822" title="Pantisocracy" label="Pantisocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732335" start="6999" end="7014" title="The Eolian Harp" label="The Eolian Harp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594599" start="7044" end="7061" title="St Mary Redcliffe" label="St Mary Redcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347010" start="7596" end="7609" title="Robert Lovell" label="Robert Lovell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6282295" start="7721" end="7734" title="Joseph Cottle" label="Joseph Cottle"/>
<link wikidata="Q111181156" start="7871" end="7896" title="Poems on Various Subjects" label="Poems on Various Subjects"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311301" start="8097" end="8114" title="Religious Musings" label="Religious Musings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901561" start="8128" end="8161" title="Monody on the Death of Chatterton" label="Monody on the Death of Chatterton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732335" start="8198" end="8213" title="The Eolian Harp" label="The Eolian Harp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5080292" start="8345" end="8358" title="Charles Lloyd (poet)" label="Charles Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q5584023" start="8582" end="8602" title="William Lisle Bowles" label="William Lisle Bowles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773675" start="8656" end="8668" title="The Watchman (periodical)" label="The Watchman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5144629" start="8931" end="8948" title="Coleridge Cottage" label="Coleridge Cottage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399305" start="8953" end="8966" title="Nether Stowey" label="Nether Stowey"/>
<link wikidata="Q45546" start="9061" end="9079" title="William Wordsworth" label="William Wordsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q448992" start="9095" end="9102" title="Dorothy Wordsworth" label="Dorothy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722165" start="9184" end="9197" title="Alfoxton House" label="Alfoxton Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q708177" start="9253" end="9284" title="The Rime of the Ancient Mariner" label="The Rime of the Ancient Mariner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089037" start="9335" end="9345" title="Kubla Khan" label="Kubla Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="9568" end="9574" title="Mongol" label="Mongol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523" start="9583" end="9594" title="Kublai Khan" label="Kublai Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q471765" start="9623" end="9629" title="Xanadu, Inner Mongolia" label="Xanadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170444" start="9691" end="9722" title="person on business from Porlock" label="person on business from Porlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q127149" start="9839" end="9845" title="Lolita" label="Lolita"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166415" start="9913" end="9931" title="conversation poems" label="conversation poems"/>
<link wikidata="Q17032661" start="9944" end="9974" title="This Lime-Tree Bower My Prison" label="This Lime-Tree Bower My Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506178" start="9988" end="10005" title="Frost at Midnight" label="Frost at Midnight"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10023" end="10038" title="The Nightingale: A Conversation Poem" label="The Nightingale"/>
<link wikidata="Q738958" start="10123" end="10138" title="Lyrical Ballads" label="Lyrical Ballads"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="10200" end="10212" title="romantic age" label="romantic age"/>
<link wikidata="Q6290272" start="10525" end="10539" title="Joshua Toulmin" label="Joshua Toulmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17555243" start="10558" end="10586" title="Taunton Unitarian Chapel" label="Mary Street Unitarian Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6253450" start="10746" end="10763" title="John Prior Estlin" label="John Prior Estlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q995647" start="11051" end="11059" title="Sidmouth" label="Sidmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q682112" start="11070" end="11074" title="Beer, Devon" label="Beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q23103" start="11361" end="11371" title="Shropshire" label="Shropshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q201970" start="11494" end="11504" title="Shrewsbury" label="Shrewsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q126596" start="11740" end="11755" title="William Hazlitt" label="William Hazlitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q301082" start="11834" end="11837" title="Wem" label="Wem"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011799" start="11887" end="11897" title="William Hazlitt (Unitarian minister)" label="his father"/>
<link wikidata="Q3186048" start="11968" end="11986" title="Josiah Wedgwood II" label="Josiah Wedgwood II"/>
<link wikidata="Q152838" start="12482" end="12505" title="University of Göttingen" label="University of Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q58588" start="12537" end="12564" title="Johann Friedrich Blumenbach" label="Johann Friedrich Blumenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q66355" start="12569" end="12594" title="Johann Gottfried Eichhorn" label="Johann Gottfried Eichhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279698" start="12674" end="12697" title="transcendental idealism" label="transcendental idealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789540" start="12702" end="12721" title="critical philosophy" label="critical philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="12725" end="12738" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Immanuel Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q58854" start="12751" end="12769" title="literary criticism" label="literary criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q34628" start="12800" end="12816" title="Gotthold Ephraim Lessing" label="Gotthold Lessing"/>
<link wikidata="Q22670" start="12962" end="12980" title="Friedrich Schiller" label="Friedrich Schiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q83368" start="13194" end="13204" title="empiricism" label="empiricism"/>
<link wikidata="Q515022" start="13293" end="13303" title="River Tees" label="River Tees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1847391" start="13307" end="13315" title="Sockburn" label="Sockburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q213181" start="13322" end="13332" title="Darlington" label="Darlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q862809" start="13544" end="13550" title="wyvern" label="wyvern"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552993" start="13583" end="13596" title="Sockburn Worm" label="Sockburn Worm"/>
<link wikidata="Q38082" start="13650" end="13663" title="Lewis Carroll" label="Lewis Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q250371" start="13677" end="13688" title="Jabberwocky" label="Jabberwocky"/>
<link wikidata="Q82083" start="13916" end="13926" title="John Keats" label="John Keats"/>
<link wikidata="Q188569" start="14102" end="14116" title="William Godwin" label="William Godwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q379902" start="14206" end="14219" title="David Hartley (philosopher)" label="David Hartley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025076" start="15157" end="15164" title="Keswick, Cumbria" label="Keswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q211778" start="15172" end="15185" title="Lake District" label="Lake District"/>
<link wikidata="Q23360" start="15189" end="15199" title="Cumberland, England" label="Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q920253" start="15211" end="15219" title="Grasmere (village)" label="Grasmere"/>
<link wikidata="Q898739" start="15354" end="15362" title="laudanum" label="laudanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q448992" start="15470" end="15488" title="Dorothy Wordsworth" label="Dorothy Wordsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q211778" start="15946" end="15959" title="Lake District" label="Lake District"/>
<link wikidata="Q463145" start="16018" end="16025" title="Scafell" label="Scafell"/>
<link wikidata="Q938767" start="16029" end="16039" title="Mickledore" label="Mickledore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="16284" end="16290" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="16295" end="16300" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q445924" start="16387" end="16401" title="Alexander Ball" label="Alexander Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549852" start="16449" end="16465" title="San Anton Palace" label="San Anton Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q44557" start="16484" end="16490" title="Attard" label="Attard"/>
<link wikidata="Q317160" start="16829" end="16846" title="Thomas De Quincey" label="Thomas De Quincey"/>
<link wikidata="Q898739" start="17243" end="17251" title="laudanum" label="laudanum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17674" end="17684" title="The Friend (Coleridge)" label="The Friend"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328980" start="18215" end="18245" title="Richard Sharp (politician)" label="&amp;quot;Conversation Sharp&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q50020" start="18957" end="18973" title="John Stuart Mill" label="John Stuart Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q48226" start="18977" end="18996" title="Ralph Waldo Emerson" label="Ralph Waldo Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="19105" end="19112" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="19124" end="19135" title="William Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q41567" start="20099" end="20105" title="Hamlet" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="20311" end="20319" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q183266" start="20323" end="20334" title="Samuel Johnson" label="Dr. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232629" start="20672" end="20683" title="John Murray (publishing house)" label="John Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679" start="20685" end="20695" title="Lord Byron" label="Lord Byron"/>
<link wikidata="Q29478" start="20779" end="20784" title="Goethe&amp;#x27;s Faust" label="Faust"/>
<link wikidata="Q323996" start="20867" end="20874" title="Demonology" label="demonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="21167" end="21190" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235307" start="21479" end="21484" title="Calne" label="Calne"/>
<link wikidata="Q803863" start="21574" end="21594" title="Biographia Literaria" label="Biographia Literaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q885849" start="21604" end="21615" title="blue plaque" label="blue plaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q123947" start="21770" end="21778" title="Highgate" label="Highgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17548805" start="21890" end="21902" title="3, The Grove, Highgate" label="3, The Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q151403" start="22252" end="22259" title="Thomas Carlyle" label="Carlyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137662" start="23142" end="23157" title="Oxford Movement" label="Oxford Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q107482138" start="23330" end="23342" title="Opus Maximum" label="Opus Maximum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9453" start="23410" end="23433" title="Dialectic" label="philosophical synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17548714" start="25749" end="25783" title="St Michael&amp;#x27;s Church, Highgate" label="St Michael&amp;#x27;s Church, Highgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560910" start="25875" end="25890" title="Highgate School" label="Highgate School"/>
<link wikidata="Q212531" start="26086" end="26095" title="Kate Moss" label="Kate Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960565" start="26247" end="26261" title="Sara Coleridge" label="Sara Coleridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5726248" start="26274" end="26296" title="Henry Nelson Coleridge" label="Henry Nelson Coleridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5733811" start="26311" end="26328" title="Herbert Coleridge" label="Herbert Coleridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671604" start="26793" end="26807" title="English poetry" label="English poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q58854" start="27847" end="27865" title="literary criticism" label="literary criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q504753" start="27913" end="27926" title="A. O. Lovejoy" label="A. O. Lovejoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q718585" start="27931" end="27945" title="I. A. Richards" label="I. A. Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q708177" start="28125" end="28156" title="The Rime of the Ancient Mariner" label="The Rime of the Ancient Mariner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790646" start="28173" end="28183" title="Christabel (poem)" label="Christabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709452" start="28320" end="28328" title="Albatross (metaphor)" label="metaphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q42482" start="29025" end="29036" title="Iron Maiden" label="Iron Maiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790646" start="29044" end="29054" title="Christabel (poem)" label="Christabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q20669641" start="29112" end="29118" title="Gothic fiction" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089037" start="29132" end="29142" title="Kubla Khan" label="Kubla Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="29319" end="29327" title="Romanticism" label="Romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5587422" start="29373" end="29388" title="Stopford Brooke (chaplain)" label="Stopford Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q345612" start="29946" end="29958" title="Harold Bloom" label="Harold Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q739672" start="30281" end="30292" title="blank verse" label="blank verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523584" start="31646" end="31658" title="M. H. Abrams" label="M. H. Abrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q803863" start="33166" end="33186" title="Biographia Literaria" label="Biographia Literaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="33523" end="33536" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Immanuel Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q60070" start="33541" end="33550" title="Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling" label="Schelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q45546" start="33599" end="33617" title="William Wordsworth" label="William Wordsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="33651" end="33663" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysical"/>
<link wikidata="Q37767" start="33776" end="33786" title="T.S. Eliot" label="T.S. Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334954" start="34442" end="34453" title="Hugh Kenner" label="Hugh Kenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q231944" start="36371" end="36384" title="Ann Radcliffe" label="Ann Radcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q20669641" start="37936" end="37942" title="Gothic fiction" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19630467" start="38044" end="38063" title="Remorse (play)" label="&amp;quot;Remorse&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q47152" start="38066" end="38078" title="Mary Shelley" label="Mary Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q150827" start="38182" end="38194" title="Frankenstein" label="Frankenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q188569" start="38273" end="38287" title="William Godwin" label="William Godwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9204" start="38547" end="38558" title="C. S. Lewis" label="C. S. Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267287" start="38599" end="38620" title="The Screwtape Letters" label="The Screwtape Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="38738" end="38746" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q106687" start="38785" end="38794" title="Unitarianism" label="Unitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="38853" end="38870" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135949" start="39274" end="39278" title="Fall of man" label="Fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q961022" start="39490" end="39503" title="Frederick Denison Maurice" label="F. D. Maurice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374608" start="39505" end="39518" title="Fenton Hort" label="F. J. A. Hort"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499104" start="39520" end="39535" title="Frederick William Robertson" label="F. W. Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q781494" start="39537" end="39551" title="Brooke Foss Westcott" label="B. F. Westcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789381" start="39567" end="39581" title="Thomas Erskine (theologian)" label="Thomas Erskine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="39791" end="39808" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q165792" start="39908" end="39920" title="Edmund Burke" label="Edmund Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347313" start="39945" end="39972" title="Constitution of the Year VIII" label="French Constitution of 1799"/>
<link wikidata="Q620965" start="39996" end="40015" title="Coup of 18 Brumaire" label="Coup of 18 Brumaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q79751" start="40038" end="40048" title="oligarchy" label="oligarchic"/>
<link wikidata="Q79228" start="40202" end="40212" title="Philosophical Radicals" label="radicalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q50020" start="40216" end="40226" title="J. S. Mill" label="J. S. Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297282" start="40663" end="40672" title="Verstehen" label="Verstehen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="41214" end="41224" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q24829" start="41263" end="41275" title="Orson Welles" label="Orson Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q24815" start="41289" end="41301" title="Citizen Kane" label="Citizen Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q902712" start="41439" end="41483" title="Dirk Gently&amp;#x27;s Holistic Detective Agency" label="Dirk Gently&amp;#x27;s Holistic Detective Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q42" start="41493" end="41506" title="Douglas Adams" label="Douglas Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q8042881" start="41665" end="41671" title="Xanadu (Rush song)" label="Xanadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q203871" start="41681" end="41685" title="Rush (band)" label="Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q313668" start="41726" end="41736" title="Neil Peart" label="Neil Peart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="41810" end="41816" title="Disney" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q24184" start="41828" end="41836" title="Don Rosa" label="Don Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11941" start="41942" end="41952" title="Carl Barks" label="Carl Barks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323475" start="41972" end="41981" title="Tralla La" label="Tralla La"/>
<link wikidata="Q42482" start="42021" end="42032" title="Iron Maiden" label="Iron Maiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q308899" start="42037" end="42089" title="Rime of the Ancient Mariner (Iron Maiden song)" label="&amp;quot;The Rime of the Ancient Mariner&amp;quot; to music"/>
<link wikidata="Q59572" start="42128" end="42138" title="In the Cut (film)" label="In the Cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q230448" start="42148" end="42160" title="Jane Campion" label="Jane Campion"/>
<link wikidata="Q167498" start="42162" end="42170" title="Meg Ryan" label="Meg Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431878" start="42357" end="42368" title="Shipwrecked (1990 film)" label="Shipwrecked"/>
<link wikidata="Q73597" start="42453" end="42478" title="Frankie Goes to Hollywood" label="Frankie Goes to Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q966700" start="42489" end="42494" title="Welcome_to_the_Pleasuredome" label="album"/>
<link wikidata="Q7980829" start="42503" end="42530" title="Welcome_to_the_Pleasuredome_(song)" label="Welcome to the Pleasuredome"/>
<link wikidata="Q363810" start="42633" end="42643" title="Tim Powers" label="Tim Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q128324" start="42674" end="42690" title="The Anubis Gates" label="The Anubis Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376682" start="42958" end="42973" title="Kathleen Coburn" label="Kathleen Coburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q25226657" start="44406" end="44437" title="Coleridge&amp;#x27;s theory of life" label="Coleridge&amp;#x27;s theory of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q583338" start="44440" end="44450" title="Lake Poets" label="Lake Poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101850" start="44453" end="44465" title="Organic form" label="Organic form"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166047" start="44468" end="44489" title="Romantic epistemology" label="Romantic epistemology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221357" start="44974" end="44987" title="John Beer" label="Beer, John B."/>
<link wikidata="Q6132093" start="45953" end="45972" title="James Cutsinger" label="Cutsinger, James S."/>
<link wikidata="Q6245009" start="47207" end="47229" title="John Livingston Lowes" label="Lowes, John Livingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q16019242" start="47509" end="47526" title="Thomas McFarland" label="McFarland, Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q521606" start="47890" end="47907" title="John Henry Muirhead" label="Muirhead, John H."/>
<link wikidata="Q5144622" start="48539" end="48565" title="Coleridge&amp;#x27;s notebooks" label="Coleridge&amp;#x27;s notebooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q718585" start="48883" end="48898" title="I. A. Richards" label="Richards, I. A."/>
<link wikidata="Q5361164" start="49191" end="49209" title="Elinor Shaffer" label="Shaffer, Elinor S."/>
<link wikidata="Q7207490" start="50419" end="50436" title="Poetry Foundation" label="Poetry Foundation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29409" wikidata="Q13008" url="?curid=29409" title="Spica">
<text>Spica is the brightest object in the constellation of Virgo and one of the 20 brightest stars in the night sky. It has the Bayer designation α Virginis, which is Latinised to Alpha Virginis and abbreviated Alpha Vir or α Vir. Analysis of its parallax shows that it is located 250 light-years from the Sun. It is a spectroscopic binary star and rotating ellipsoidal variable; a system whose two stars are so close together they are egg-shaped rather than spherical, and can only be separated by their spectra. The primary is a blue giant and a variable star of the Beta Cephei type.

Spica, along with Arcturus and Denebola—or Regulus, depending on the source—forms the Spring Triangle asterism, and, by extension, is also part of the Great Diamond together with the star Cor Caroli.

==Nomenclature==
In 2016, the International Astronomical Union organized a Working Group on Star Names (WGSN) to catalog and standardize proper names for stars. The WGSN&#x27;s first bulletin of July 2016 included a table of the first two batches of names approved by the WGSN; which included &quot;Spica&quot; for this star. It is now so entered in the IAU Catalog of Star Names. The name is derived from the Latin &quot;spīca virginis&quot; &quot;the virgin&#x27;s ear of [wheat] grain&quot;. It was also anglicized as &quot;Virgin&#x27;s Spike&quot;.

&quot;α Virginis&quot; (Latinised to &quot;Alpha Virginis&quot;) is the system&#x27;s Bayer designation. Johann Bayer cited the name &quot;Arista&quot;.

Other traditional names are &quot;Azimech&quot; , from Arabic السماك الأعزل &quot;al-simāk al-ʼaʽzal&quot; &#x27;the unarmed &quot;simāk&quot; (of unknown meaning, cf. Eta Boötis); &quot;Alarph&quot;, Arabic for &#x27;the grape-gatherer&#x27; or &#x27;gleaner&#x27;, and &quot;Sumbalet&quot; (&quot;Sombalet&quot;, &quot;Sembalet&quot; and variants), from Arabic سنبلة &quot;sunbulah&quot; &quot;ear of grain&quot;.

In Chinese, (), meaning &quot;Horn (asterism)&quot;, refers to an asterism consisting of Spica and ζ Virginis. Consequently, the Chinese name for Spica is (, ).

In Hindu astronomy, Spica corresponds to the Nakshatra &quot;Chitrā&quot;.

==Observational history==
As one of the nearest massive binary star systems to the Sun, Spica has been the subject of many observational studies.

Spica is believed to be the star that gave Hipparchus the data that led him to discover the precession of the equinoxes. A temple to Menat (an early Hathor) at Thebes was oriented with reference to Spica when it was built in 3200 BC, and, over time, precession slowly but noticeably changed Spica&#x27;s location relative to the temple. Nicolaus Copernicus made many observations of Spica with his home-made triquetrum for his researches on precession.

== Observation ==
Spica is 2.06 degrees from the ecliptic and can be occulted by the Moon and sometimes by planets. The last planetary occultation of Spica occurred when Venus passed in front of the star (as seen from Earth) on November 10, 1783. The next occultation will occur on September 2, 2197, when Venus again passes in front of Spica. The Sun passes a little more than 2° north of Spica around October 16 every year, and the star&#x27;s heliacal rising occurs about two weeks later. Every 8 years, Venus passes Spica around the time of the star&#x27;s heliacal rising, as in 2009 when it passed 3.5° north of the star on November 3.

A method of finding Spica is to follow the arc of the handle of the Big Dipper (or Plough) to Arcturus, and then continue on the same angular distance to Spica. This can be recalled by the mnemonic phrase, &quot;arc to Arcturus and spike to Spica.&quot;

Stars that can set (not in a circumpolar constellation for the viewer) culminate at midnight—noticeable where viewed away from any polar region experiencing midnight sun—when at opposition, meaning they can be viewed from dusk until dawn. This applies to α Virginis on 12 April, in the current astronomical epoch.

==Physical properties==
Spica is a close binary star whose components orbit each other every four days. They stay close enough together that they cannot be resolved as two stars through a telescope. The changes in the orbital motion of this pair results in a Doppler shift in the absorption lines of their respective spectra, making them a double-lined spectroscopic binary. Initially, the orbital parameters for this system were inferred using spectroscopic measurements. Between 1966 and 1970, the Narrabri Stellar Intensity Interferometer was used to observe the pair and to directly measure the orbital characteristics and the angular diameter of the primary, which was found to be , and the angular size of the semi-major axis of the orbit was found to be only slightly larger at .

Spica is a rotating ellipsoidal variable, which is a non-eclipsing close binary star system where the stars are mutually distorted through their gravitational interaction. This effect causes the apparent magnitude of the star system to vary by 0.03 over an interval that matches the orbital period. This slight dip in magnitude is barely noticeable visually. Both stars rotate faster than their mutual orbital period. This lack of synchronization and the high ellipticity of their orbit may indicate that this is a young star system. Over time, the mutual tidal interaction of the pair may lead to rotational synchronization and orbit circularization.
Spica is a polarimetric variable, first discovered to be such in 2016. The majority of the polarimetric signal is the result of the reflection of the light from one star off the other (and vice versa). The two stars in Spica were the first ever to have their reflectivity (or geometric albedo) measured. The geometric albedos of Spica A and B are, respectively, 3.61 percent and 1.36 percent, values that are low compared to planets.

The MK spectral classification of Spica is typically considered to be an early B-type main-sequence star. Individual spectral types for the two components are difficult to assign accurately, especially for the secondary due to the Struve–Sahade effect. The Bright Star Catalogue derived a spectral class of B2III-IV for the primary and B4-7V for the secondary, but later studies have given various different values.

The primary star has a stellar classification of B2III-IV. The luminosity class matches the spectrum of a star that is midway between a subgiant and a giant star, and it is no longer a main-sequence star. The evolutionary stage has been calculated to be near or slightly past the end of the main-sequence phase. This is a massive star with more than 10 times the mass of the Sun and seven times its radius. The bolometric luminosity of the primary is about 20,500 times that of the Sun, and nine times the luminosity of its companion. The primary is one of the nearest stars to the Sun that has enough mass to end its life in a Type II supernova explosion. However, since Spica has only recently left the main sequence, this event is not likely to occur for several more million years.

The primary is classified as a Beta Cephei variable star that varies in brightness over a 0.1738-day period. The spectrum shows a radial velocity variation with the same period, indicating that the surface of the star is regularly pulsating outward and then contracting. This star is rotating rapidly, with a rotational velocity of 199 km/s along the equator.

The secondary member of this system is one of the few stars whose spectrum is affected by the Struve–Sahade effect. This is an anomalous change in the strength of the spectral lines over the course of an orbit, where the lines become weaker as the star is moving away from the observer. It may be caused by a strong stellar wind from the primary scattering the light from secondary when it is receding. This star is smaller than the primary, with about 4 times the mass of the Sun and 3.6 times the Sun&#x27;s radius. Its stellar classification is B4-7 V, making this a main-sequence star.

==In culture==
Both a rocket and crew capsule designed and under development by Copenhagen Suborbitals, a crowd-funded space program, is named Spica. Spica aims to make Denmark the first country to launch its own astronaut to space after Russia, the US and China.

Spica is one of the Behenian fixed stars. In his &quot;Three Books of Occult Philosophy&quot;, Cornelius Agrippa attributes Spica&#x27;s kabbalistic symbol to Hermes Trismegistus.
==See also==
* Lists of astronomical objects

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13008" start="0" end="5" title="Spica" label="Spica"/>
<link wikidata="Q8928" start="37" end="50" title="constellation" label="constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8842" start="54" end="59" title="Virgo (constellation)" label="Virgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q184221" start="78" end="93" title="List of brightest stars" label="brightest stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153471" start="101" end="110" title="night sky" label="night sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q105616" start="123" end="140" title="Bayer designation" label="Bayer designation"/>
<link wikidata="Q13008" start="141" end="151" title="Spica" label="α Virginis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806983" start="162" end="171" title="Latinisation of names" label="Latinised"/>
<link wikidata="Q13008" start="175" end="189" title="Spica" label="Alpha Virginis"/>
<link wikidata="Q13008" start="206" end="215" title="Spica" label="Alpha Vir"/>
<link wikidata="Q13008" start="219" end="224" title="Spica" label="α Vir"/>
<link wikidata="Q165074" start="242" end="250" title="parallax" label="parallax"/>
<link wikidata="Q531" start="280" end="290" title="light-year" label="light-year"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="301" end="304" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="314" end="327" title="spectroscopic" label="spectroscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q50053" start="328" end="339" title="binary star" label="binary star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332364" start="344" end="373" title="rotating ellipsoidal variable" label="rotating ellipsoidal variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q133139" start="500" end="507" title="Electromagnetic spectrum" label="spectra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5855" start="526" end="536" title="blue giant" label="blue giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243" start="543" end="556" title="variable star" label="variable star"/>
<link wikidata="Q764463" start="564" end="580" title="Beta Cephei variable" label="Beta Cephei type"/>
<link wikidata="Q12985" start="601" end="609" title="Arcturus" label="Arcturus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13015" start="614" end="622" title="Denebola" label="Denebola"/>
<link wikidata="Q76493786" start="626" end="633" title="Regulus" label="Regulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q591000" start="669" end="684" title="Spring Triangle" label="Spring Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9262" start="685" end="693" title="Asterism (astronomy)" label="asterism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497268" start="734" end="747" title="Great Diamond" label="Great Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q76868858" start="771" end="781" title="Cor Caroli" label="Cor Caroli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867" start="814" end="846" title="International Astronomical Union" label="International Astronomical Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q27927866" start="859" end="886" title="Working Group on Star Names" label="Working Group on Star Names"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1194" end="1199" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806983" start="1363" end="1372" title="Latinisation of names" label="Latinised"/>
<link wikidata="Q105616" start="1425" end="1442" title="Bayer designation" label="Bayer designation"/>
<link wikidata="Q78427" start="1444" end="1456" title="Johann Bayer" label="Johann Bayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="1548" end="1554" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q14020" start="1661" end="1671" title="Eta Boötis" label="Eta Boötis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268276" start="1913" end="1920" title="Chinese astronomy" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192463" start="1940" end="1944" title="Horn (Chinese constellation)" label="Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q14199" start="2009" end="2019" title="ζ Virginis" label="ζ Virginis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832287" start="2039" end="2051" title="Chinese star names" label="Chinese name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292962" start="2075" end="2090" title="Hindu astronomy" label="Hindu astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125935" start="2117" end="2126" title="Nakshatra" label="Nakshatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q159905" start="2338" end="2348" title="Hipparchus" label="Hipparchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q83094" start="2387" end="2414" title="Axial precession" label="precession of the equinoxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q44539" start="2418" end="2424" title="temple" label="temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779386" start="2428" end="2433" title="Menat" label="Menat"/>
<link wikidata="Q133343" start="2444" end="2450" title="Hathor" label="Hathor"/>
<link wikidata="Q101583" start="2455" end="2461" title="Thebes, Egypt" label="Thebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q619" start="2632" end="2651" title="Nicolaus Copernicus" label="Nicolaus Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258152" start="2703" end="2713" title="triquetrum (astronomy)" label="triquetrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q79852" start="2798" end="2806" title="ecliptic" label="ecliptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q202746" start="2818" end="2826" title="occultation" label="occulted"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="2834" end="2838" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="2856" end="2862" title="planet" label="planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="2919" end="2924" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="2967" end="2972" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q191536" start="3130" end="3138" title="conjunction (astronomy)" label="north of"/>
<link wikidata="Q368373" start="3195" end="3210" title="heliacal rising" label="heliacal rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q10460" start="3460" end="3470" title="Big Dipper" label="Big Dipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357788" start="3526" end="3542" title="angular distance" label="angular distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q12115" start="3676" end="3701" title="circumpolar constellation" label="circumpolar constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q774621" start="3804" end="3816" title="midnight sun" label="midnight sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q105562" start="3825" end="3835" title="opposition (astronomy)" label="opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703" start="3941" end="3959" title="astronomical epoch" label="astronomical epoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q50053" start="4003" end="4014" title="binary star" label="binary star"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213" start="4150" end="4159" title="telescope" label="telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q76436" start="4221" end="4234" title="Doppler shift" label="Doppler shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q13553575" start="4242" end="4257" title="absorption line" label="absorption line"/>
<link wikidata="Q752171" start="4279" end="4286" title="stellar spectrum" label="spectra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6966156" start="4462" end="4503" title="Narrabri Stellar Intensity Interferometer" label="Narrabri Stellar Intensity Interferometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q21143897" start="4678" end="4693" title="semi-major axis" label="semi-major axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332364" start="4761" end="4790" title="rotating ellipsoidal variable" label="rotating ellipsoidal variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="4945" end="4963" title="apparent magnitude" label="apparent magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q16948734" start="5379" end="5400" title="tidal circularization" label="orbit circularization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832068" start="5678" end="5694" title="geometric albedo" label="geometric albedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="5844" end="5867" title="spectral classification" label="spectral classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="5916" end="5922" title="B-type star" label="B-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q3720184" start="6068" end="6088" title="Struve–Sahade effect" label="Struve–Sahade effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q499138" start="6094" end="6115" title="Bright Star Catalogue" label="Bright Star Catalogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="6277" end="6299" title="stellar classification" label="stellar classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="6317" end="6333" title="luminosity class" label="luminosity class"/>
<link wikidata="Q6227" start="6390" end="6398" title="subgiant" label="subgiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5875" start="6405" end="6415" title="giant star" label="giant star"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450" start="6439" end="6457" title="main-sequence star" label="main-sequence star"/>
<link wikidata="Q180892" start="6617" end="6632" title="mass of the Sun" label="mass of the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q48440" start="6649" end="6659" title="Solar radius" label="its radius"/>
<link wikidata="Q105902" start="6665" end="6686" title="bolometric luminosity" label="bolometric luminosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="6736" end="6739" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049029" start="6882" end="6899" title="Type II supernova" label="Type II supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q764463" start="7072" end="7083" title="Beta Cephei variable" label="Beta Cephei"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243" start="7084" end="7097" title="variable star" label="variable star"/>
<link wikidata="Q240105" start="7171" end="7186" title="radial velocity" label="radial velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="7392" end="7399" title="equator" label="equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="7569" end="7582" title="spectral line" label="spectral line"/>
<link wikidata="Q654396" start="7718" end="7730" title="stellar wind" label="stellar wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450" start="7972" end="7990" title="main-sequence star" label="main-sequence star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131092" start="8073" end="8095" title="Copenhagen Suborbitals" label="Copenhagen Suborbitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q11631" start="8206" end="8215" title="astronaut" label="astronaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645995" start="8278" end="8297" title="Behenian fixed star" label="Behenian fixed star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939470" start="8313" end="8345" title="Three Books of Occult Philosophy" label="Three Books of Occult Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q76568" start="8353" end="8370" title="Cornelius Agrippa" label="Cornelius Agrippa"/>
<link wikidata="Q123006" start="8395" end="8406" title="kabbalistic" label="kabbalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192358" start="8417" end="8436" title="Hermes Trismegistus" label="Hermes Trismegistus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309613" start="8453" end="8482" title="Lists of astronomical objects" label="Lists of astronomical objects"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29414" wikidata="Q5241443" url="?curid=29414" title="Stuart Little">
<text>Stuart Little is a 1945 American children&#x27;s novel by E. B. White. It was White&#x27;s first children&#x27;s book, and became recognized as a classic in children&#x27;s literature. &quot;Stuart Little&quot; was illustrated by the artist Garth Williams, also his first work for children.

The book is a realistic yet fantastical story about a boy named Stuart Little. According to the first chapter, he looked very much like a mouse in every way.

==Background==
In a letter White wrote in response to inquiries from readers, he described how he came to conceive of Stuart Little: &quot;Many years ago, I went to bed one night in a railway sleeping car, and during the night I dreamed about a tiny boy who acted rather like a rat. That&#x27;s how the story of &quot;Stuart Little&quot; got started&quot;.
He had the dream in the spring of 1926, while sleeping on a train on his way back to New York from a visit to the Shenandoah Valley. As Sims (2011) wrote that Stuart &quot;arrived in [White&#x27;s] mind in a direct shipment from the subconscious.&quot;

White typed up a few stories about Stuart, which he told to his 18 nieces and nephews when they asked him to tell them a story.
In 1935, White&#x27;s wife Katharine showed these stories to Clarence Day, then a regular contributor to &quot;The New Yorker&quot;. Day liked the stories and encouraged White not to neglect them, but neither Oxford University Press nor Viking Press was interested in the stories, and White did not immediately develop them further.

In the fall of 1938, as his wife wrote her annual collection of children&#x27;s book reviews for &quot;The New Yorker&quot;, White wrote a few paragraphs in his &quot;One Man&#x27;s Meat&quot; column in &quot;Harper&#x27;s Magazine&quot; about writing children&#x27;s books. Anne Carroll Moore, the head children&#x27;s librarian at the New York Public Library, read this column and responded by encouraging him to write a children&#x27;s book that would &quot;make the library lions roar&quot;.

White&#x27;s editor at Harper, who had heard about the Stuart stories from Katherine, asked to see them, and by March 1939 was intent on publishing them. Around that time, White wrote to James Thurber that he was &quot;about half done&quot; with the book; however, he did not finish it until the winter of 1944–1945.

==Plot==
A white mouse looking boy named Stuart is born to an ordinary family in New York City. He is normal in every way except that he is only just over tall and looks exactly like a mouse, despite being a human child. At first, the family is concerned with how Stuart will survive in a human-sized world, but by the age of seven, he speaks, thinks, and behaves on the level of a human of sixteen and shows surprising ingenuity in adapting, performing such helpful family tasks as fishing his mother&#x27;s wedding ring from a sink drain. The family&#x27;s cat, Snowbell, dislikes Stuart because while he feels a natural instinct to chase him, he is aware that Stuart is a human family member and is thus off-limits.

On a cold winter&#x27;s day, the family discovers a yellow canary named Margalo half-frozen on their doorstep. Margalo is taken in and spends the winter in the family home, where she befriends Stuart; Stuart in turn protects her from Snowbell. The bird repays his kindness by saving Stuart when he is trapped in a garbage barge and shipped out to sea for disposal. In the spring, when she is set free from the house, she continues to visit Stuart, infuriating Snowbell, who now finds himself with two small animals he is not allowed to eat.

Snowbell makes a deal with the Angora cat to eat Margalo to get rid of one of his temptations (reasoning that it&#x27;s only wrong if he eats her). Margalo is warned and flees in the middle of the night. Stuart is heartbroken but becomes determined to find her. He first goes to the local dentist, Dr. Carey. The dentist&#x27;s patient, Edward Clydesdale, suggests that Margalo may have flown to Connecticut, and Dr. Carey loans Stuart his miniature car for the long journey.

Stuart travels from adventure to adventure and finds himself in the town of Ames Crossing, where he takes work as a substitute teacher. There he learns that living in Ames Crossing is a fifteen-year-old girl named Harriet Ames who is the same size as Stuart but looks like a human being. Stuart purchases a miniature souvenir canoe, prepping it to make it comfortable and waterproof, and invites Harriet out on a boating date. However, when the two arrive for the date, the canoe has been discovered and played with by local children, who have ruined it. Harriet tries to be polite but is put off by Stuart&#x27;s sulking over his broken boat. Stuart decides to leave Ames Crossing and continue on his quest to find Margalo. He sets off once more in his car, continuing on his mission of exploring the world and finding his friend.

==Reception==
Lucien Agosta, in his overview of the critical reception of the book, notes that &quot;Critical reactions to &quot;Stuart Little&quot; have varied from disapprobation to unqualified admiration since the book was published in 1945, though generally it has been well received.&quot; Anne Carroll Moore, who had initially encouraged White to write the book, was critical of it when she read a proof of it. She wrote letters to White, his wife Katharine, and &quot;Harper&#x27;s&quot; children&#x27;s editor Ursula Nordstrom, advising that the book not be published.

A 1945 book reviewer wrote, &quot;Mr. White has a tendency to write amusing scenes instead of telling a story. To say that &quot;Stuart Little&quot; is one of the best children’s books published this year is very modest praise for a writer of his talent.&quot;
The book has become a children&#x27;s classic, and is widely read by children and used by teachers.
White was awarded the Laura Ingalls Wilder Medal in 1970 for &quot;Stuart Little&quot; and &quot;Charlotte&#x27;s Web&quot;.

==Adaptations==
===Audio===
Actress Julie Harris narrated an unabridged adaptation on LP in two volumes for Pathways of Sound (POS 1036 and 1037). The complete recording was later released on audio cassette by Bantam Audio and on CD by Listening Library.

===Films===
The book was very loosely adapted into a 1999 film of the same name, which combines live-action with computer animation. In the film, Stuart is an anthropomorphic mouse instead of a mouse-like boy, he is adopted instead of born into the Little family. Margalo is absent, with the plot instead focusing on Stuart&#x27;s search for his real parents, later revealed to have died years ago, and Snowbell&#x27;s attempt to get rid of him. The 2002 sequel &quot;Stuart Little 2&quot; features Margalo and more closely follows the plot of the book, albeit with the inclusion of an evil falcon who holds Margalo captive. A third film, &quot;Stuart Little 3: Call of the Wild&quot; was released direct-to-video in 2006. This film is entirely computer-animated, with its plot not derived from the book. None of the film adaptations include the subplot of Stuart being a one-time substitute teacher in a schoolhouse, meeting Dr. Paul Carey, or encountering a girl his size named Harriet.

All three films feature Hugh Laurie as Mr. Little, Geena Davis as Mrs. Little, and Michael J. Fox as the voice of Stuart Little.

In 2015, it was announced that a remake of &quot;Stuart Little&quot; is in the works at Sony Pictures Entertainment and Red Wagon Entertainment. The movie will remain hybrid live-action / computer animation. Douglas Wick, the producer of the original films, will produce the remake.

===Television===
&quot;The World of Stuart Little&quot;, a 1966 episode of NBC&#x27;s &quot;Children&#x27;s Theater&quot;, narrated by Johnny Carson, won a Peabody Award and was nominated for an Emmy. An animated television series, &quot;Stuart Little: The Animated Series&quot; (based on the film adaptations) was produced for HBO Family and aired for 13 episodes in 2003.

===Video games===
Four video games based on the film adaptations have been produced. &quot;Stuart Little: Big City Adventures&quot;, released for Microsoft Windows in 1999, is based on the 1999 film. &quot;Stuart Little: The Journey Home&quot;, which was released only for the Game Boy Color in 2001, is also based on the 1999 film. A game based on &quot;Stuart Little 2&quot; was released for the PlayStation, Game Boy Advance and Microsoft Windows in 2002. A fourth game, entitled &quot;Stuart Little 3: Big Photo Adventure&quot;, was released exclusively for the PlayStation 2 in 2005.

==See also==
* Conservatory Water, the boating pond on which Stuart Little sails
* Stuart, Florida, the town which served as the inspiration for Stuart&#x27;s name

==References==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131539" start="33" end="54" title="Children&amp;#x27;s literature" label="children&amp;#x27;s novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q361617" start="58" end="69" title="E. B. White" label="E. B. White"/>
<link wikidata="Q841310" start="241" end="255" title="Garth Williams" label="Garth Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q142668" start="922" end="939" title="Shenandoah Valley" label="Shenandoah Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6834418" start="944" end="948" title="Michael Sims" label="Sims"/>
<link wikidata="Q13563061" start="1217" end="1226" title="Katharine Sergeant Angell White" label="Katharine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095394" start="1251" end="1263" title="Clarence Day" label="Clarence Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="1301" end="1315" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="1399" end="1422" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q921536" start="1427" end="1439" title="Viking Press" label="Viking Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="1627" end="1641" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170076" start="1733" end="1755" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769255" start="1799" end="1817" title="Anne Carroll Moore" label="Anne Carroll Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q219555" start="1861" end="1884" title="New York Public Library" label="New York Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127696" start="2044" end="2050" title="Harper (publisher)" label="Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q124527" start="2208" end="2221" title="James Thurber" label="James Thurber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7901268" start="5429" end="5445" title="Ursula Nordstrom" label="Ursula Nordstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q354323" start="5872" end="5898" title="Laura Ingalls Wilder Medal" label="Laura Ingalls Wilder Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q236708" start="6012" end="6024" title="Julie Harris (actress)" label="Julie Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q841983" start="6062" end="6064" title="LP record" label="LP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609948" start="6186" end="6198" title="Bantam Books" label="Bantam Audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="6206" end="6208" title="Compact disc" label="CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q744182" start="6212" end="6229" title="Random House" label="Listening Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q754017" start="6285" end="6289" title="1999 in film" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048958" start="6290" end="6311" title="Stuart Little (film)" label="film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401416" start="6345" end="6363" title="computer animation" label="computer animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070554" start="6700" end="6715" title="Stuart Little 2" label="Stuart Little 2"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6877" end="6910" title="Stuart Little 3: Call of the Wild" label="Stuart Little 3: Call of the Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q844580" start="6930" end="6945" title="direct-to-video" label="direct-to-video"/>
<link wikidata="Q49017" start="7246" end="7257" title="Hugh Laurie" label="Hugh Laurie"/>
<link wikidata="Q280098" start="7273" end="7284" title="Geena Davis" label="Geena Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q395274" start="7305" end="7319" title="Michael J. Fox" label="Michael J. Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q822314" start="7440" end="7467" title="Sony Pictures Entertainment" label="Sony Pictures Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252563" start="7472" end="7495" title="Red Wagon Entertainment" label="Red Wagon Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q25110269" start="7526" end="7558" title="Live-action animated film" label="live-action / computer animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252563" start="7560" end="7572" title="Douglas Wick" label="Douglas Wick"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="7711" end="7714" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q18378772" start="7728" end="7751" title="NBC Children&amp;#x27;s Theatre" label="Children&amp;#x27;s Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q310819" start="7771" end="7784" title="Johnny Carson" label="Johnny Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q838121" start="7792" end="7805" title="Peabody Award" label="Peabody Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="7831" end="7835" title="Emmy" label="Emmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608616" start="7874" end="7908" title="Stuart Little (TV series)" label="Stuart Little: The Animated Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="7964" end="7974" title="HBO" label="HBO Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q17048803" start="8059" end="8075" title="Stuart Little (franchise)" label="film adaptations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048958" start="8200" end="8209" title="Stuart Little (film)" label="1999 film"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8217" end="8248" title="Stuart Little: The Journey Home" label="Stuart Little: The Journey Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q203992" start="8288" end="8302" title="Game Boy Color" label="Game Boy Color"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070554" start="8366" end="8381" title="Stuart Little 2" label="Stuart Little 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q10677" start="8409" end="8420" title="PlayStation (console)" label="PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q188642" start="8422" end="8438" title="Game Boy Advance" label="Game Boy Advance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="8443" end="8460" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q10680" start="8577" end="8590" title="PlayStation 2" label="PlayStation 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163141" start="8616" end="8634" title="Conservatory Water" label="Conservatory Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q988744" start="8684" end="8699" title="Stuart, Florida" label="Stuart, Florida"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29417" wikidata="Q7604443" url="?curid=29417" title="Statite">
<text>A statite (a portmanteau of the words &quot;static&quot; and &quot;satellite&quot;) is a hypothetical type of artificial satellite that employs a solar sail to continuously modify its orbit in ways that gravity alone would not allow. Typically, a statite would use the solar sail to &quot;hover&quot; in a location that would not otherwise be available as a stable geosynchronous orbit. Statites have been proposed that would remain in fixed locations high over Earth&#x27;s poles, using reflected sunlight to counteract the gravity pulling them down. Statites might also employ their sails to change the shape or velocity of more conventional orbits, depending upon the purpose of the particular statite.

The concept of the statite was invented independently and at about the same time by Robert L. Forward (who coined the term &quot;statite&quot;) and Colin McInnes, who used the term &quot;halo orbit&quot; (not to be confused with the type of halo orbit discovered by Robert Farquhar). Subsequently, the terms &quot;non-Keplerian orbit&quot; and &quot;artificial Lagrange point&quot; have been used as a generalization of the above terms.

No statites have been deployed to date, as solar sail technology remains in its infancy. NASA&#x27;s cancelled &quot;Sunjammer&quot; solar sail mission had the stated objective of flying to an artificial Lagrange point near the Earth/Sun L1 point, to demonstrate the feasibility of the Geostorm geomagnetic storm warning mission concept proposed by NOAA&#x27;s Patricia Mulligan. A constellation of statites have been proposed for performing a rendezvous with an interstellar object.

==See also==
* Dyson bubble
* List of hypothetical technologies
* Solar mirror
* Space sunshade

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7604443" start="2" end="9" title="Statite" label="statite"/>
<link wikidata="Q208674" start="13" end="24" title="portmanteau" label="portmanteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="110" end="130" title="artificial satellite" label="artificial satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q368891" start="146" end="156" title="solar sail" label="solar sail"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130" start="184" end="189" title="orbit" label="orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="203" end="210" title="gravity" label="gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q472251" start="365" end="385" title="geosynchronous orbit" label="geosynchronous orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="462" end="467" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q193788" start="498" end="506" title="sunlight" label="sunlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000229" start="791" end="808" title="Robert L. Forward" label="Robert L. Forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145495" start="855" end="868" title="Colin R. McInnes" label="Colin McInnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133479" start="948" end="958" title="halo orbit" label="halo orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946193" start="1025" end="1040" title="Keplerian orbit" label="Keplerian orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q190463" start="1068" end="1082" title="Lagrange point" label="Lagrange point"/>
<link wikidata="Q15261140" start="1262" end="1271" title="Sunjammer (spacecraft)" label="Sunjammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q130011" start="1440" end="1457" title="geomagnetic storm" label="geomagnetic storm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1506" end="1523" title="Patricia Mulligan" label="Patricia Mulligan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441216" start="1608" end="1627" title="interstellar object" label="interstellar object"/>
<link wikidata="Q469" start="1645" end="1657" title="Dyson bubble" label="Dyson bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q60518359" start="1660" end="1693" title="List of hypothetical technologies" label="List of hypothetical technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509894" start="1696" end="1708" title="Solar mirror" label="Solar mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572630" start="1711" end="1725" title="Space sunshade" label="Space sunshade"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29419" wikidata="Q226737" url="?curid=29419" title="Stanford (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Stanford]] is a university in northern California, United States.

Stanford may also refer to: 

== Places ==
===South Africa===
* Stanford, Western Cape

===United Kingdom===
* Stanford, Bedfordshire
* Stanford-le-Hope, Essex 
* Stanford, Kent
* Stanford, Norfolk
* Stanford, Northamptonshire
** Stanford-on-Avon
* Stanford on Soar, Nottinghamshire
* Stanford in the Vale, Oxfordshire
* Stanford, Shropshire, a UK location
* Stanford on Teme, Worcestershire

===United States===
* Stanford, California
** Stanford (Caltrain station)
* Stanford, Idaho
* Stanford, Indiana
* Stanford, Illinois
* Stanford, Kentucky
* Stanford, Minnesota
* Stanford, Montana
* Stanford, New York, a town

==Facilities and structures==
* Stanford Hall, Leicestershire, UK, a country house
** Stanford Park, its grounds
** Stanford Reservoir, nearby
* Stanford Hall, Nottinghamshire, UK, a country house
* Stanford Lake College, a high school in Limpopo Province, South Africa
* Stanford Mansion, a mansion in Sacramento, California

==People and characters==
* Stanford (name), a list of persons and fictional characters with the name

==Sports==
* Stanford Cardinal, the nickname of the athletic teams at Stanford University
* Stanford Super Series, a cricket tournament
* Stanford 20/20, a cricket tournament

== Other uses ==
* Stanford Financial Group
* The Stanford prison experiment, a social psychology experiment conducted in 1971

== See also ==
* Stanford House (disambiguation)
* Samford (disambiguation)
* Sanford (disambiguation)
* Stamford (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q226737" start="0" end="12" title="Stanford (disambiguation)" label="[[Stanford]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q226737" start="69" end="77" title="Stanford (disambiguation)" label="Stanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742675" start="133" end="155" title="Stanford, Western Cape" label="Stanford, Western Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518891" start="180" end="202" title="Stanford, Bedfordshire" label="Stanford, Bedfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574529" start="205" end="221" title="Stanford-le-Hope" label="Stanford-le-Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132713" start="232" end="246" title="Stanford, Kent" label="Stanford, Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2789084" start="249" end="266" title="Stanford, Norfolk" label="Stanford, Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598710" start="269" end="295" title="Stanford, Northamptonshire" label="Stanford, Northamptonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598710" start="299" end="315" title="Stanford-on-Avon" label="Stanford-on-Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3105970" start="318" end="334" title="Stanford on Soar" label="Stanford on Soar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053810" start="354" end="374" title="Stanford in the Vale" label="Stanford in the Vale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="390" end="410" title="Stanford, Shropshire" label="Stanford, Shropshire"/>
<link wikidata="" start="414" end="425" title="List of United Kingdom locations: Sow-Stao#Stab-Stao" label="UK location"/>
<link wikidata="Q3891366" start="428" end="444" title="Stanford on Teme" label="Stanford on Teme"/>
<link wikidata="Q173813" start="484" end="504" title="Stanford, California" label="Stanford, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598711" start="508" end="535" title="Stanford (Caltrain station)" label="Stanford (Caltrain station)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22058995" start="538" end="553" title="Stanford, Idaho" label="Stanford, Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598706" start="556" end="573" title="Stanford, Indiana" label="Stanford, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621084" start="576" end="594" title="Stanford, Illinois" label="Stanford, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q951131" start="597" end="615" title="Stanford, Kentucky" label="Stanford, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914802" start="618" end="637" title="Stanford, Minnesota" label="Stanford, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q964886" start="640" end="657" title="Stanford, Montana" label="Stanford, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250385" start="660" end="678" title="Stanford, New York" label="Stanford, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598748" start="720" end="749" title="Stanford Hall, Leicestershire" label="Stanford Hall, Leicestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q45129637" start="774" end="787" title="Stanford Park" label="Stanford Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331782" start="804" end="822" title="Stanford Reservoir" label="Stanford Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598749" start="833" end="863" title="Stanford Hall, Nottinghamshire" label="Stanford Hall, Nottinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598766" start="887" end="908" title="Stanford Lake College" label="Stanford Lake College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520801" start="960" end="976" title="Stanford Mansion" label="Stanford Mansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q16281732" start="1043" end="1058" title="Stanford (name)" label="Stanford (name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2938060" start="1131" end="1148" title="Stanford Cardinal" label="Stanford Cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496619" start="1210" end="1231" title="Stanford Super Series" label="Stanford Super Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598712" start="1256" end="1270" title="Stanford 20/20" label="Stanford 20/20"/>
<link wikidata="Q924847" start="1313" end="1337" title="Stanford Financial Group" label="Stanford Financial Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q235089" start="1344" end="1370" title="Stanford prison experiment" label="Stanford prison experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q121322186" start="1439" end="1470" title="Stanford House (disambiguation)" label="Stanford House (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2217073" start="1473" end="1497" title="Samford (disambiguation)" label="Samford (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q253560" start="1500" end="1524" title="Sanford (disambiguation)" label="Sanford (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q226720" start="1527" end="1552" title="Stamford (disambiguation)" label="Stamford (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29420" wikidata="Q368891" url="?curid=29420" title="Solar sail">
<text>Solar sails (also known as lightsails, light sails, and [[photon]] sails) are a method of spacecraft propulsion using radiation pressure exerted by sunlight on large surfaces. A number of spaceflight missions to test solar propulsion and navigation have been proposed since the 1980s. The first spacecraft to make use of the technology was IKAROS, launched in 2010.

A useful analogy to solar sailing may be a sailing boat; the light exerting a force on the large surface is akin to a sail being blown by the wind. High-energy laser beams could be used as an alternative light source to exert much greater force than would be possible using sunlight, a concept known as beam sailing. Solar sail craft offer the possibility of low-cost operations combined with high speeds (relative to chemical rockets) and long operating lifetimes. Since they have few moving parts and use no propellant, they can potentially be used numerous times for the delivery of payloads.

Solar sails use a phenomenon that has a proven, measured effect on astrodynamics. Solar pressure affects all spacecraft, whether in interplanetary space or in orbit around a planet or small body. A typical spacecraft going to Mars, for example, will be displaced thousands of kilometers by solar pressure, so the effects must be accounted for in trajectory planning, which has been done since the time of the earliest interplanetary spacecraft of the 1960s. Solar pressure also affects the orientation of a spacecraft, a factor that must be included in spacecraft design.

The total force exerted on an solar sail, for example, is about at Earth&#x27;s distance from the Sun, making it a low-thrust propulsion system, similar to spacecraft propelled by electric engines, but as it uses no propellant, that force is exerted almost constantly and the collective effect over time is great enough to be considered a potential manner of propelling spacecraft.

==History of concept==
Johannes Kepler observed that comet tails point away from the Sun and suggested that the Sun caused the effect. In a letter to Galileo in 1610, he wrote, &quot;Provide ships or sails adapted to the heavenly breezes, and there will be some who will brave even that void.&quot; He might have had the comet tail phenomenon in mind when he wrote those words, although his publications on comet tails came several years later.

James Clerk Maxwell, in 1861–1864, published his theory of electromagnetic fields and radiation, which shows that light has momentum and thus can exert pressure on objects. Maxwell&#x27;s equations provide the theoretical foundation for sailing with light pressure. So by 1864, the physics community and beyond knew sunlight carried momentum that would exert a pressure on objects.

Jules Verne, in &quot;From the Earth to the Moon&quot;, published in 1865, wrote &quot;there will some day appear velocities far greater than these [of the planets and the projectile], of which light or electricity will probably be the mechanical agent ... we shall one day travel to the moon, the planets, and the stars.&quot; This is possibly the first published recognition that light could move ships through space.

Pyotr Lebedev was first to successfully demonstrate light pressure, which he did in 1899 with a torsional balance; Ernest Nichols and Gordon Hull conducted a similar independent experiment in 1901 using a Nichols radiometer.

Svante Arrhenius predicted in 1908 the possibility of solar radiation pressure distributing life spores across interstellar distances, providing one means to explain the concept of panspermia. He was apparently the first scientist to state that light could move objects between stars.

Konstantin Tsiolkovsky first proposed using the pressure of sunlight to propel spacecraft through space and suggested, &quot;using tremendous mirrors of very thin sheets to utilize the pressure of sunlight to attain cosmic velocities&quot;.

Friedrich Zander (Tsander) published a technical paper in 1925 that included technical analysis of solar sailing. Zander wrote of &quot;applying small forces&quot; using &quot;light pressure or transmission of light energy to distances by means of very thin mirrors&quot;.

JBS Haldane speculated in 1927 about the invention of tubular spaceships that would take humanity to space and how &quot;wings of metallic foil of a square kilometre or more in area are spread out to catch the Sun&#x27;s radiation pressure&quot;.

J. D. Bernal wrote in 1929, &quot;A form of space sailing might be developed which used the repulsive effect of the Sun&#x27;s rays instead of wind. A space vessel spreading its large, metallic wings, acres in extent, to the full, might be blown to the limit of Neptune&#x27;s orbit. Then, to increase its speed, it would tack, close-hauled, down the gravitational field, spreading full sail again as it rushed past the Sun.&quot;

Arthur C. Clarke wrote &quot;Sunjammer&quot;, a science fiction short story originally published in the March 1964 issue of &quot;Boys&#x27; Life&quot; depicting a yacht race between solar sail spacecraft. 

Carl Sagan, in the 1970s, popularized the idea of sailing on light using a giant structure which would reflect photons in one direction, creating momentum. He brought up his ideas in college lectures, books, and television shows. He was fixated on quickly launching this spacecraft in time to perform a rendezvous with Halley&#x27;s Comet. Unfortunately, the mission didn&#x27;t take place in time and he would never live to finally see it through.

The first formal technology and design effort for a solar sail began in 1976 at Jet Propulsion Laboratory for a proposed mission to rendezvous with Halley&#x27;s Comet.

== Types ==
=== Reflective ===
Most solar sails are based on reflection. The surface of the sail is highly reflective, like a mirror, and light reflecting off of the surface imparts a force.

=== Diffractive ===

In 2018, diffraction was proposed as a different solar sail propulsion mechanism, which is claimed to have several advantages.

== Alternatives ==
=== Electric solar wind ===
Pekka Janhunen from FMI has proposed a type of solar sail called the electric solar wind sail. Mechanically it has little in common with the traditional solar sail design. The sails are replaced with straightened conducting tethers (wires) placed radially around the host ship. The wires are electrically charged to create an electric field around the wires. The electric field extends a few tens of metres into the plasma of the surrounding solar wind. The solar electrons are reflected by the electric field (like the photons on a traditional solar sail). The radius of the sail is from the electric field rather than the actual wire itself, making the sail lighter. The craft can also be steered by regulating the electric charge of the wires. A practical electric sail would have 50–100 straightened wires with a length of about 20 km each.

Electric solar wind sails can adjust their electrostatic fields and sail attitudes.

=== Magnetic ===
A magnetic sail would also employ the solar wind. However, the magnetic field deflects the electrically charged particles in the wind. It uses wire loops, and runs a static current through them instead of applying a static voltage.

All these designs maneuver, though the mechanisms are different.

Magnetic sails bend the path of the charged protons that are in the solar wind. By changing the sails&#x27; attitudes, and the size of the magnetic fields, they can change the amount and direction of the thrust.

==Physical principles for reflective sails==

===Solar radiation pressure===

The force imparted to a solar sail arises from the momentum of photons. The momentum of a photon or an entire flux is given by Einstein&#x27;s relation:

:formula_1

where p is the momentum, E is the energy (of the photon or flux), and c is the speed of light. Specifically, the momentum of a photon depends on its wavelength 

Solar radiation pressure can be related to the irradiance (solar constant) value of 1361 W/m2 at 1 AU (Earth-Sun distance), as revised in 2011:

*perfect absorbance: F = 4.54 μN per square metre (4.54 μPa) in the direction of the incident beam (a perfectly inelastic collision)
*perfect reflectance: F = 9.08 μN per square metre (9.08 μPa) in the direction normal to surface (an elastic collision)

An ideal sail is flat and has 100% specular reflection. An actual sail will have an overall efficiency of about 90%, about 8.17 μN/m2, due to curvature (billow), wrinkles, absorbance, re-radiation from front and back, non-specular effects, and other factors.

The force on a sail and the actual acceleration of the craft vary by the inverse square of distance from the Sun (unless extremely close to the Sun), and by the square of the cosine of the angle between the sail force vector and the radial from the Sun, so

:formula_2 (for an ideal sail)

where R is distance from the Sun in AU. An actual square sail can be modelled as:

:formula_3

Note that the force and acceleration approach zero generally around θ = 60° rather than 90° as one might expect with an ideal sail.

If some of the energy is absorbed, the absorbed energy will heat the sail, which re-radiates that energy from the front and rear surfaces, depending on the emissivity of those two surfaces.

Solar wind, the flux of charged particles blown out from the Sun, exerts a nominal dynamic pressure of about 3 to 4 nPa, three orders of magnitude less than solar radiation pressure on a reflective sail.

===Sail parameters===
Sail loading (areal density) is an important parameter, which is the total mass divided by the sail area, expressed in g/m2. It is represented by the Greek letter σ (sigma).

A sail craft has a characteristic acceleration, ac, which it would experience at 1 AU when facing the Sun. Note this value accounts for both the incident and reflected momentums. Using the value from above of 9.08 μN per square metre of radiation pressure at 1 AU, ac is related to areal density by:

:ac = 9.08(efficiency) / σ mm/s2

Assuming 90% efficiency, ac = 8.17 / σ mm/s2

The lightness number, λ, is the dimensionless ratio of maximum vehicle acceleration divided by the Sun&#x27;s local gravity. Using the values at 1 AU:

:λ = ac / 5.93

The lightness number is also independent of distance from the Sun because both gravity and light pressure fall off as the inverse square of the distance from the Sun. Therefore, this number defines the types of orbit maneuvers that are possible for a given vessel.

The table presents some example values. Payloads are not included. The first two are from the detailed design effort at JPL in the 1970s. The third, the lattice sailer, might represent about the best possible performance level. The dimensions for square and lattice sails are edges. The dimension for heliogyro is blade tip to blade tip.

===Attitude control===
An active attitude control system (ACS) is essential for a sail craft to achieve and maintain a desired orientation. The required sail orientation changes slowly (often less than 1 degree per day) in interplanetary space, but much more rapidly in a planetary orbit. The ACS must be capable of meeting these orientation requirements. Attitude control is achieved by a relative shift between the craft&#x27;s center of pressure and its center of mass. This can be achieved with control vanes, movement of individual sails, movement of a control mass, or altering reflectivity.

Holding a constant attitude requires that the ACS maintain a net torque of zero on the craft. The total force and torque on a sail, or set of sails, is not constant along a trajectory. The force changes with solar distance and sail angle, which changes the billow in the sail and deflects some elements of the supporting structure, resulting in changes in the sail force and torque.

Sail temperature also changes with solar distance and sail angle, which changes sail dimensions. The radiant heat from the sail changes the temperature of the supporting structure. Both factors affect total force and torque.

To hold the desired attitude the ACS must compensate for all of these changes.

===Constraints===
In Earth orbit, solar pressure and drag pressure are typically equal at an altitude of about 800 km, which means that a sail craft would have to operate above that altitude. Sail craft must operate in orbits where their turn rates are compatible with the orbits, which is generally a concern only for spinning disk configurations.

Sail operating temperatures are a function of solar distance, sail angle, reflectivity, and front and back emissivities. A sail can be used only where its temperature is kept within its material limits. Generally, a sail can be used rather close to the Sun, around 0.25 AU, or even closer if carefully designed for those conditions.

==Applications==
Potential applications for sail craft range throughout the Solar System, from near the Sun to the comet clouds beyond Neptune. The craft can make outbound voyages to deliver loads or to take up station keeping at the destination. They can be used to haul cargo and possibly also used for human travel.

===Inner planets===
For trips within the inner Solar System, they can deliver payloads and then return to Earth for subsequent voyages, operating as an interplanetary shuttle. For Mars in particular, the craft could provide economical means of routinely supplying operations on the planet. According to Jerome Wright, &quot;The cost of launching the necessary conventional propellants from Earth are enormous for manned missions. Use of sailing ships could potentially save more than $10 billion in mission costs.&quot;

Solar sail craft can approach the Sun to deliver observation payloads or to take up station keeping orbits. They can operate at 0.25 AU or closer. They can reach high orbital inclinations, including polar.

Solar sails can travel to and from all of the inner planets. Trips to Mercury and Venus are for rendezvous and orbit entry for the payload. Trips to Mars could be either for rendezvous or swing-by with release of the payload for aerodynamic braking.

===Outer planets===
Minimum transfer times to the outer planets benefit from using an indirect transfer (solar swing-by). However, this method results in high arrival speeds. Slower transfers have lower arrival speeds.

The minimum transfer time to Jupiter for &quot;ac&quot; of 1 mm/s2 with no departure velocity relative to Earth is 2 years when using an indirect transfer (solar swing-by). The arrival speed (&quot;V&quot;∞) is close to 17 km/s. For Saturn, the minimum trip time is 3.3 years, with an arrival speed of nearly 19 km/s.

=== Oort Cloud/Sun&#x27;s inner gravity focus ===

The Sun&#x27;s inner gravitational focus point lies at minimum distance of 550 AU from the Sun, and is the point to which light from distant objects is focused by gravity as a result of it passing by the Sun. This is thus the distant point to which solar gravity will cause the region of deep space on the other side of the Sun to be focused, thus serving effectively as a very large telescope objective lens.

It has been proposed that an inflated sail, made of beryllium, that starts at 0.05 AU from the Sun would gain an initial acceleration of 36.4 m/s2, and reach a speed of 0.00264c (about 950 km/s) in less than a day. Such proximity to the Sun could prove to be impractical in the near term due to the structural degradation of beryllium at high temperatures, diffusion of hydrogen at high temperatures as well as an electrostatic gradient, generated by the ionization of beryllium from the solar wind, posing a burst risk. A revised perihelion of 0.1 AU would reduce the aforementioned temperature and solar flux exposure.
Such a sail would take &quot;Two and a half years to reach the heliopause, six and a half years to reach the Sun’s inner gravitational focus, with arrival at the inner Oort Cloud in no more than thirty years.&quot; &quot;Such a mission could perform useful astrophysical observations en route, explore gravitational focusing techniques, and image Oort Cloud objects while exploring particles and fields in that region that are of galactic rather than solar origin.&quot;

===Satellites===
Robert L. Forward has commented that a solar sail could be used to modify the orbit of a satellite about the Earth. In the limit, a sail could be used to &quot;hover&quot; a satellite above one pole of the Earth. Spacecraft fitted with solar sails could also be placed in close orbits such that they are stationary with respect to either the Sun or the Earth, a type of satellite named by Forward a &quot;statite&quot;. This is possible because the propulsion provided by the sail offsets the gravitational attraction of the Sun. Such an orbit could be useful for studying the properties of the Sun for long durations. Likewise a solar sail-equipped spacecraft could also remain on station nearly above the polar solar terminator of a planet such as the Earth by tilting the sail at the appropriate angle needed to counteract the planet&#x27;s gravity.

In his book &quot;The Case for Mars&quot;, Robert Zubrin points out that the reflected sunlight from a large statite, placed near the polar terminator of the planet Mars, could be focused on one of the Martian polar ice caps to significantly warm the planet&#x27;s atmosphere. Such a statite could be made from asteroid material.

A group of satellites designed to act as sails has been proposed to measure Earth&#x27;s Energy Imbalance which is the most fundamental measure of the planet&#x27;s rate of global warming. On-board state-of-the-art accelerometers would measure shifts in the pressure differential between incoming solar and outgoing thermal radiation on opposing sides of each satellite. Measurement accuracy has been projected to be better than that achievable with compact radiometric detectors.

===Trajectory corrections===
The MESSENGER probe orbiting Mercury used light pressure on its solar panels to perform fine trajectory corrections on the way to Mercury. By changing the angle of the solar panels relative to the Sun, the amount of solar radiation pressure was varied to adjust the spacecraft trajectory more delicately than possible with thrusters. Minor errors are greatly amplified by gravity assist maneuvers, so using radiation pressure to make very small corrections saved large amounts of propellant.

===Interstellar flight===
In the 1970s, Robert Forward proposed two beam-powered propulsion schemes using either lasers or masers to push giant sails to a significant fraction of the speed of light.

In the science fiction novel &quot;Rocheworld&quot;, Forward described a light sail propelled by super lasers. As the starship neared its destination, the outer portion of the sail would detach. The outer sail would then refocus and reflect the lasers back onto a smaller, inner sail. This would provide braking thrust to stop the ship in the destination star system.

Both methods pose monumental engineering challenges. The lasers would have to operate for years continuously at gigawatt strength. Forward&#x27;s solution to this requires enormous solar panel arrays to be built at or near the planet Mercury. A planet-sized mirror or Fresnel lens would need to be located at several dozen astronomical units from the Sun to keep the lasers focused on the sail. The giant braking sail would have to act as a precision mirror to focus the braking beam onto the inner &quot;deceleration&quot; sail.

A potentially easier approach would be to use a maser to drive a &quot;solar sail&quot; composed of a mesh of wires with the same spacing as the wavelength of the microwaves directed at the sail, since the manipulation of microwave radiation is somewhat easier than the manipulation of visible light. The hypothetical &quot;Starwisp&quot; interstellar probe design would use microwaves, rather than visible light, to push it. Masers spread out more rapidly than optical lasers owing to their longer wavelength, and so would not have as great an effective range.

Masers could also be used to power a painted solar sail, a conventional sail coated with a layer of chemicals designed to evaporate when struck by microwave radiation. The momentum generated by this evaporation could significantly increase the thrust generated by solar sails, as a form of lightweight ablative laser propulsion.

To further focus the energy on a distant solar sail, Forward proposed a lens designed as a large zone plate. This would be placed at a location between the laser or maser and the spacecraft.

Another more physically realistic approach would be to use the light from the Sun to accelerate the spacecraft. The ship would first drop into an orbit making a close pass to the Sun, to maximize the solar energy input on the sail, then it would begin to accelerate away from the system using the light from the Sun. Acceleration will drop approximately as the inverse square of the distance from the Sun, and beyond some distance, the ship would no longer receive enough light to accelerate it significantly, but would maintain the final velocity attained. When nearing the target star, the ship could turn its sails toward it and begin to use the outward pressure of the destination star to decelerate. Rockets could augment the solar thrust.

Similar solar sailing launch and capture were suggested for directed panspermia to expand life in other solar systems. Velocities of 0.05% the speed of light could be obtained by solar sails carrying 10 kg payloads, using thin solar sail vehicles with effective areal densities of 0.1 g/m2 with thin sails of 0.1 μm thickness and sizes on the order of one square kilometer. Alternatively, swarms of 1 mm capsules could be launched on solar sails with radii of 42 cm, each carrying 10,000 capsules of a hundred million extremophile microorganisms to seed life in diverse target environments.

Theoretical studies suggest relativistic speeds if the solar sail harnesses a supernova.

===Deorbiting artificial satellites===
Small solar sails have been proposed to accelerate the deorbiting of small artificial satellites from Earth orbits. Satellites in low Earth orbit can use a combination of solar pressure on the sail and increased atmospheric drag to accelerate satellite reentry. A de-orbit sail developed at Cranfield University is part of the UK satellite TechDemoSat-1, launched in 2014. The sail deployed at the end of the satellite&#x27;s five-year useful life in May 2019. The sail&#x27;s purpose is to bring the satellite out of orbit over a period of about 25 years. In July 2015 British 3U CubeSat called DeorbitSail was launched into space with the purpose of testing 16 m2 deorbit structure, but eventually it failed to deploy it. A student 2U CubeSat mission called PW-Sat2, launched in December 2018 and tested a 4 m2 deorbit sail. It successfully deorbited in February 2021. In June 2017, a second British 3U CubeSat called InflateSail deployed a 10 m2 deorbit sail at an altitude of .
In June 2017 the 3U Cubesat URSAMAIOR has been launched in low Earth orbit to test the deorbiting system ARTICA developed by Spacemind. The device, which occupies only 0.4 U of the cubesat, shall deploy a sail of 2.1 m2 to deorbit the satellite at the end of the operational life.

==Sail configurations==

IKAROS, launched in 2010, was the first practical solar sail vehicle. As of 2015, it was still under thrust, proving the practicality of a solar sail for long-duration missions. It is spin-deployed, with tip-masses in the corners of its square sail. The sail is made of thin polyimide film, coated with evaporated aluminium. It steers with electrically controlled liquid crystal panels. The sail slowly spins, and these panels turn on and off to control the attitude of the vehicle. When on, they diffuse light, reducing the momentum transfer to that part of the sail. When off, the sail reflects more light, transferring more momentum. In that way, they turn the sail. Thin-film solar cells are also integrated into the sail, powering the spacecraft. The design is very reliable, because spin deployment, which is preferable for large sails, simplified the mechanisms to unfold the sail and the LCD panels have no moving parts.

Parachutes have very low mass, but a parachute is not a workable configuration for a solar sail. Analysis shows that a parachute configuration would collapse from the forces exerted by shroud lines, since radiation pressure does not behave like aerodynamic pressure, and would not act to keep the parachute open.

The highest thrust-to-mass designs for ground-assembled deploy-able structures are square sails with the masts and guy lines on the dark side of the sail. Usually there are four masts that spread the corners of the sail, and a mast in the center to hold guy-wires. One of the largest advantages is that there are no hot spots in the rigging from wrinkling or bagging, and the sail protects the structure from the Sun. This form can, therefore, go close to the Sun for maximum thrust. Most designs steer with small moving sails on the ends of the spars.

In the 1970s JPL studied many rotating blade and ring sails for a mission to rendezvous with Halley&#x27;s Comet. The intention was to stiffen the structures using angular momentum, eliminating the need for struts, and saving mass. In all cases, surprisingly large amounts of tensile strength were needed to cope with dynamic loads. Weaker sails would ripple or oscillate when the sail&#x27;s attitude changed, and the oscillations would add and cause structural failure. The difference in the thrust-to-mass ratio between practical designs was almost nil, and the static designs were easier to control.

JPL&#x27;s reference design was called the &quot;heliogyro&quot;. It had plastic-film blades deployed from rollers and held out by centrifugal forces as it rotated. The spacecraft&#x27;s attitude and direction were to be completely controlled by changing the angle of the blades in various ways, similar to the cyclic and collective pitch of a helicopter. Although the design had no mass advantage over a square sail, it remained attractive because the method of deploying the sail was simpler than a strut-based design. The CubeSail (UltraSail) is an active project aiming to deploy a heliogyro sail.

Heliogyro design is similar to the blades on a helicopter. The design is faster to manufacture due to lightweight centrifugal stiffening of sails. Also, they are highly efficient in cost and velocity because the blades are lightweight and long. Unlike the square and spinning disk designs, heliogyro is easier to deploy because the blades are compacted on a reel. The blades roll out when they are deploying after the ejection from the spacecraft. As the heliogyro travels through space the system spins around because of the centrifugal acceleration. Finally, payloads for the space flights are placed in the center of gravity to even out the distribution of weight to ensure stable flight.

JPL also investigated &quot;ring sails&quot; (Spinning Disk Sail in the above diagram), panels attached to the edge of a rotating spacecraft. The panels would have slight gaps, about one to five percent of the total area. Lines would connect the edge of one sail to the other. Masses in the middles of these lines would pull the sails taut against the coning caused by the radiation pressure. JPL researchers said that this might be an attractive sail design for large crewed structures. The inner ring, in particular, might be made to have artificial gravity roughly equal to the gravity on the surface of Mars.

A solar sail can serve a dual function as a high-gain antenna. Designs differ, but most modify the metalization pattern to create a holographic monochromatic lens or mirror in the radio frequencies of interest, including visible light.

==Reflective sail making==
===Materials===

The most common material in current designs is a thin layer of aluminum coating on a polymer (plastic) sheet, such as aluminized 2 μm Kapton film. The polymer provides mechanical support as well as flexibility, while the thin metal layer provides the reflectivity. Such material resists the heat of a pass close to the Sun and still remains reasonably strong. The aluminum reflecting film is on the Sun side. The sails of &quot;Cosmos 1&quot; were made of aluminized PET film (Mylar).

Eric Drexler developed a concept for a sail in which the polymer was removed. He proposed very high thrust-to-mass solar sails, and made prototypes of the sail material. His sail would use panels of thin aluminium film (30 to 100 nanometres thick) supported by a tensile structure. The sail would rotate and would have to be continually under thrust. He made and handled samples of the film in the laboratory, but the material was too delicate to survive folding, launch, and deployment. The design planned to rely on space-based production of the film panels, joining them to a deployable tension structure. Sails in this class would offer high area per unit mass and hence accelerations up to &quot;fifty times higher&quot; than designs based on deploy-able plastic films.
The material developed for the Drexler solar sail was a thin aluminium film with a baseline thickness of 0.1 μm, to be fabricated by vapor deposition in a space-based system. Drexler used a similar process to prepare films on the ground. As anticipated, these films demonstrated adequate strength and robustness for handling in the laboratory and for use in space, but not for folding, launch, and deployment.

Research by Geoffrey Landis in 1998–1999, funded by the NASA Institute for Advanced Concepts, showed that various materials such as alumina for laser lightsails and carbon fiber for microwave pushed lightsails were superior sail materials to the previously standard aluminium or Kapton films.

In 2000, Energy Science Laboratories developed a new carbon fiber material that might be useful for solar sails. The material is over 200 times thicker than conventional solar sail designs, but it is so porous that it has the same mass. The rigidity and durability of this material could make solar sails that are significantly sturdier than plastic films. The material could self-deploy and should withstand higher temperatures.

There has been some theoretical speculation about using molecular manufacturing techniques to create advanced, strong, hyper-light sail material, based on nanotube mesh weaves, where the weave &quot;spaces&quot; are less than half the wavelength of light impinging on the sail. While such materials have so far only been produced in laboratory conditions, and the means for manufacturing such material on an industrial scale are not yet available, such materials could mass less than 0.1 g/m2, making them lighter than any current sail material by a factor of at least 30. For comparison, 5 micrometre thick Mylar sail material mass 7 g/m2, aluminized Kapton films have a mass as much as 12 g/m2, and Energy Science Laboratories&#x27; new carbon fiber material masses 3 g/m2.

The least dense metal is lithium, about 5 times less dense than aluminium. Fresh, unoxidized surfaces are reflective. At a thickness of 20 nm, lithium has an area density of 0.011 g/m2. A high-performance sail could be made of lithium alone at 20 nm (no emission layer). It would have to be fabricated in space and not used to approach the Sun. In the limit, a sail craft might be constructed with a total areal density of around 0.02 g/m2, giving it a lightness number of 67 and ac of about 400 mm/s2. Magnesium and beryllium are also potential materials for high-performance sails. These 3 metals can be alloyed with each other and with aluminium.

===Reflection and emissivity layers===
Aluminium is the common choice for the reflection layer. It typically has a thickness of at least 20 nm, with a reflectivity of 0.88 to 0.90. Chromium is a good choice for the emission layer on the face away from the Sun. It can readily provide emissivity values of 0.63 to 0.73 for thicknesses from 5 to 20 nm on plastic film. Usable emissivity values are empirical because thin-film effects dominate; bulk emissivity values do not hold up in these cases because material thickness is much thinner than the emitted wavelengths.

===Fabrication===
Sails are fabricated on Earth on long tables where ribbons are unrolled and joined to create the sails. Sail material needed to have as little weight as possible because it would require the use of the shuttle to carry the craft into orbit. Thus, these sails are packed, launched, and unfurled in space.

In the future, fabrication could take place in orbit inside large frames that support the sail. This would result in lower mass sails and elimination of the risk of deployment failure.

==Operations==

===Changing orbits===
Sailing operations are simplest in interplanetary orbits, where altitude changes are done at low rates. For outward bound trajectories, the sail force vector is oriented forward of the Sun line, which increases orbital energy and angular momentum, resulting in the craft moving farther from the Sun. For inward trajectories, the sail force vector is oriented behind the Sun line, which decreases orbital energy and angular momentum, resulting in the craft moving in toward the Sun. It is worth noting that only the Sun&#x27;s gravity pulls the craft toward the Sun—there is no analog to a sailboat&#x27;s tacking to windward. To change orbital inclination, the force vector is turned out of the plane of the velocity vector.

In orbits around planets or other bodies, the sail is oriented so that its force vector has a component along the velocity vector, either in the direction of motion for an outward spiral, or against the direction of motion for an inward spiral.

Trajectory optimizations can often require intervals of reduced or zero thrust. This can be achieved by rolling the craft around the Sun line with the sail set at an appropriate angle to reduce or remove the thrust.

===Swing-by maneuvers===
A close solar passage can be used to increase a craft&#x27;s energy. The increased radiation pressure combines with the efficacy of being deep in the Sun&#x27;s gravity well to substantially increase the energy for runs to the outer Solar System. The optimal approach to the Sun is done by increasing the orbital eccentricity while keeping the energy level as high as practical. The minimum approach distance is a function of sail angle, thermal properties of the sail and other structure, load effects on structure, and sail optical characteristics (reflectivity and emissivity). A close passage can result in substantial optical degradation. Required turn rates can increase substantially for a close passage. A sail craft arriving at a star can use a close passage to reduce energy, which also applies to a sail craft on a return trip from the outer Solar System.

A lunar swing-by can have important benefits for trajectories leaving from or arriving at Earth. This can reduce trip times, especially in cases where the sail is heavily loaded. A swing-by can also be used to obtain favorable departure or arrival directions relative to Earth.

A planetary swing-by could also be employed similar to what is done with coasting spacecraft, but good alignments might not exist due to the requirements for overall optimization of the trajectory.

===Laser powered===

The following table lists some example concepts using beamed laser propulsion as proposed by the physicist Robert L. Forward:

====Interstellar travel catalog to use photogravitational assists for a full stop====
* Successive assists at α Cen A and B could allow travel times to 75 yr to both stars.
* Lightsail has a nominal mass-to-surface ratio (σnom) of 8.6×10−4 gram m−2 for a nominal graphene-class sail.
* Area of the Lightsail, about 105 m2 = (316 m)2
* Velocity up to 37,300 km s−1 (12.5% c)
Ref:

==Projects operating or completed==

===Attitude (orientation) control===
Both the Mariner 10 mission, which flew by the planets Mercury and Venus, and the MESSENGER mission to Mercury demonstrated the use of solar pressure as a method of attitude control in order to conserve attitude-control propellant.

Hayabusa also used solar pressure on its solar paddles as a method of attitude control to compensate for broken reaction wheels and chemical thruster.

MTSAT-1R (Multi-Functional Transport Satellite)&#x27;s solar sail counteracts the torque produced by sunlight pressure on the solar array. The trim tab on the solar array makes small adjustments to the torque balance.

===Ground deployment tests===
NASA has successfully tested deployment technologies on small scale sails in vacuum chambers.

In 1999, a full-scale deployment of a solar sail was tested on the ground at DLR/ESA in Cologne.

===Suborbital tests ===

Cosmos 1, a joint private project between Planetary Society, Cosmos Studios and Russian Academy of Science attempted to launch a suborbital prototype vehicle in 2005, which was destroyed due to a rocket failure.

A 15-meter-diameter solar sail (SSP, solar sail sub payload, &quot;soraseiru sabupeiro-do&quot;) was launched together with ASTRO-F on a M-V rocket on February 21, 2006, and made it to orbit. It deployed from the stage, but opened incompletely.

On August 9, 2004, the Japanese ISAS successfully deployed two prototype solar sails from a sounding rocket. A clover-shaped sail was deployed at 122 km altitude and a fan-shaped sail was deployed at 169 km altitude. Both sails used 7.5-micrometer film. The experiment purely tested the deployment mechanisms, not propulsion.

===Znamya 2===

On February 4, 1993, the Znamya 2, a 20-meter wide aluminized-mylar reflector, was successfully deployed from the Russian Mir space station. It was the first thin film reflector of such type successfully deployed in space using the mechanism based on centrifugal force. Although the deployment succeeded, propulsion was not demonstrated. A second test in 1999, Znamya 2.5, failed to deploy properly.

===IKAROS 2010===

On 21 May 2010, Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) launched the world&#x27;s first interplanetary solar sail spacecraft &quot;IKAROS&quot; (Interplanetary Kite-craft Accelerated by Radiation Of the Sun) to Venus. Using a new solar-photon propulsion method, it was the first true solar sail spacecraft fully propelled by sunlight, and was the first spacecraft to succeed in solar sail flight.

JAXA successfully tested IKAROS in 2010. The goal was to deploy and control the sail and, for the first time, to determine the minute orbit perturbations caused by light pressure. Orbit determination was done by the nearby AKATSUKI probe from which IKAROS detached after both had been brought into a transfer orbit to Venus. The total effect over the six month flight was 100 m/s.

Until 2010, no solar sails had been successfully used in space as primary propulsion systems. On 21 May 2010, the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) launched the IKAROS spacecraft, which deployed a 200 m2 polyimide experimental solar sail on June 10.&lt;ref name=&quot;jaxa.jp/press/2010/06/20100611_ikaros_e&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; In July, the next phase for the demonstration of acceleration by radiation began. On 9 July 2010, it was verified that IKAROS collected radiation from the Sun and began photon acceleration by the orbit determination of IKAROS by range-and-range-rate (RARR) that is newly calculated in addition to the data of the relativization accelerating speed of IKAROS between IKAROS and the Earth that has been taken since before the Doppler effect was utilized.&lt;ref name=&quot;http://www.jaxa.jp/press/2010/07/20100709_ikaros_j.html&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The data showed that IKAROS appears to have been solar-sailing since 3 June when it deployed the sail.

IKAROS has a diagonal spinning square sail 14×14 m (196 m2) made of a thick sheet of polyimide. The polyimide sheet had a mass of about 10 grams per square metre. A thin-film solar array is embedded in the sail. Eight LCD panels are embedded in the sail, whose reflectance can be adjusted for attitude control. IKAROS spent six months traveling to Venus, and then began a three-year journey to the far side of the Sun.

===NanoSail-D 2010===

A team from the NASA Marshall Space Flight Center (Marshall), along with a team from the NASA Ames Research Center, developed a solar sail mission called NanoSail-D, which was lost in a launch failure aboard a Falcon 1 rocket on 3 August 2008. The second backup version, NanoSail-D2, also sometimes called simply NanoSail-D, was launched with FASTSAT on a Minotaur IV on November 19, 2010, becoming NASA&#x27;s first solar sail deployed in low earth orbit. The objectives of the mission were to test sail deployment technologies, and to gather data about the use of solar sails as a simple, &quot;passive&quot; means of de-orbiting dead satellites and space debris. The NanoSail-D structure was made of aluminium and plastic, with the spacecraft massing less than . The sail has about of light-catching surface. After some initial problems with deployment, the solar sail was deployed and over the course of its 240-day mission reportedly produced a &quot;wealth of data&quot; concerning the use of solar sails as passive deorbit devices. 

NASA launched the second NanoSail-D unit stowed inside the FASTSAT satellite on the Minotaur IV on November 19, 2010. The ejection date from the FASTSAT microsatellite was planned for December 6, 2010, but deployment only occurred on January 20, 2011.
===Planetary Society LightSail Projects===
On June 21, 2005, a joint private project between Planetary Society, Cosmos Studios and Russian Academy of Science launched a prototype sail &quot;Cosmos 1&quot; from a submarine in the Barents Sea, but the Volna rocket failed, and the spacecraft failed to reach orbit. They intended to use the sail to gradually raise the spacecraft to a higher Earth orbit over a mission duration of one month. The launch attempt sparked public interest according to Louis Friedman. Despite the failed launch attempt of Cosmos 1, The Planetary Society received applause for their efforts from the space community and sparked a rekindled interest in solar sail technology.

On Carl Sagan&#x27;s 75th birthday (November 9, 2009) the Planetary Society announced plans to make three further attempts, dubbed LightSail-1, -2, and -3. The new design will use a 32 m2 Mylar sail, deployed in four triangular segments like NanoSail-D. The launch configuration is a 3U CubeSat format, and as of 2015, it was scheduled as a secondary payload for a 2016 launch on the first SpaceX Falcon Heavy launch.

&quot;LightSail-1&quot; was launched on 20 May 2015. The purpose of the test was to allow a full checkout of the satellite&#x27;s systems in advance of LightSail-2. Its deployment orbit was not high enough to escape Earth&#x27;s atmospheric drag and demonstrate true solar sailing.

&quot;LightSail-2&quot; was launched on 25 June 2019, and deployed into a much higher low Earth orbit. Its solar sails were deployed on 23 July 2019. It reentered the atmosphere on 17 November 2022.

===NEA Scout===

The Near-Earth Asteroid Scout (NEA Scout) was a mission jointly developed by NASA&#x27;s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), consisting of a controllable low-cost CubeSat solar sail spacecraft capable of encountering near-Earth asteroids (NEA). Four booms were to deploy, unfurling the aluminized polyimide solar sail. In 2015, NASA announced it had selected NEA Scout to launch as one of several secondary payloads aboard Artemis 1, the first flight of the agency&#x27;s heavy-lift SLS launch vehicle. However, the craft was considered lost with the failure to establish communications shortly after launch in 2022.

===Advanced Composite Solar Sail System (ACS3)===

The NASA Advanced Composite Solar Sail System (ACS3) is a technology demonstration of solar sail technology for future small spacecraft. It was selected in 2019 by NASA&#x27;s CubeSat Launch Initiative (CSLI) to be launched as part of the ELaNa program.

ACS3 consists of a 12U (unit) CubeSat small satellite (23 cm x 23 cm x 34 cm; 16 kg) that unfolds a quadratic solar sail consisting of a polyethylene naphthalate film coated on one side with aluminum for reflectivity and on the other side with chromium to increase thermal emissivity. The sail is held by a novel unfolding system of four long carbon fiber reinforced polymer booms that roll-up for storage. 

ACS3 was launched on 23 April 2024 on the Electron &quot;Beginning Of The Swarm&quot; mission. The ACS3 successfully made contact with ground stations following deployment in early May. The solar sail was confirmed as successfully operational by mission operators on 29 August 2024. 

On 25 October 2024 it was reported &quot;... a bent support arm has made it (ACS3) lose direction and spin out of control in space.&quot;

== Projects proposed or cancelled or not selected ==
Despite the losses of &quot;Cosmos 1&quot; and NanoSail-D (about 23cm x 23cm x 34cm) which were due to failure of their launchers, scientists and engineers around the world remain encouraged and continue to work on solar sails. While most direct applications created so far intend to use the sails as inexpensive modes of cargo transport, some scientists are investigating the possibility of using solar sails as a means of transporting humans. This goal is strongly related to the management of very large (i.e. well above 1 km2) surfaces in space and the sail making advancements. Development of solar sails for crewed space flight is still in its infancy.

===Sunjammer 2015===

A technology demonstration sail craft, dubbed &quot;Sunjammer&quot;, was in development with the intent to prove the viability and value of sailing technology. &quot;Sunjammer&quot; had a square sail, wide on each side, giving it an effective area of . It would have traveled from the Sun-Earth Lagrangian point from Earth to a distance of . The demonstration was expected to launch on a Falcon 9 in January 2015. It would have been a secondary payload, released after the placement of the DSCOVR climate satellite at the L1 point. Citing a lack of confidence in the ability of its contractor L&#x27;Garde to deliver, the mission was cancelled by NASA in October 2014.

===OKEANOS===

OKEANOS (Outsized Kite-craft for Exploration and Astronautics in the Outer Solar System) was a proposed mission concept by Japan&#x27;s JAXA to Jupiter&#x27;s Trojan asteroids using a hybrid solar sail for propulsion; the sail would have been covered with thin solar panels to power an ion engine. &quot;In-situ&quot; analysis of the collected samples would have been performed by either direct contact or using a lander carrying a high-resolution mass spectrometer. A lander and a sample-return to Earth were options under study. The OKEANOS Jupiter Trojan Asteroid Explorer was a finalist for Japan&#x27;s ISAS″ 2nd Large-class mission to be launched in the late 2020s. However, it was not selected.

===&quot;Solar Cruiser&quot;===
In August 2019, NASA awarded the &quot;Solar Cruiser&quot; team $400,000 for nine-month mission concept studies. The spacecraft would have a solar sail and would orbit the Sun in a polar orbit, while the coronagraph instrument would enable simultaneous measurements of the Sun&#x27;s magnetic field structure and velocity of coronal mass ejections. If selected for further development, it would have launched in 2025. However, &quot;Solar Cruiser&quot; was not approved to advance to phase C of its development cycle and was subsequently discontinued.

==Projects still in development or unknown status==

===Gossamer deorbit sail===
, the European Space Agency (ESA) has a proposed deorbit sail, named &quot;Gossamer&quot;, that would be intended to be used to accelerate the deorbiting of small (less than ) artificial satellites from low Earth orbits. The launch mass is with a launch volume of only . Once deployed, the sail would expand to and would use a combination of solar pressure on the sail and increased atmospheric drag to accelerate satellite reentry.

===Breakthrough Starshot===

The well-funded Breakthrough Starshot project announced on April 12, 2016, aims to develop a fleet of 1000 light sail nanocraft carrying miniature cameras, propelled by ground-based lasers and send them to Alpha Centauri at 20% the speed of light. The trip would take 20 years.

== In popular culture ==

Cordwainer Smith gives a description of solar-sail-powered spaceships in &quot;The Lady Who Sailed The Soul&quot;, published first in April 1960.

Jack Vance wrote a short story about a training mission on a solar-sail-powered spaceship in &quot;Sail 25&quot;, published in 1961.

Arthur C. Clarke and Poul Anderson (writing as Winston P. Sanders) independently published stories featuring solar sails, both stories titled &quot;Sunjammer,&quot; in 1964. Clarke retitled his story &quot;The Wind from the Sun&quot; when it was reprinted, in order to avoid confusion.

In Larry Niven and Jerry Pournelle&#x27;s 1974 novel &quot;The Mote in God&#x27;s Eye&quot;, aliens are discovered when their laser-sail propelled probe enters human space.

A similar technology was the theme in the &quot;Star Trek: Deep Space Nine&quot; episode &quot;Explorers&quot;. In the episode, Lightships are described as an ancient technology used by Bajorans to travel beyond their solar system by using light from the Bajoran sun and specially constructed sails to propel them through space ().

In the 2002 &quot;Star Wars&quot; film &quot;Attack of the Clones&quot;, the main villain Count Dooku was seen using a spacecraft with solar sails.

In the 2009 film &quot;Avatar&quot;, the spacecraft which transports the protagonist Jake Sully to the Alpha Centauri system, the &quot;ISV Venture Star&quot;, uses solar sails as a means of propulsion to accelerate the vehicle away from the Earth towards Alpha Centauri.

In the third season of Apple TV+&#x27;s alternate history TV show &quot;For All Mankind&quot;, the fictional NASA spaceship Sojourner 1 utilises solar sails for additional propulsion on its way to Mars.

In the final episode of the first season of 2024 Netflix TV show, &quot;3 Body Problem&quot;, one of the protagonists, Will Downing, has his cryogenically frozen brain launched into space toward the oncoming Trisolarian spaceship, using solar sails and nuclear pulse propulsion to accelerate it to a fraction of the speed of light.

==See also==
* 
* 

==References==
==Bibliography==
*G. Vulpetti, &quot;Fast Solar Sailing: Astrodynamics of Special Sailcraft Trajectories&quot;, &quot;Space Technology Library&quot; Vol. 30, Springer, August 2012, (Hardcover) https://www.springer.com/engineering/mechanical+engineering/book/978-94-007-4776-0, (Kindle-edition), ASIN: B00A9YGY4I
*G. Vulpetti, L. Johnson, G. L. Matloff, &quot;Solar Sails: A Novel Approach to Interplanetary Flight&quot;, Springer, August 2015, 
* J. L. Wright, &quot;Space Sailing&quot;, Gordon and Breach Science Publishers, London, 1992; Wright was involved with JPL&#x27;s effort to use a solar sail for a rendezvous with Halley&#x27;s comet.
* &quot;NASA/CR 2002-211730, Chapter IV&quot;— presents an optimized escape trajectory via the H-reversal sailing mode
*G. Vulpetti, The Sailcraft Splitting Concept, &quot;JBIS&quot;, Vol. 59, pp. 48–53, February 2006
*G. L. Matloff, &quot;Deep-Space Probes: To the Outer Solar System and Beyond&quot;, 2nd ed., Springer-Praxis, UK, 2005, 
*T. Taylor, D. Robinson, T. Moton, T. C. Powell, G. Matloff, and J. Hall, &quot;Solar Sail Propulsion Systems Integration and Analysis (for Option Period)&quot;, Final Report for NASA/MSFC, Contract No. H-35191D Option Period, Teledyne Brown Engineering Inc., Huntsville, AL, May 11, 2004
*G. Vulpetti, &quot;Sailcraft Trajectory Options for the Interstellar Probe: Mathematical Theory and Numerical Results&quot;, the Chapter IV of NASA/CR-2002-211730, &quot;The Interstellar Probe (ISP): Pre-Perihelion Trajectories and Application of Holography&quot;, June 2002
*G. Vulpetti, Sailcraft-Based Mission to The Solar Gravitational Lens, STAIF-2000, Albuquerque (New Mexico, USA), 30 January – 3 February 2000
*G. Vulpetti, &quot;General 3D H-Reversal Trajectories for High-Speed Sailcraft&quot;, &quot;Acta Astronautica&quot;, Vol. 44, No. 1, pp. 67–73, 1999
*C. R. McInnes, &quot;Solar Sailing: Technology, Dynamics, and Mission Applications&quot;, Springer-Praxis Publishing Ltd, Chichester, UK, 1999, 
*Genta, G., and Brusa, E., &quot;The AURORA Project: a New Sail Layout&quot;, &quot;Acta Astronautica&quot;, 44, No. 2–4, pp. 141–146 (1999)
*S. Scaglione and G. Vulpetti, &quot;The Aurora Project: Removal of Plastic Substrate to Obtain an All-Metal Solar Sail&quot;, special issue of &quot;Acta Astronautica&quot;, vol. 44, No. 2–4, pp. 147–150, 1999
*

==External links==

* &quot;Deflecting Asteroids&quot; by Gregory L. Matloff, &quot;IEEE Spectrum,&quot; April 2012
* Planetary Society&#x27;s solar sailing project
*The Solar Photon Sail Comes of Age by Gregory L. Matloff
* NASA Mission Site for NanoSail-D 
* &quot;NanoSail-D&quot; mission: Dana Coulter, &quot;NASA to Attempt Historic Solar Sail Deployment&quot;, NASA, June 28, 2008
* Far-out Pathways to Space: Solar Sails from NASA
* Solar Sails Comprehensive collection of solar sail information and references, maintained by Benjamin Diedrich. Good diagrams showing how light sailors must tack.
* U3P Multilingual site with news and flight simulators
* ISAS Deployed Solar Sail Film in Space
* Suggestion of a solar sail with roller reefing, hybrid propulsion and a central docking and payload station.
* Interview with NASA&#x27;s JPL about solar sail technology and missions
* Website with technical pdf-files about solar-sailing, including NASA report and lectures at Aerospace Engineering School of Rome University
* Advanced Solar- and Laser-pushed Lightsail Concepts
*www.aibep.org: Official site of American Institute of Beamed Energy Propulsion
* Space Sailing Sailing ship concepts, operations, and history of concept
* Bernd Dachwald&#x27;s Website Broad information on sail propulsion and missions</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q368891" start="0" end="11" title="Solar sail" label="Solar sails"/>
<link wikidata="Q368891" start="27" end="37" title="Solar sail" label="lightsails"/>
<link wikidata="Q368891" start="39" end="50" title="Solar sail" label="light sails"/>
<link wikidata="Q368891" start="56" end="72" title="Solar sail" label="[[photon]] sails"/>
<link wikidata="Q609089" start="90" end="111" title="spacecraft propulsion" label="spacecraft propulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q649036" start="118" end="136" title="radiation pressure" label="radiation pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q193788" start="148" end="156" title="sunlight" label="sunlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q609059" start="340" end="346" title="IKAROS" label="IKAROS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075310" start="410" end="422" title="sailboat" label="sailing boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11402" start="445" end="450" title="force" label="force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407628" start="527" end="538" title="Laser propulsion" label="laser beams"/>
<link wikidata="Q335225" start="785" end="800" title="chemical rocket" label="chemical rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q842433" start="1031" end="1044" title="astrodynamics" label="astrodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q834235" start="1096" end="1116" title="Interplanetary spaceflight" label="interplanetary space"/>
<link wikidata="Q83001" start="1454" end="1465" title="Spacecraft attitude" label="orientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572667" start="1517" end="1534" title="spacecraft design" label="spacecraft design"/>
<link wikidata="Q609089" start="1663" end="1673" title="spacecraft propulsion" label="propulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q648588" start="1717" end="1733" title="Electrically powered spacecraft propulsion" label="electric engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963" start="1943" end="1958" title="Johannes Kepler" label="Johannes Kepler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="1973" end="1978" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="2005" end="2008" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q9095" start="2366" end="2385" title="James Clerk Maxwell" label="James Clerk Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q177625" start="2425" end="2446" title="electromagnetic field" label="electromagnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q41273" start="2490" end="2498" title="momentum" label="momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q51501" start="2539" end="2563" title="Maxwell&amp;#x27;s equations" label="Maxwell&amp;#x27;s equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q193788" start="2682" end="2690" title="sunlight" label="sunlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q33977" start="2749" end="2760" title="Jules Verne" label="Jules Verne"/>
<link wikidata="Q471369" start="3170" end="3183" title="Pyotr Lebedev" label="Pyotr Lebedev"/>
<link wikidata="Q9065697" start="3375" end="3393" title="Nichols radiometer" label="Nichols radiometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q80956" start="3396" end="3412" title="Svante Arrhenius" label="Svante Arrhenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q188458" start="3577" end="3587" title="panspermia" label="panspermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41239" start="3682" end="3704" title="Konstantin Tsiolkovsky" label="Konstantin Tsiolkovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q327279" start="3924" end="3940" title="Friedrich Zander" label="Friedrich Zander"/>
<link wikidata="Q156333" start="4198" end="4209" title="JBS Haldane" label="JBS Haldane"/>
<link wikidata="Q168362" start="4446" end="4458" title="J. D. Bernal" label="J. D. Bernal"/>
<link wikidata="Q223776" start="4736" end="4757" title="Gravity assist" label="to increase its speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q47087" start="4878" end="4894" title="Arthur C. Clarke" label="Arthur C. Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q12267739" start="4907" end="4916" title="Sunjammer" label="Sunjammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="4926" end="4941" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q49084" start="4942" end="4953" title="short story" label="short story"/>
<link wikidata="Q126900267" start="5008" end="5023" title="Boys&amp;#x27; Life" label="Boys&amp;#x27; Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q410" start="5086" end="5096" title="Carl Sagan" label="Carl Sagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="5197" end="5204" title="photons" label="photons"/>
<link wikidata="Q23054" start="5405" end="5424" title="Halley&amp;#x27;s Comet" label="Halley&amp;#x27;s Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q189325" start="5616" end="5641" title="Jet Propulsion Laboratory" label="Jet Propulsion Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q23054" start="5684" end="5703" title="Halley&amp;#x27;s Comet" label="Halley&amp;#x27;s Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q165939" start="5767" end="5777" title="Reflection (physics)" label="reflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q35197" start="5832" end="5838" title="mirror" label="mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q133900" start="5928" end="5939" title="diffraction" label="diffraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161077" start="6094" end="6108" title="Pekka Janhunen" label="Pekka Janhunen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266959" start="6114" end="6117" title="Finnish Meteorological Institute" label="FMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620789" start="6163" end="6187" title="electric solar wind sail" label="electric solar wind sail"/>
<link wikidata="Q173817" start="6341" end="6349" title="radius" label="radially"/>
<link wikidata="Q46221" start="6420" end="6434" title="electric field" label="electric field"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721907" start="7044" end="7057" title="magnetic sail" label="magnetic sail"/>
<link wikidata="Q79833" start="7409" end="7419" title="solar wind" label="solar wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="7722" end="7728" title="photon" label="photon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502299" start="7759" end="7783" title="Energy–momentum relation" label="Einstein&amp;#x27;s relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111" start="7877" end="7891" title="speed of light" label="speed of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q335272" start="8019" end="8033" title="solar constant" label="solar constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811" start="8059" end="8061" title="Astronomical unit" label="AU"/>
<link wikidata="Q44395" start="8162" end="8164" title="Pascal (unit)" label="Pa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074917" start="8207" end="8236" title="Inelastic collision" label="perfectly inelastic collision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044799" start="8339" end="8356" title="elastic collision" label="elastic collision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079524" start="8394" end="8413" title="specular reflection" label="specular reflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q899670" start="9293" end="9303" title="emissivity" label="emissivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q79833" start="9328" end="9338" title="Solar wind" label="Solar wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q44395" start="9444" end="9447" title="Pascal (unit)" label="nPa"/>
<link wikidata="Q83001" start="10917" end="10933" title="Spacecraft attitude control" label="attitude control"/>
<link wikidata="Q604830" start="11314" end="11332" title="Center of pressure (fluid mechanics)" label="center of pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945123" start="11341" end="11355" title="center of mass" label="center of mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="12933" end="12945" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q16353" start="14134" end="14153" title="Aerobraking" label="aerodynamic braking"/>
<link wikidata="Q98113986" start="14767" end="14786" title="Solar gravitational lens" label="gravitational focus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14898" end="14916" title="Two-body problem in general relativity#Bending of light by gravity" label="focused by gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q569" start="15209" end="15218" title="beryllium" label="beryllium"/>
<link wikidata="Q131687" start="15841" end="15851" title="Heliopause (astronomy)" label="heliopause"/>
<link wikidata="Q116214108" start="15899" end="15918" title="Gravitational focusing" label="gravitational focus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000229" start="16267" end="16284" title="Robert L. Forward" label="Robert L. Forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604443" start="16672" end="16679" title="statite" label="statite"/>
<link wikidata="Q331824" start="16980" end="16996" title="terminator (solar)" label="solar terminator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721493" start="17139" end="17156" title="The Case for Mars" label="The Case for Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q504677" start="17164" end="17177" title="Robert Zubrin" label="Robert Zubrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292280" start="17528" end="17557" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s Energy Imbalance" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s Energy Imbalance"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="17625" end="17639" title="global warming" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q192940" start="17667" end="17680" title="accelerometer" label="accelerometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q192593" start="17768" end="17785" title="thermal radiation" label="thermal radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q247760" start="17910" end="17921" title="radiometry" label="radiometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q182539" start="17967" end="17976" title="MESSENGER" label="MESSENGER"/>
<link wikidata="Q308" start="17992" end="17999" title="Mercury (planet)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q223776" start="18335" end="18349" title="gravity assist" label="gravity assist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000229" start="18496" end="18510" title="Robert Forward" label="Robert Forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355073" start="18524" end="18547" title="beam-powered propulsion" label="beam-powered propulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q487875" start="18579" end="18584" title="maser" label="maser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111" start="18639" end="18653" title="speed of light" label="speed of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354066" start="18691" end="18701" title="Rocheworld" label="Rocheworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="19137" end="19145" title="gigawatt" label="gigawatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q14672" start="19293" end="19305" title="Fresnel lens" label="Fresnel lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811" start="19348" end="19365" title="astronomical unit" label="astronomical unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7602659" start="19880" end="19888" title="Starwisp" label="Starwisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q132814" start="20318" end="20329" title="evaporation" label="evaporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q533668" start="20363" end="20369" title="thrust" label="thrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407628" start="20421" end="20446" title="ablative laser propulsion" label="ablative laser propulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455709" start="20546" end="20556" title="zone plate" label="zone plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280412" start="21447" end="21466" title="directed panspermia" label="directed panspermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q175821" start="21700" end="21702" title="micrometre" label="μm"/>
<link wikidata="Q206912" start="21905" end="21917" title="extremophile" label="extremophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3" start="21941" end="21945" title="life" label="life"/>
<link wikidata="Q663611" start="22238" end="22253" title="low Earth orbit" label="low Earth orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q531716" start="22361" end="22368" title="atmospheric entry" label="reentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q181177" start="22399" end="22419" title="Cranfield University" label="Cranfield University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142930" start="22689" end="22696" title="CubeSat" label="CubeSat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22704" end="22715" title="DeorbitSail" label="DeorbitSail"/>
<link wikidata="Q856632" start="22868" end="22875" title="PW-Sat2" label="PW-Sat2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142930" start="23013" end="23020" title="CubeSat" label="CubeSat"/>
<link wikidata="Q30752104" start="23028" end="23039" title="InflateSail" label="InflateSail"/>
<link wikidata="Q663611" start="23149" end="23164" title="low Earth orbit" label="low Earth orbit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23215" end="23224" title="Spacemind" label="Spacemind"/>
<link wikidata="Q609059" start="23397" end="23403" title="IKAROS" label="IKAROS"/>
<link wikidata="Q145958" start="23672" end="23681" title="polyimide" label="polyimide"/>
<link wikidata="Q203989" start="23761" end="23775" title="liquid crystal" label="liquid crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q58803" start="24077" end="24087" title="solar cell" label="solar cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q340936" start="24756" end="24759" title="guy (sailing)" label="guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283556" start="24895" end="24903" title="guy-wire" label="guy-wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q189325" start="25208" end="25211" title="JPL" label="JPL"/>
<link wikidata="Q23054" start="25288" end="25307" title="Halley&amp;#x27;s Comet" label="Halley&amp;#x27;s Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="26144" end="26154" title="helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q48815976" start="26325" end="26345" title="CubeSail (UltraSail)" label="CubeSail (UltraSail)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988941" start="27809" end="27821" title="metallizing" label="metalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3192874" start="28125" end="28131" title="Kapton" label="Kapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q847714" start="28419" end="28427" title="Cosmos 1" label="Cosmos 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146623" start="28447" end="28466" title="metallized polyethylene terephthalate" label="aluminized PET film"/>
<link wikidata="Q441961" start="28468" end="28473" title="PET film (biaxially oriented)" label="Mylar"/>
<link wikidata="Q380511" start="28477" end="28489" title="Eric Drexler" label="Eric Drexler"/>
<link wikidata="Q178674" start="28707" end="28716" title="nanometre" label="nanometre"/>
<link wikidata="Q908584" start="28740" end="28747" title="tension (physics)" label="tensile"/>
<link wikidata="Q918443" start="29675" end="29690" title="Geoffrey Landis" label="Geoffrey Landis"/>
<link wikidata="Q533530" start="29719" end="29755" title="NASA Institute for Advanced Concepts" label="NASA Institute for Advanced Concepts"/>
<link wikidata="Q177342" start="29795" end="29802" title="alumina" label="alumina"/>
<link wikidata="Q910977" start="29828" end="29840" title="carbon fiber" label="carbon fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q910977" start="30010" end="30022" title="carbon fiber" label="carbon fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q740612" start="30444" end="30467" title="molecular manufacturing" label="molecular manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778729" start="30543" end="30551" title="Carbon nanotube" label="nanotube"/>
<link wikidata="Q441961" start="30996" end="31001" title="Mylar" label="Mylar"/>
<link wikidata="Q568" start="31190" end="31197" title="lithium" label="lithium"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="31668" end="31677" title="Magnesium" label="Magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q569" start="31682" end="31691" title="beryllium" label="beryllium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000229" start="35620" end="35637" title="Robert L. Forward" label="Robert L. Forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q59131" start="36103" end="36113" title="Mariner 10" label="Mariner 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q308" start="36149" end="36156" title="Mercury (planet)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="36161" end="36166" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q182539" start="36176" end="36185" title="MESSENGER" label="MESSENGER"/>
<link wikidata="Q83001" start="36259" end="36275" title="Spacecraft attitude control" label="attitude control"/>
<link wikidata="Q275444" start="36327" end="36335" title="Hayabusa (spacecraft)" label="Hayabusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457049" start="36439" end="36453" title="reaction wheel" label="reaction wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390199" start="36489" end="36525" title="Multi-Functional Transport Satellite" label="Multi-Functional Transport Satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q847714" start="36946" end="36954" title="Cosmos 1" label="Cosmos 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q671782" start="36988" end="37005" title="Planetary Society" label="Planetary Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174621" start="37007" end="37021" title="Cosmos Studios" label="Cosmos Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q83172" start="37026" end="37052" title="Russian Academy of Science" label="Russian Academy of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q298047" start="37283" end="37290" title="ASTRO-F" label="ASTRO-F"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332896" start="37296" end="37299" title="M-V" label="M-V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207946" start="37437" end="37441" title="Institute of Space and Astronautical Science" label="ISAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q175821" start="37642" end="37652" title="micrometre" label="micrometer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37773" end="37781" title="Znamya (space mirror)#Znamya 2" label="Znamya 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q48604" start="37870" end="37873" title="Mir" label="Mir"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38109" end="38119" title="Znamya (space mirror)#Znamya 2.5" label="Znamya 2.5"/>
<link wikidata="Q179103" start="38184" end="38218" title="Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency" label="Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q16502" start="38239" end="38244" title="world" label="world"/>
<link wikidata="Q834235" start="38258" end="38272" title="Interplanetary spaceflight" label="interplanetary"/>
<link wikidata="Q40218" start="38284" end="38294" title="spacecraft" label="spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q609059" start="38301" end="38307" title="IKAROS" label="IKAROS"/>
<link wikidata="Q416448" start="38791" end="38805" title="Akatsuki (spacecraft)" label="AKATSUKI probe"/>
<link wikidata="Q145958" start="40025" end="40034" title="polyimide" label="polyimide"/>
<link wikidata="Q83341" start="40158" end="40161" title="liquid crystal display" label="LCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q83001" start="40233" end="40249" title="Spacecraft attitude control" label="attitude control"/>
<link wikidata="Q618696" start="40404" end="40432" title="Marshall Space Flight Center" label="Marshall Space Flight Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q181052" start="40477" end="40497" title="Ames Research Center" label="Ames Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q648606" start="40593" end="40601" title="Falcon 1" label="Falcon 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q379402" start="40654" end="40665" title="NanoSail-D2" label="NanoSail-D2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424491" start="40726" end="40733" title="FASTSAT" label="FASTSAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q907608" start="40739" end="40750" title="Minotaur IV" label="Minotaur IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="41424" end="41428" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q671782" start="41769" end="41786" title="Planetary Society" label="Planetary Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174621" start="41788" end="41802" title="Cosmos Studios" label="Cosmos Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q83172" start="41807" end="41833" title="Russian Academy of Science" label="Russian Academy of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q45823" start="41905" end="41916" title="Barents Sea" label="Barents Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142103" start="41926" end="41931" title="Volna" label="Volna"/>
<link wikidata="Q671782" start="42234" end="42255" title="The Planetary Society" label="The Planetary Society"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42508" end="42519" title="LightSail#LightSail-1" label="LightSail-1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42521" end="42523" title="LightSail#LightSail-2" label="-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142930" start="42664" end="42671" title="CubeSat" label="CubeSat"/>
<link wikidata="Q193701" start="42767" end="42773" title="SpaceX" label="SpaceX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093627" start="42774" end="42786" title="Falcon Heavy" label="Falcon Heavy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42802" end="42813" title="LightSail#LightSail-1" label="LightSail-1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43085" end="43096" title="LightSail#LightSail-2" label="LightSail-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="43373" end="43377" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q618696" start="43385" end="43413" title="Marshall Space Flight Center" label="Marshall Space Flight Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q189325" start="43429" end="43454" title="Jet Propulsion Laboratory" label="Jet Propulsion Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142930" start="43500" end="43507" title="CubeSat" label="CubeSat"/>
<link wikidata="Q265392" start="43554" end="43573" title="near-Earth asteroid" label="near-Earth asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3389152" start="43760" end="43769" title="Artemis 1" label="Artemis 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q64127" start="43820" end="43823" title="Space Launch System" label="SLS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44182" end="44214" title="CubeSat#CubeSat_Launch_Initiative" label="CubeSat Launch Initiative (CSLI)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48854464" start="44245" end="44250" title="Educational Launch of Nanosatellites" label="ELaNa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142930" start="44291" end="44298" title="CubeSat" label="CubeSat"/>
<link wikidata="Q411472" start="44398" end="44422" title="polyethylene naphthalate" label="polyethylene naphthalate"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="44452" end="44460" title="Aluminium" label="aluminum"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="44505" end="44513" title="chromium" label="chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q910977" start="44604" end="44635" title="Carbon-fiber reinforced polymer" label="carbon fiber reinforced polymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q811491" start="44636" end="44641" title="Boom (sailing)" label="booms"/>
<link wikidata="Q18471030" start="44712" end="44720" title="Rocket Lab Electron" label="Electron"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44727" end="44749" title="List of Electron launches#2024" label="Beginning Of The Swarm"/>
<link wikidata="Q15261140" start="45875" end="45896" title="Sunjammer (spacecraft)" label="&amp;quot;Sunjammer&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q190463" start="46124" end="46140" title="Lagrangian point" label="Lagrangian point"/>
<link wikidata="Q249091" start="46217" end="46225" title="Falcon 9" label="Falcon 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182418" start="46319" end="46325" title="Deep Space Climate Observatory" label="DSCOVR"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156802" start="46422" end="46434" title="LGarde" label="L&amp;#x27;Garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q179103" start="46650" end="46654" title="JAXA" label="JAXA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8101032" start="46673" end="46689" title="Jupiter Trojan" label="Trojan asteroids"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556726" start="46775" end="46787" title="Solar panels on spacecraft" label="solar panels"/>
<link wikidata="Q205702" start="46800" end="46810" title="ion engine" label="ion engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207946" start="47122" end="47126" title="Institute of Space and Astronautical Science" label="ISAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q835032" start="47453" end="47464" title="coronagraph" label="coronagraph"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47522" end="47547" title="Sun#Magnetic field" label="Sun&amp;#x27;s magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q129890" start="47574" end="47595" title="coronal mass ejection" label="coronal mass ejection"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="47889" end="47910" title="European Space Agency" label="European Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q663611" start="48086" end="48101" title="low Earth orbit" label="low Earth orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q531716" start="48307" end="48314" title="atmospheric entry" label="reentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12176" start="48552" end="48566" title="Alpha Centauri" label="Alpha Centauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q937000" start="48651" end="48667" title="Cordwainer Smith" label="Cordwainer Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q312632" start="48798" end="48808" title="Jack Vance" label="Jack Vance"/>
<link wikidata="Q47087" start="48932" end="48948" title="Arthur C. Clarke" label="Arthur C. Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q220883" start="48953" end="48966" title="Poul Anderson" label="Poul Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q316610" start="49222" end="49233" title="Larry Niven" label="Larry Niven"/>
<link wikidata="Q578031" start="49238" end="49253" title="Jerry Pournelle" label="Jerry Pournelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190888" start="49278" end="49304" title="The Mote in God&amp;#x27;s Eye" label="The Mote in God&amp;#x27;s Eye"/>
<link wikidata="" start="49441" end="49467" title="Star Trek: Deep Space Nine" label="Star Trek: Deep Space Nine"/>
<link wikidata="" start="49488" end="49497" title="Explorers (Star Trek: Deep Space Nine)" label="Explorers"/>
<link wikidata="Q788819" start="49579" end="49586" title="Bajoran" label="Bajoran"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="49744" end="49753" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q181069" start="49771" end="49791" title="Attack of the Clones" label="Attack of the Clones"/>
<link wikidata="Q51727" start="49816" end="49827" title="Count Dooku" label="Count Dooku"/>
<link wikidata="Q24871" start="49898" end="49904" title="Avatar (2009 film)" label="Avatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1915132" start="49960" end="49970" title="Jake Sully" label="Jake Sully"/>
<link wikidata="Q62446736" start="50171" end="50180" title="Apple TV+" label="Apple TV+"/>
<link wikidata="Q224989" start="50188" end="50205" title="alternate history" label="alternate history"/>
<link wikidata="Q54958409" start="50220" end="50235" title="For All Mankind (TV series)" label="For All Mankind"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="50401" end="50408" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q110652727" start="50424" end="50438" title="3 Body Problem (TV series)" label="3 Body Problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q633581" start="50493" end="50506" title="Cryonics" label="cryogenically"/>
<link wikidata="Q15217409" start="50605" end="50629" title="nuclear pulse propulsion" label="nuclear pulse propulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6296126" start="51538" end="51542" title="Journal of the British Interplanetary Society" label="JBIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q15749620" start="52507" end="52524" title="Acta Astronautica" label="Acta Astronautica"/>
</links>
</doc>
