<doc id="30128" wikidata="Q869" url="?curid=30128" title="Thailand">
<text>Thailand, officially the Kingdom of Thailand and historically known as Siam (the official name until 1939), is a country in Southeast Asia on the Indochinese Peninsula. With a population of almost 66 million, it spans . Thailand is to the northwest by Myanmar, to the northeast and east by Laos, to the southeast by Cambodia, to the south by the Gulf of Thailand and Malaysia, and to the southwest by the Andaman Sea; it also shares maritime borders with Vietnam to the southeast and Indonesia and India to the southwest. Bangkok is the state capital and largest city.

Thai peoples migrated from southwestern China to mainland Southeast Asia from the 6th to 11th centuries. Indianised kingdoms such as the Mon, Khmer Empire, and Malay states ruled the region, competing with Thai states such as the Kingdoms of Ngoenyang, Sukhothai, Lan Na, and Ayutthaya, which also rivalled each other. European contact began in 1511 with a Portuguese diplomatic mission to Ayutthaya, which became a regional power by the end of the 15th century. Ayutthaya reached its peak during the 18th century, until it was destroyed in the Burmese–Siamese War. King Taksin the Great quickly reunified the fragmented territory and established the short-lived Thonburi Kingdom (1767–1782), of which he was the only king. He was succeeded in 1782 by Phutthayotfa Chulalok (Rama I), the first monarch of the current Chakri dynasty. Throughout the era of Western imperialism in Asia, Siam remained the only state in the region to avoid colonisation by foreign powers, although it was often forced to make territorial, trade, and legal concessions in unequal treaties. The Siamese system of government was centralised and transformed into a modern unitary absolute monarchy during the 1868–1910 reign of Chulalongkorn (Rama V). 
In World War I, Siam sided with the Allies, a political decision made in order to amend the unequal treaties. Following a bloodless revolution in 1932, it became a constitutional monarchy and changed its official name to Thailand, becoming an ally of Japan in World War II. In the late 1950s, a military coup under Sarit Thanarat revived the monarchy&#x27;s historically influential role in politics. During the Cold War, Thailand became a major non-NATO ally of the United States and played an anti-communist role in the region as a member of SEATO, which was disbanded in 1977.

Apart from a brief period of parliamentary democracy in the mid-1970s and 1990s, Thailand has periodically alternated between democracy and military rule. Since the 2000s, the country has been in continual political conflict between supporters and opponents of twice-elected Prime Minister of Thailand Thaksin Shinawatra, which resulted in two coups (in 2006 and 2014), along with the establishment of its current constitution, a nominally democratic government after the 2019 Thai general election, and large pro-democracy protests in 2020–2021, which included unprecedented demands to reform the monarchy. Since 2019, it has been nominally a parliamentary constitutional monarchy; in practice, however, structural advantages in the constitution have ensured the military&#x27;s continued influence in politics.

Thailand is a middle power in global affairs and a founding member of ASEAN. It has the second-largest economy in Southeast Asia and the 23rd-largest in the world by PPP, and it ranks 29th by nominal GPD. Thailand is classified as a newly industrialised economy, with manufacturing, agriculture, and tourism as leading sectors.

== Etymology ==
Thailand was known by outsiders before 1939 as &quot;Siam&quot;. According to George Cœdès, the word &quot;Thai&quot; () means &#x27;free man&#x27; in the Thai language, &quot;differentiating the Thai from the natives encompassed in Thai society as serfs&quot;. According to Chit Phumisak, Thai () simply means &#x27;people&#x27; or &#x27;human being&#x27;; his investigation shows that some rural areas used the word &quot;Thai&quot; instead of the usual Thai word &quot;khon&quot; () for people. According to Michel Ferlus, the ethnonyms Thai-Tai (or Thay-Tay) would have evolved from the etymon &quot;*k(ə)ri:&quot; &#x27;human being&#x27;.

Thais often refer to their country using the polite form &quot;prathet Thai&quot; (). They also use the more colloquial term &quot;mueang Thai&quot; () or simply &quot;Thai;&quot; the word &quot;mueang&quot;, archaically referring to a city-state, is commonly used to refer to a city or town as the centre of a region. &quot;Ratcha Anachak Thai&quot; () means &#x27;kingdom of Thailand&#x27; or &#x27;kingdom of Thai&#x27;. 

Etymologically, its components are: &quot;ratcha&quot; (, &quot;rājan&quot;, &#x27;king, royal, realm&#x27;), &quot;ana-&quot; (Pali &quot;āṇā&quot; &#x27;authority, command, power&#x27;, itself from the Sanskrit , &quot;ājñā&quot;, of the same meaning), and &quot;-chak&quot; (from Sanskrit &quot;cakra-&quot; &#x27;wheel&#x27;, a symbol of power and rule). 

The Thai National Anthem (), written by Luang Saranupraphan during the patriotic 1930s, refers to the Thai nation as &quot;prathet Thai&quot; (). The first line of the national anthem is: &quot;prathet thai ruam lueat nuea chat chuea thai&quot; (), &#x27;Thailand is founded on blood and flesh&#x27;.

The former name &quot;Siam&quot; may have originated from Sanskrit श्याम (&quot;śyāma&quot;, &#x27;dark&#x27;) or Mon ရာမည (&quot;rhmañña&quot;, &#x27;stranger&#x27;), probably the same root as &quot;Shan&quot; and &quot;Assam&quot;. The word &quot;Śyâma&quot; is possibly not the true origin, but a pre-designed deviation from its proper, original meaning. Another theory is the name derives from the Chinese calling this region &#x27;Xian&#x27;. 

The ancient Khmers used the word &quot;Siam&quot; to refer to people settled in the west Chao Phraya River valley surrounding the ancient city of Nakhon Pathom in the present-day central Thailand; it may probably originate from the name of Lord Krishna, which also called &quot;Shyam&quot;, as in the Wat Sri Chum Inscription, dated 13th century CE, mentions came to restore Phra Pathommachedi at the city of Lord Krishna (Nakhon Pathom) in the early era of the Sukhothai Kingdom.

The signature of King Mongkut (r. 1851–1868) reads &quot;SPPM&quot; (&quot;Somdet Phra Poramenthra Maha&quot;) &quot;Mongkut Rex Siamensium&quot; (Mongkut, King of the Siamese). This usage of the name in the country&#x27;s first international treaty gave the name &quot;Siam&quot; official status, until 24 June 1939 when it was changed to &quot;Thailand&quot;.

== History ==

=== Prehistory and origins ===
There is evidence of continuous human habitation in present-day Thailand from 20,000 years ago to the present day. The earliest evidence of rice growing is dated at 2,000 BCE. Areas comprising what is now Thailand participated in the Maritime Jade Road, as ascertained by archeological research. The trading network existed for 3,000 years, between 2000 BCE to 1000 CE. Bronze appeared –1,000 BCE. The site of Ban Chiang in northeast Thailand currently ranks as the earliest known centre of copper and bronze production in Southeast Asia. Iron appeared around 500 BCE. 

The Kingdom of Funan was the first and most powerful Southeast Asian kingdom at the time (2nd century BCE). The Mon people established the principalities of Dvaravati and Kingdom of Hariphunchai in the 6th century. The Khmer people established the Khmer empire, centred in Angkor, in the 9th century. Tambralinga, a Malay state controlling trade through the Malacca Strait, rose in the 10th century. The Indochina peninsula was heavily influenced by the culture and religions of India from the time of the Kingdom of Funan to that of the Khmer Empire.

The Thai people are of the Tai ethnic group, characterised by common linguistic roots. Chinese chronicles first mention the Tai peoples in the 6th century BCE. While there are many assumptions regarding the origin of Tai peoples, David K. Wyatt, a historian of Thailand, argued that their ancestors who at present inhabit Laos, Thailand, Myanmar, India, and China came from the Điện Biên Phủ area between the 5th and the 8th century. 

Thai people began migrating into present-day Thailand gradually from the 6th to 11th century, which Mon and Khmer people occupied at the time. Thus Thai culture was influenced by Indian, Mon, and Khmer cultures. Tai people intermixed with various ethnic and cultural groups in the region, resulting in many groups of present-day Thai people. Genetic evidences suggested that ethnolinguistics could not accurately predict the origins of the Thais. Sujit Wongthes argued that Thai is not a race or ethnicity but a culture group.

According to French historian George Cœdès, &quot;The Thai first enter history of Farther India in the eleventh century with the mention of &quot;Syam&quot; slaves or prisoners of war in Champa epigraphy&quot;, and &quot;in the twelfth century, the bas-reliefs of Angkor Wat&quot; where &quot;a group of warriors&quot; are described as &quot;Syam&quot;, though Cham accounts do not indicate the origins of &quot;Syam&quot; or what ethnic group they belonged to. The origins and ethnicity of the &quot;Syam&quot; remain unclear, with some literature suggesting that &quot;Syam&quot; refers to the Shan people, the Bru people, or the Brau people. However, mainland Southeast Asian sources from before the fourteenth century primarily used the word &quot;Syam&quot; as an ethnonym, referring to those who belonged to a separate cultural category different from the Khmer, Cham, Bagan, or Mon. This contrasts with the Chinese sources, where &quot;Xian&quot; was used as a toponym.

=== Early Tai confederate cities: (691 BCE – 13th century CE) ===

Theoretically, Tai-Kadai-speaking people formed as early as the 12th century BCE in the middle of the Yangtze basin. Some groups later migrated south to Guangxi. However, after several bloody centuries against Chinese influence in Guangxi between 333 BCE and the 11th century, hundreds of thousands of Tais were killed, thus, Tai people began to move southwestward along the rivers and over the lower passes into the mountain north of Southeast Asia and river valleys in present-day Assam of India. Some evidence indicates that the ancestors of Tai people migrated en masse southwestwards out of Yunnan only after the 1253 Mongol invasion of Dali; however, it is not generally accepted.

Tais defeated indigenous tribes and emerged as the new power in the new region. As a result, several Tai city-states were established, scattered from Điện Biên Phủ in present-day northwestern Vietnam and highland Southeast Asia to northeastern India. 

According to the &quot;Simhanavati legend&quot; given in several chronicles, the first Tai city-state in northern Thailand, Singhanavati, was founded around the 7th century. However, several modern geology and archaeology studies found that its centre, Yonok Nahaphan, dates from 691 BCE–545 CE; this roughly coincides with the establishment of Shan States, another Tai&#x27;s federated principalities in the present-day northeast Myanmar. as well as Muang Sua (Luang Prabang) in the east. 

After Singhanavati was submerged below Chiang Saen Lake due to an earthquake in 545, the survivors then founded a new seat at . The kingdom lasted for another 93 years.

In addition to Singhanavati, another northern principality probably related to the Tai people, Ngoenyang, was established as the successor of Singhanavati in 638 by , also centred in (present-day Mae Sai District, Chiang Rai). Its seat was moved to Chiang Mai in 1262 by King Mangrai, which considered the foundation of the Lan Na kingdom. Mangrai unified the surrounding area and also created a network of states through political alliances to the east and north of the Mekong. His dynasty would rule the kingdom continuously for the next two centuries. Lan Na expanded its territory southward and annexed the Mon Hariphunchai of Dvaravati in 1292.

In the late tenth century, Tai people began to migrate further south to the present-day upper central Thailand. Around the 1100s period, several cities in this area, such as Songkwae, Sawankhalok, and Chakangrao, were ruled by the Tai people, and they eventually launched several battles against the pre-existing Mon of Lavo, who had been falling under Chenla and Khmer influences since the 7th century, thus bringing the establishment of the Tai people&#x27;s independent state, Sukhothai Kingdom, in the upper Chao Phraya River valley in 1238.

The earliest conflict between Tai people and the preexisting ethnics was recorded in the mid-4th century when the ruler of Singhanavati, , forcibly lost the seat at Yonok to King Khom from Umongasela (present-day Fang). He then fled to Vieng Si Tuang (; present-day Wiang Phang Kham, Mae Sai district) but had to send tributes to Yonok annually until his son, Phrom, took back Yonok and expelled King Khom from Umongasela. Phrom also marched the troops south to occupy Chakangrao from the enemy as well as founding the city of Songkwae. Some historians suggest that Lavo&#x27;s capital, Lopburi, was once seized by Phrom. In contrast, Tai people instead established relationships with Siamese Mon via royal intermarriages.

=== Mon and Lavo Kingdoms: (5th century CE – 13th century CE) ===

As is generally known, the present-day Thai people were previously called Siamese before the country was renamed Thailand in the mid-20th century. Several genetic studies published in the 21st century suggest that the so-called Siamese people (central Thai) might have had Mon origins since their genetic profiles are more closely related to the Mon people in Myanmar than the Tais of southern China, and they probably later became Tais via cultural diffusion after the arriving of Tai people from the north around the 8th–10th centuries. 

This is also reflected in the language since over half of the vocabulary in the central Thai language is derived from or borrowed from the Mon language, as well as Pali and Sanskrit. Moreover, the Jinakalamali chronicle of Tai&#x27;s Lan Na also called the southern region occupied by the Mon Haripuñjaya of Dvaravati as &quot;Shyam Pradesh&quot; (), which indicates that the ancient Siamese and the Mon people in central Thailand were probably the same ethnolinguistic group.

The earliest evidence to mention the Siam people are stone inscriptions found in Angkor Borei of Funan (K.557 and K.600), dated 661 CE, the slave&#x27;s name is mentioned as &quot;Ku Sayam&quot; meaning &quot;Sayam female slaves&quot; (Ku is a prefix used to refer to female slaves in the pre-Angkorian era), and the Takéo inscriptions (K.79) written in 682 during the reign of Bhavavarman II of Chenla also mention Siam Nobel: &quot;Sāraṇnoya Poña Sayam&quot;, which was transcribed into English as: &quot;the rice field that was given to the poña (noble rank) who was called Sayam (Siam)&quot;. 

The Song Huiyao Jigao (960–1279) indicate Siamese people settled in the west central Thailand and their state was called &quot;Xiān guó&quot; (), while the eastern plain belonged to the Mon of Lavo (), who later fell under the Chenla and Khmer hegemony around the 7th–9th centuries. Those Mon political entities, which also included Haripuñjaya in the north and several city-states in the northeast, are collectively called Dvaravati. 

However, the states of Siamese Mon and Lavo were later merged via the royal intermarriage and became Ayutthaya Kingdom in the mid-14th century, while the southwestern Isan principalities, centred in Phanom Rung and Phimai, later pledged allegiance to Siamese&#x27;s Ayutthaya during the reign of Borommarachathirat II ( 1424–1448). The remaining principal city-states in Isan region became Lan Xang around 1353 after the twin cities of Muang Sua (Luang Prabang) and &quot;Vieng Chan Vieng Kham&quot; (Vientiane) became independent following the death of the Sukhothai king Ram Khamhaeng.

According to the Wat Kud Tae inscription (K.1105), dated c. 7th century, during the period that the eastern Mon entity, Lavo, was strongly influenced by the Chenla, the Siamese Mon in the west also established a royal intermarriage with Chenla as Sri Chakatham, prince of Sambhuka (ศามภูกะ, in the present-day Ratchaburi province), married to a princess of Isanavarman I, and two mandalas then became an ally. After Chenla sieged Funan and moved the centre to Angkor, both Siamese Mon and the Angkorian eventually marched the troops to attack Vijaya of Champa in 1201 during the reign of Jayavarman VII, as recorded in the Cho-Dinh inscription (C.3).

=== Sukhothai Kingdom (1238 CE – 14th century CE) ===

After the decline of the Khmer Empire and Kingdom of Pagan in the early 13th century, various states thrived in their place. The domains of Tai people existed from the northeast of present-day India to the north of present-day Laos and to the Malay Peninsula. During the 13th century, Tai people had already settled in the core land of Dvaravati and Lavo Kingdom to Nakhon Si Thammarat in the south. There are, however, no records detailing the arrival of the Tais.

Around 1240, Pho Khun Bang Klang Hao, a local Tai ruler, rallied the people to rebel against the Khmer. He later crowned himself the first king of Sukhothai Kingdom in 1238. Mainstream Thai historians count Sukhothai as the first kingdom of Thai people. Sukhothai expanded furthest during the reign of Ram Khamhaeng (). However, it was mostly a network of local lords who swore fealty to Sukhothai, not directly controlled by it. He is believed have invented Thai script and Thai ceramics were an important export in his era. Sukhothai embraced Theravada Buddhism in the reign of Maha Thammaracha I (1347–1368).

=== Ayutthaya Kingdom (1351–1767) ===

According to the most widely accepted version of its origin, the Ayutthaya Kingdom rose from the earlier, nearby Lavo Kingdom and Suvarnabhumi with Uthong as its first king. Ayutthaya was a patchwork of self-governing principalities and tributary provinces owing allegiance to the King of Ayutthaya under the mandala system. Its initial expansion was through conquest and political marriage. 

Before the end of the 15th century, Ayutthaya invaded the Khmer Empire three times and sacked its capital Angkor. Ayutthaya then became a regional power in place of the Khmer. Constant interference of Sukhothai effectively made it a vassal state of Ayutthaya and it was finally incorporated into the kingdom. Borommatrailokkanat brought about bureaucratic reforms which lasted into the 20th century and created a system of social hierarchy called &quot;sakdina&quot;, where male commoners were conscripted as corvée labourers for six months a year. Ayutthaya was interested in the Malay Peninsula but failed to conquer the Malacca Sultanate, which was supported by the Chinese Ming dynasty.

European contact and trade started in the early-16th century, with the envoy of Portuguese duke Afonso de Albuquerque in 1511. Portugal became an ally and ceded some soldiers to King Rama Thibodi II. The Portuguese were followed in the 17th century by the French, Dutch, and English. Rivalry for supremacy over Chiang Mai and the Mon people pitted Ayutthaya against the Burmese Kingdom. Several wars with its ruling Taungoo dynasty starting in the 1540s in the reign of Tabinshwehti and Bayinnaung were ultimately ended with the capture of the capital in 1570. Then a brief period of vassalage to Burma until Naresuan proclaimed independence in 1584 followed.

Ayutthaya sought to improve relations with European powers for many successive reigns. The kingdom especially prospered during cosmopolitan Narai&#x27;s reign (1656–1688), when some European travellers regarded Ayutthaya as an Asian great power, alongside China and India. However, growing French influence later in his reign was met with nationalist sentiment and eventually led to the Siamese revolution of 1688. Despite the revolution, overall relations remained stable, with French missionaries still actively preaching Christianity.

After a bloody period of dynastic struggle, Ayutthaya entered what has been called the Siamese &quot;golden age&quot;, a relatively peaceful episode in the second quarter of the 18th century where art, literature, and learning flourished. There were seldom foreign wars, apart from conflict with the Nguyễn lords for control of Cambodia starting around 1715. The last fifty years of the kingdom witnessed bloody succession crises, where there were purges of court officials and able generals for many consecutive reigns. In 1765, a combined 40,000-strong force of Burmese armies invaded it from the north and west. The Burmese under the new Alaungpaya dynasty quickly rose to become a new local power by 1759. After a 14-month siege, the capital city&#x27;s walls fell and the city was burned in April 1767.

=== Thonburi Kingdom (1767–1782) ===
The capital and many of its territories lay in chaos after the war. The former capital was occupied by the Burmese garrison army and five local leaders declared themselves overlords, including the lords of Sakwangburi, Phitsanulok, Pimai, Chanthaburi, and Nakhon Si Thammarat. Chao Tak, a capable military leader, proceeded to make himself a lord by right of conquest, beginning with the legendary sack of Chanthaburi. Based at Chanthaburi, Chao Tak raised troops and resources, and sent a fleet up the Chao Phraya to take the fort of Thonburi. In the same year, Chao Tak was able to retake Ayutthaya from the Burmese only seven months after the fall of the city.

Chao Tak then crowned himself as Taksin and proclaimed Thonburi as temporary capital in the same year. He also quickly subdued the other warlords. His forces engaged in wars with Burma, Laos, and Cambodia, which successfully drove the Burmese out of Lan Na in 1775, captured Vientiane in 1778 and tried to install a pro-Thai king in Cambodia in the 1770s. In his final years there was a coup, supposedly caused by his &quot;insanity&quot;, and eventually Taksin and his sons were executed by his longtime companion General Chao Phraya Chakri (the future Rama I). He was the first king of the ruling Chakri dynasty and founder of the Rattanakosin Kingdom on 6 April 1782.

=== Rattanakosin Kingdom and modernization (1782 –1932) ===


Under Rama I (1782–1809), Rattanakosin successfully defended against Burmese attacks and put an end to Burmese incursions. He also created suzerainty over large portions of Laos and Cambodia. In 1821, Briton John Crawfurd was sent to negotiate a new trade agreement with Siam – the first sign of an issue which was to dominate 19th century Siamese politics. Bangkok signed the Burney Treaty in 1826, after the British victory in the First Anglo-Burmese War. 

Anouvong of Vientiane, who mistakenly held the belief that Britain was about to launch an invasion of Bangkok, started the Lao rebellion in 1826, which was suppressed. Vientiane was destroyed and a large number of Lao people were relocated to Khorat Plateau as a result. Bangkok also waged several wars with Vietnam, where Siam successfully regained hegemony over Cambodia.

From the late 19th century, Siam tried to rule the ethnic groups in the realm as colonies. In the reign of Mongkut (1851–1868), who recognised the potential threat Western powers posed to Siam, his court contacted the British government directly to defuse tensions. A British mission led by Sir John Bowring, Governor of Hong Kong, led to the signing of the Bowring Treaty, the first of many unequal treaties with Western countries. This, however, brought trade and economic development to Siam. The unexpected death of Mongkut from malaria led to the reign of underage King Chulalongkorn, with Somdet Chaophraya Sri Suriwongse (Chuang Bunnag) acting as regent.

Chulalongkorn () initiated centralisation, set up a privy council, and abolished slavery and the corvée system. The Front Palace crisis of 1874 stalled attempts at further reforms. In the 1870s and 1880s, he incorporated the protectorates up north into the kingdom proper, which later expanded to the protectorates in the northeast and the south. He established twelve &quot;krom&quot; in 1888, which were equivalent to present-day ministries. The crisis of 1893 erupted, caused by French demands for Laotian territory east of Mekong. 

Thailand is the only Southeast Asian state never to have been colonised by a Western power, in part because Britain and France agreed in 1896 to make the Chao Phraya valley a buffer state. Not until the 20th century could Siam renegotiate every unequal treaty dating from the Bowring Treaty, including extraterritoriality. The advent of the &quot;monthon&quot; system marked the creation of the modern Thai nation-state. In 1905, there were unsuccessful rebellions in the ancient Patani area, Ubon Ratchathani, and Phrae in opposition to an attempt to blunt the power of local lords.

The Palace Revolt of 1912 was a failed attempt by Western-educated military officers to overthrow the Siamese monarchy. Vajiravudh () responded by propaganda for the entirety of his reign, which promoted the idea of the Thai nation. In 1917, Siam joined the First World War on the side of the Allies. In the aftermath, Siam had a seat at the Paris Peace Conference and gained freedom of taxation and the revocation of extraterritoriality.

=== Constitutional monarchy, World War II and Cold War (1932–1975) ===

A bloodless revolution took place in 1932, in which Prajadhipok was forced to grant the country&#x27;s first constitution, thereby ending centuries of feudal and absolute monarchy. The combined results of economic hardships brought on by the Great Depression, sharply falling rice prices, and a significant reduction in public spending caused discontent among aristocrats. 

In 1933, a counter-revolutionary rebellion took place to reinstate absolute monarchy, but failed. Prajadhipok&#x27;s conflict with the government eventually led to abdication. The government selected Ananda Mahidol, who was studying in Switzerland, to be the new king.

Later that decade, the army wing of Khana Ratsadon came to dominate Siamese politics. Plaek Phibunsongkhram who became premier in 1938, started political oppression and took an openly anti-royalist stance. His government adopted nationalism and Westernisation, anti-Chinese and anti-French policies.

In 1939, there was a decree changing the name of the country from &quot;Siam&quot; to &quot;Thailand&quot;. In 1941, Thailand was in a brief conflict with Vichy France, resulting in Thailand gaining some Lao and Cambodian territories.

On 8 December 1941, the Empire of Japan launched an invasion of Thailand, and fighting broke out shortly before Phibun ordered an armistice. Japan was granted free passage, and on 21 December Thailand and Japan signed a military alliance with a secret protocol, wherein the Japanese government agreed to help Thailand regain lost territories. 

The Thai government then declared war on the United States and the United Kingdom. The United Kingdom, whose colony Malaya was under immediate threat from Thai forces, responded in kind, but the United States refused to declare war and ignored Thailand&#x27;s declaration. The Free Thai Movement was launched both in Thailand and abroad to oppose the government and Japanese occupation. After the war ended in 1945, Thailand signed formal agreements to end the state of war with the Allies.

In June 1946, young King Ananda was found dead under mysterious circumstances. His younger brother Bhumibol Adulyadej ascended to the throne. Thailand joined the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO) to become an active ally of the United States in 1954. Field Marshal Sarit Thanarat launched a coup in 1957, which removed Khana Ratsadon from politics. His rule (premiership 1959–1963) was autocratic; he built his legitimacy around the god-like status of the monarch and by channelling the government&#x27;s loyalty to the king. His government improved the country&#x27;s infrastructure and education. After the United States joined the Vietnam War in 1961, there was a secret agreement wherein the U.S. promised to protect Thailand.

The period brought about increasing modernisation and Westernisation of Thai society. Rapid urbanisation occurred when the rural populace sought work in growing cities. Rural farmers gained class consciousness and were sympathetic to the Communist Party of Thailand. Economic development and education enabled the rise of a middle class in Bangkok and other cities. In October 1971, there was a large demonstration against the dictatorship of Thanom Kittikachorn (premiership 1963–1973), which led to civilian casualties. Bhumibol installed Sanya Dharmasakti (premiership 1973–1975) to replace him, marking the first time that the king had intervened in Thai politics directly since 1932. The aftermath of the event marked a short-lived parliamentary democracy, often called the &quot;era when democracy blossomed&quot; (ยุคประชาธิปไตยเบ่งบาน).

=== Contemporary history ===
Constant unrest and instability, as well as fear of a communist takeover after the fall of Saigon, made some ultra-right groups brand leftist students as communists. This culminated in the Thammasat University massacre in October 1976. A coup d&#x27;état on that day brought Thailand a new ultra-right government, which cracked down on media outlets, officials, and intellectuals, and fuelled the communist insurgency. Another coup the following year installed a more moderate government, which offered amnesty to communist fighters in 1978.

Fuelled by Indochina refugee crisis, Vietnamese border raids and economic hardships, Prem Tinsulanonda became the Prime Minister from 1980 to 1988. The communists abandoned the insurgency by 1983. Prem&#x27;s premiership was dubbed &quot;semi-democracy&quot; because the Parliament was composed of all elected House and all appointed Senate. The 1980s also saw increasing intervention in politics by the monarch, who rendered two coups in 1981 and 1985 attempts against Prem failed. In 1988 Thailand had its first elected prime minister since 1976.

Suchinda Kraprayoon, who was the coup leader in 1991 and said he would not seek to become prime minister, was nominated as one by the majority coalition government after the 1992 general election. This caused a popular demonstration in Bangkok, which ended with a bloody military crackdown. Bhumibol intervened in the event and signed an amnesty law, Suchinda then resigned.

The 1997 Asian financial crisis originated in Thailand and ended the country&#x27;s 40 years of uninterrupted economic growth. Chuan Leekpai&#x27;s government took an IMF loan with unpopular provisions.

The 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami hit the country, mostly in the south, claiming around 5,400 lives in Phuket, Phang Nga, Ranong, Krabi, Trang, and Satun, with thousands still missing.

The populist Thai Rak Thai party, led by prime minister Thaksin Shinawatra, governed from 2001 until 2006. His policies were successful in reducing rural poverty and initiated universal healthcare in the country. However, Thaksin was viewed as a corrupt populist who was destroying the middle class in order to favour himself and the rural poor. He also faced criticism over his response to a South Thailand insurgency which escalated starting from 2004. Additionally, his recommendations to the rural poor directly conflicted with King Bhumibol&#x27;s recommendations, drawing the ire of royalists, a powerful faction in Thailand. In response, the royalists made up a story about how Thaskin and his &quot;advisors gathered in Finland to plot the overthrow of the monarchy&quot;. 

Meanwhile, massive protests against Thaksin led by the People&#x27;s Alliance for Democracy (PAD) started in his second term as prime minister. Eventually, the monarchy and the military agree to oust the leader. In this case, the military first sought permission from the king to oust Thaksin, the permission was denied. But then, the king rejected Thaksin&#x27;s choice to lead the army, allowing a military leader to be put into power who wanted the coup.1 Then, the army dissolved Thaksin&#x27;s party with a coup d&#x27;état in 2006 and banned over a hundred of its executives from politics. After the coup, a military government was installed which lasted a year.

Coming back to democracy was a process that took very active participation of the people. The people frequently stormed government buildings and the military threatened yet another coup. Finally, in 2007, a civilian government led by the Thaksin-allied People&#x27;s Power Party (PPP) was elected. Another protest led by PAD ended with the dissolution of PPP, and the Democrat Party led a coalition government in its place. The pro-Thaksin United Front for Democracy Against Dictatorship (UDD) protested both in 2009 and in 2010, the latter of which ended with a violent military crackdown causing more than 70 civilian deaths.

After the general election of 2011, the populist Pheu Thai Party won a majority and Yingluck Shinawatra, Thaksin&#x27;s younger sister, became prime minister. The People&#x27;s Democratic Reform Committee organised another anti-Shinawatra protest after the ruling party proposed an amnesty bill which would benefit Thaksin. Yingluck dissolved parliament and a general election was scheduled, but was invalidated by the Constitutional Court. The crisis ended with another coup d&#x27;état in 2014.

The ensuing National Council for Peace and Order, a military junta led by General Prayut Chan-o-cha, led the country until 2019. Civil and political rights were restricted, and the country saw a surge in &quot;lèse-majesté&quot; cases. Political opponents and dissenters were sent to &quot;attitude adjustment&quot; camps; this was described by academics as showing the rise of fascism. Bhumibol, the longest-reigning Thai king, died in 2016, and his son Vajiralongkorn ascended to the throne. The referendum and adoption of Thailand&#x27;s current constitution happened under the junta&#x27;s rule. The junta also bound future governments to a 20-year national strategy &#x27;road map&#x27; it laid down, effectively locking the country into military-guided democracy. 

In 2019, the junta agreed to schedule a general election in March. Prayut continued his premiership with the support of Palang Pracharath Party-coalition in the House and junta-appointed Senate, amid allegations of election fraud. The 2020–21 pro-democracy protests were triggered by increasing royal prerogative, democratic and economic regression from the Royal Thai Armed Forces supported by the monarchy in the wake of the coup d&#x27;état in 2014, dissolution of the pro-democracy Future Forward Party, distrust in the 2019 general election and the current political system, forced disappearance and deaths of political activists including Wanchalearm Satsaksit, and political corruption scandals, which brought forward unprecedented demands to reform the monarchy and the highest sense of republicanism in the country.

In May 2023, Thailand&#x27;s reformist opposition, the progressive Move Forward Party (MFP) and the populist Pheu Thai Party, won the general election, meaning the royalist-military parties that supported Prime Minister Prayuth Chan-ocha lost power. On 22 August 2023, Srettha Thavisin of the populist Pheu Thai party, became Thailand&#x27;s new prime minister, while the Pheu Thai party&#x27;s billionaire figurehead Thaksin Shinawatra returned to Thailand after years in self-imposed exile. Thavisin was later dismissed from his prime ministerial role on 14 August 2024 by the Constitutional Court for his &quot;gross ethics violations&quot;.

== Geography ==

Totalling , Thailand is the 50th-largest country by total area. Thailand comprises several distinct geographic regions, partly corresponding to the provincial groups. The north of the country is the mountainous area of the Thai highlands, with the highest point being Doi Inthanon in the Thanon Thong Chai Range at above sea level. The northeast, Isan, consists of the Khorat Plateau, bordered to the east by the Mekong River. The centre of the country is dominated by the predominantly flat Chao Phraya river valley, which runs into the Gulf of Thailand. Southern Thailand consists of the narrow Kra Isthmus that widens into the Malay Peninsula.

The Chao Phraya and the Mekong River are the indispensable water courses of rural Thailand. Industrial scale production of crops use both rivers and their tributaries. The Gulf of Thailand covers and is fed by the Chao Phraya, Mae Klong, Bang Pakong, and Tapi Rivers. It contributes to the tourism sector owing to its clear shallow waters along the coasts in the southern region and the Kra Isthmus. The eastern shore of the Gulf of Thailand has the kingdom&#x27;s premier deepwater port in Sattahip and its busiest commercial port, Laem Chabang. Phuket, Krabi, Ranong, Phang Nga and Trang, and their islands, all lay along the coasts of the Andaman Sea.

=== Climate ===
Thailand&#x27;s climate is influenced by monsoon winds that have a seasonal character (the southwest and northeast monsoon). Most of the country is classified as Köppen&#x27;s tropical savanna climate. The majority of the south, as well as the eastern tip, have a tropical monsoon climate. Parts of the south also have a tropical rainforest climate.

A year in Thailand is divided into three seasons. The first is the rainy or southwest monsoon season (mid–May to mid–October), which is caused by southwestern wind from the Indian Ocean. 

Rainfall is also contributed by Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) and tropical cyclones, with August and September being the wettest period of the year. The country receives a mean annual rainfall of . 

Winter or the northeast monsoon occurs from mid–October until mid–February. Most of Thailand experiences dry weather with mild temperatures. Summer or the pre–monsoon season runs from mid–February until mid–May.

Due to their inland position and latitude, the north, northeast, central and eastern parts of Thailand experience a long period of warm weather, where temperatures can reach up to during March to May, in contrast to close to or below in some areas in winter. 

Southern Thailand is characterised by mild weather year-round with less diurnal and seasonal variations in temperatures due to maritime influences. It receives abundant rainfall, particularly during October to November. Thailand is among the world&#x27;s ten countries that are most exposed to climate change. In particular, it is highly vulnerable to rising sea levels and extreme weather events.

=== Biodiversity and conservation ===
National parks in Thailand are defined as &quot;an area that contains natural resources of ecological importance or unique beauty, or flora and fauna of special importance&quot;. Thailand&#x27;s protected areas include 156 national parks, 58 wildlife sanctuaries, 67 non-hunting areas, and 120 forest parks. They cover almost 31 per cent of the kingdom&#x27;s territory. The parks are administered by the National Parks, Wildlife and Plant Conservation Department (DNP) of the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (MNRE).

Thailand has a mediocre but improving performance in the global Environmental Performance Index (EPI), with an overall ranking of 91 out of 180 countries in 2016. The environmental areas where Thailand performs worst (i.e., highest-ranking) are air quality (167), environmental effects of the agricultural industry (106), and the climate and energy sector (93), the later mainly because of a high CO2 emission per kWh produced. Thailand performs best (i.e., lowest-ranking) in water resource management (66), with some major improvements expected for the future, and sanitation (68). The country had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 6.00/10, ranking it 88th globally out of 172 countries.

The population of elephants, the country&#x27;s national symbol, has fallen from 100,000 in 1850 to an estimated 2,000. Poachers have long hunted elephants for ivory and hides, and now increasingly for meat. Young elephants are often captured for use in tourist attractions or as work animals, where there have been claims of mistreatment. In 1989, the government banned the use of elephants for logging, leading many elephant owners to move their domesticated animals to the tourism industry.

Poaching of protected species remains a major problem. Tigers, leopards, and other large cats are hunted for their pelts. Many are farmed or hunted for their meat, which supposedly has medicinal properties. Although such trade is illegal, the well-known Bangkok market Chatuchak is still known for the sale of endangered species. The practice of keeping wild animals as pets affects species such as Asiatic black bear, Malayan sun bear, white-handed lar, pileated gibbon, and binturong.

== Politics and government ==


Prior to 1932, Thai kings were feudal or absolute monarchs. During Sukhothai Kingdom, the king was seen as a &quot;Dharmaraja&quot; or &#x27;king who rules in accordance with Dharma&#x27;. The system of government was a network of tributaries ruled by local lords. Modern absolute monarchy and statehood was established by Chulalongkorn when he transformed the decentralised protectorate system into a unitary state. On 24 June 1932, Khana Ratsadon (People&#x27;s Party) carried out a bloodless revolution which marked the beginning of constitutional monarchy.

Thailand has had 20 constitutions and charters since 1932, including the latest and current 2017 Constitution. All constitutions state that the politics is conducted within the framework of a constitutional monarchy, but the &quot;de facto&quot; form of government has ranged from military dictatorship to electoral democracy. Thailand&#x27;s current form of government is part democracy and part dictatorship; many terms are used to describe it. Thailand has had the fourth-most coups in the world. &quot;Uniformed or ex-military men have led Thailand for 55 of the 83 years&quot; between 1932 and 2009. Most recently, the military junta self-titled as the National Council for Peace and Order ruled the country between 2014 and 2019.

Government is separated into three branches:
* The legislative branch: the National Assembly is composed of the Senate, the 200-member indirectly elected upper house and House of Representatives, the elected 500-member lower house. Its most recent election is the 2023 general election. The coalition led by Pheu Thai Party currently holds the majority. The 2024 Thai Senate election was the first senate election held under the current constitution in the process criticized as &quot;the most complicated election in the world&quot;. The senate is allegedly dominated by Bhumjaithai Party-affiliated senators.
* The executive branch consisting of the Prime Minister of Thailand, the head of government, and other cabinet members of up to 35 people. The Prime Minister was elected by the House of Representatives. The current constitution mandates that prime ministers are to be considered from candidates nominated by political parties before the election. The current prime minister is Paetongtarn Shinawatra, a member of the Pheu Thai Party.
* The judiciary is supposed to be independent of the executive and the legislative branches, although judicial rulings are suspected of being based on political considerations rather than on existing law.

Military and bureaucratic aristocrats fully controlled political parties between 1946 and the 1980s. Most parties in Thailand are short-lived. Between 1992 and 2006, Thailand had a two-party system. Later constitutions created a multi-party system where a single party cannot gain a majority in the house.

A hereditary monarch serves as Thailand&#x27;s head of state. The current King of Thailand is Vajiralongkorn (Rama X), who has reigned since October 2016. The powers of the king are limited by the constitution and he is primarily a symbolic figurehead. However, the monarch still occasionally intervenes in Thai politics, as all constitutions pave the way for customary royal rulings. Some academics outside Thailand, including Duncan McCargo and Federico Ferrara, noted extraconstitutional role of the monarch through a &quot;network monarchy&quot; behind the political scenes. The monarchy is protected by the severe &quot;lèse majesté&quot; law, even though the people&#x27;s attitude towards the institution varies from one reign to another.

The kings are protected by &quot;lèse-majesté&quot; laws which allow critics to be jailed for three to fifteen years. After the coup d&#x27;état in 2014, Thailand had the highest number of &quot;lèse-majesté&quot; prisoners in the nation&#x27;s history. Human rights in Thailand has been rated &quot;not free&quot; on the Freedom House Index since 2014. On August 7, 2024, Thailand&#x27;s Constitutional Court banned the victors of the 2023 parliamentary elections, the Move Forward Party and all of its leaders from politics for its proposal to reform the lèse-majesté law, arguing it posed a threat to the constitutional order. &quot;The Economist&quot; criticised the move as an example of &quot;lawfare&quot; and pointed to the dissolution of its predecessor party, Future Forward in 2020, as the latest example of how an &quot;alliance of conservative forces in Thailand—including monarchists, the army and a handful of business tycoons—has sought to suppress opposition&quot;.

On the Freedom in the World 2024 Report for Thailand, their status improved from &quot;not free&quot; to &quot;partly free&quot; due to competitive parliamentary elections and the formation of a new governing coalition by what had been a major opposition party, though unelected senators ensured that the party with the most votes was excluded.

=== Administrative divisions ===
Thailand is a unitary state; the administrative services of the executive branch are divided into three levels by &quot;National Government Organisation Act, BE 2534&quot; (1991): central, provincial and local. Thailand is composed of 76 provinces (, &quot;changwat&quot;), which are first-level administrative divisions. There are also two specially governed districts: the capital Bangkok and Pattaya. Bangkok is at provincial level and thus often counted as a province. Each province is divided into districts (, &quot;amphoe&quot;) and the districts are further divided into sub-districts (, &quot;tambons&quot;). The name of each province&#x27;s capital city (, mueang) is the same as that of the province. For example, the capital of Chiang Mai Province (&quot;Changwat Chiang Mai&quot;) is &quot;Mueang Chiang Mai&quot; or &quot;Chiang Mai&quot;. All provincial governors and district chiefs, which are administrators of provinces and districts respectively, are appointed by the central government. Thailand&#x27;s provinces are sometimes grouped into four to six regions, depending on the source.

=== Foreign relations ===
Siam&#x27;s and Thailand&#x27;s way of conducting foreign relations has long been described as &quot;bamboo bending with the wind&quot;, of policies that are &quot;always solidly rooted, but flexible enough to bend whichever way the wind blows in order to survive&quot;, or adaptable and pragmatic. In order to secure independence, it sought to pit one great power against the others so that it would be dominated by none.

During the Cold War, Thailand sought to prevent the spread of communism so it joined the United States, including participating in SEATO alliance, sending expeditions to Korea and Vietnam, and offering the US to use its base. Thailand is one of the five founding members of Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), initially to safeguard against communism. The end of Vietnam War was a turning point in Thai foreign policy and afterwards it sought to improve relations with Communist China and its now-Communist neighbours. Thailand remains an active member of ASEAN and seek to project its influence in it. Thailand has developed increasingly close ties with other members, with progressing regional co-operation in economic, trade, banking, political, and cultural matters.

In the 2000s, Thailand had taken an active role on the international stage and participated fully in international and regional organisations. It is a major non-NATO ally and Priority Watch List Special 301 Report of the United States. When East Timor gained independence from Indonesia, Thailand contributed troops to the international peacekeeping effort. As part of its effort to increase international ties, Thailand had reached out to such regional organisations as the Organization of American States (OAS) and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE).

During Thaksin Shinawatra&#x27;s premiership, negotiations for several free trade agreements with China, Australia, Bahrain, India, and the US were initiated. Thaksin sought to position Thailand as a regional leader, initiating various development projects in poorer neighbouring countries. More controversially, he established close, friendly ties with the Burmese dictatorship. Thailand joined the US-led invasion of Iraq, sending a humanitarian contingent until September 2004. Thailand also had contributed troops to reconstruction efforts in Afghanistan.

In April 2009, the Cambodian–Thai border dispute brought troops on territory immediately adjacent to the 900-year-old ruins of Cambodia&#x27;s Preah Vihear Hindu temple near the border.

After the 2014 coup, Thailand leaned more towards China. Growing Chinese influence and capital inflow caused some members of parliament to raise the concern about &quot;economic colony&quot; under China after many concessions.

During the Israel-Hamas military conflict in 2023, at first Thailand&#x27;s prime minister stated that his government strongly condemns the attack against Israel and extends its deepest condolences to the government and the people of Israel but the government later changed its position and announced that Thailand adopted a neutral stance in this conflict. 28 Thai nationals were killed in this conflict.

=== Armed forces ===

The Royal Thai Armed Forces (กองทัพไทย; ) constitute the military of the Kingdom of Thailand. It consists of the Royal Thai Army (กองทัพบกไทย), the Royal Thai Navy (กองทัพเรือไทย), and the Royal Thai Air Force (กองทัพอากาศไทย). It also incorporates various paramilitary forces.

The Thai Armed Forces have a combined manpower of 306,000 active duty personnel and another 245,000 active reserve personnel. The head of the Thai Armed Forces (จอมทัพไทย, &quot;Chom Thap Thai&quot;) is the king, although this position is only nominal. The armed forces are managed by the Ministry of Defence of Thailand, which is headed by the Minister of Defence (a member of the cabinet of Thailand) and commanded by the Royal Thai Armed Forces Headquarters, which in turn is headed by the Chief of Defence Forces of Thailand. Thai annual defence budget almost tripled from US$1.98 billion in 2005 to US$5.88 billion in 2016, accounting for approximately 1.4% of GDP. Thailand ranked 16th worldwide in the Military Strength Index based on the Credit Suisse report in September 2015.
The military is also tasked with humanitarian missions, such as escorting Rohingya to Malaysia or Indonesia, ensuring security and welfare for refugees during Indochina refugee crisis.

According to the constitution, serving in the armed forces is a duty of all Thai citizens. Thailand still use active draft system for males over the age of 21. They are subjected to varying lengths of active service depending on the duration of reserve training as Territorial Defence Student and their level of education. Those who have completed three years or more of reserve training will be exempted entirely. The practice has long been criticized, as some media question its efficacy and value. It is alleged that conscripts end up as servants to senior officers or clerks in military cooperative shops. In a report issued in March 2020, Amnesty International charged that Thai military conscripts face institutionalised abuse systematically hushed up by military authorities.

Critics observed that Thai military&#x27;s main objective is to deal with internal rather than external threats. Internal Security Operations Command is called the political arm of the Thai military, which has overlapping social and political functions with civilian bureaucracy. It also has anti-democracy mission. The military is also notorious for numerous corruption incidents, such as accusation of human trafficking, and nepotism in promotion of high-ranking officers. The military is deeply entrenched in politics. Most recently, the appointed senators include more than 100 active and retired military.

Thailand is the 75th most peaceful country in the world, according to the 2024 Global Peace Index.

== Economy ==

The economy of Thailand is heavily export-dependent, with exports accounting for more than two-thirds of gross domestic product (GDP). Thailand exports over US$105 billion worth of goods and services annually. Major exports include cars, computers, electrical appliances, rice, textiles and footwear, fishery products, rubber, and jewellery.

Thailand is an emerging economy and is considered a newly industrialised country. Thailand had a 2017 GDP of US$1.236 trillion (on a purchasing power parity basis). Thailand is the second largest economy in Southeast Asia after Indonesia. Thailand ranks midway in the wealth spread in Southeast Asia as it is the fourth richest nation according to GDP per capita, after Singapore, Brunei, and Malaysia.

Thailand functions as an anchor economy for the neighbouring developing economies of Laos, Myanmar, and Cambodia. In the third quarter of 2014, the unemployment rate in Thailand stood at 0.84% according to Thailand&#x27;s National Economic and Social Development Board (NESDB).

In 2017, the Thai economy grew an inflation-adjusted 3.9%, up from 3.3% in 2016, marking its fastest expansion since 2012. High public spending, especially during the COVID-19 pandemic, prompted the authorities to raise Thailand&#x27;s public debt ceiling from 60% to 70% of GDP. 

, Thailand struggles with low productivity, poor education, high household debt, low private investment and slow economic growth, with an economic research group forecasted an annual GDP growth of below 2% in the next decades without structural reforms.

=== Income and wealth disparities ===

Thais have median wealth per one adult person of $1,469 in 2016, increasing from $605 in 2010. In 2016, Thailand was ranked 87th in Human Development Index, and 70th in the inequality-adjusted HDI.

In 2017, Thailand&#x27;s median household income was ฿26,946 per month. Top quintile households had a 45.0% share of all income, while bottom quintile households had 7.1%. There were 26.9 million persons who had the bottom 40% of income earning less than ฿5,344 per person per month. During the 2013–2014 Thai political crisis, a survey found that anti-government PDRC mostly (32%) had a monthly income of more than ฿50,000, while pro-government UDD mostly (27%) had between ฿10,000 and ฿20,000.

In 2014, Credit Suisse reported that Thailand was the world&#x27;s third most unequal country, behind Russia and India. The top 10% richest held 79% of the country&#x27;s assets. The top 1% held 58% of the assets. The 50 richest Thai families had a total net worth accounting to 30% of GDP. Bank of Thailand reported that during 2006–16, Thailand&#x27;s top 5% largest companies had 85% of all corporate revenue in the nation, and only 6% of the country&#x27;s companies were in export industries, which made up 60% of the country&#x27;s GDP.

In 2016, 5.81 million people lived in poverty, or 11.6 million people (17.2% of population) if &quot;near poor&quot; is included. The proportion of the poor relative to total population in each region was 12.96% in the Northeast, 12.35% in the South, and 9.83% in the North. In 2017, there were 14 million people who applied for social welfare (yearly income of less than ฿100,000 was required). In the first quarter of 2023, Thai household debts totaled 14.6 trillion baht or 89.2% of GDP; the average debt per household was approximately 500,000 baht. In 2016, there were estimated 30,000 homeless persons in the country.

=== Exports and manufacturing ===
The economy of Thailand is heavily export-dependent, with exports accounting for more than two-thirds of gross domestic products (GDPs). Major exports include cars, computers, electrical appliances, rice, textiles and footwear, fishery products, rubber, and jewellery. In 2022, Thailand&#x27;s export of goods is worth roughly while its import worth roughly .

Substantial industries include electric appliances, components, computer components, and vehicles. Thailand&#x27;s recovery from the 1997–1998 Asian financial crisis depended mainly on exports, among various other factors. , the Thai automotive industry was the largest in Southeast Asia and the 9th largest in the world. The Thailand industry has an annual output of near 1.5 million vehicles, mostly commercial vehicles.

Most of the vehicles built in Thailand are developed and licensed by foreign producers, mainly Japanese and American. The Thai car industry takes advantage of the ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA) to find a market for many of its products. Eight manufacturers, five Japanese, two US, and Tata of India, produce pick-up trucks in Thailand. As of 2012, due to its favourable taxation for 2-door pick-ups at only 3–12% against 17–50% for passenger cars, Thailand was the second largest consumer of pick-up trucks in the world, after the US. In 2014, pick-ups accounted for 42% of all new vehicle sales in Thailand.

=== Tourism ===

Tourism makes up about 6% of the country&#x27;s economy. Prior to the pandemic, Thailand was the world&#x27;s eighth most visited country according to the World Tourism rankings compiled by the United Nations World Tourism Organisation. In 2019, Thailand received 39.8 million international tourists, ahead of United Kingdom and Germany and was the fourth highest in international tourism earning 60.5 billion US dollars.

Thailand was the most visited country in Southeast Asia in 2013, according to the World Tourism Organisation. Estimates of tourism receipts directly contributing to the Thai GDP of 12 trillion baht range from 9 per cent (1 trillion baht) (2013) to 16 per cent. When including the indirect effects of tourism, it is said to account for 20.2 per cent (2.4 trillion baht) of Thailand&#x27;s GDP.

Asian tourists primarily visit Thailand for Bangkok and the historical, natural, and cultural sights in its vicinity. Western tourists not only visit Bangkok and surrounding areas; many travel to the southern beaches and islands. The north is the chief destination for trekking and adventure travel with its diverse ethnic minority groups and forested mountains. The region hosting the fewest tourists is Isan. To accommodate foreign visitors, a separate tourism police with offices were set up in the major tourist areas and an emergency telephone number.

Thailand ranks as the worlds fifth largest medical tourism destination in spending, according to the World Travel and Tourism Council, attracting over 2.5 million visitors in 2018, and is number one in Asia. The country is popular for the growing practice of sex reassignment surgery (SRS) and cosmetic surgery. In 2010–2012, more than 90% of medical tourists travelled to Thailand for SRS. Prostitution in Thailand and sex tourism also form a &quot;de facto&quot; part of the economy. Campaigns promote Thailand as exotic to attract tourists. One estimate published in 2003 placed the trade at US$4.3 billion per year or about 3% of the Thai economy. It is believed that at least 10% of tourist dollars are spent on the sex trade.

=== Agriculture and natural resources ===
Forty-nine per cent of Thailand&#x27;s labour force is employed in agriculture. This is down from 70% in 1980. Rice is the most important crop in the country and Thailand had long been the world&#x27;s leading exporter of rice, until recently falling behind both India and Vietnam. Thailand has the highest percentage of arable land, 27.25%, of any state in the Greater Mekong Subregion. About 55% of the arable land area is used for rice production.

Agriculture has been experiencing a transition from labour-intensive and transitional methods to a more industrialised and competitive sector. Between 1962 and 1983, the agricultural sector grew by 4.1% per year on average and continued to grow at 2.2% between 1983 and 2007. The relative contribution of agriculture to GDP has declined while exports of goods and services have increased.

Furthermore, access to biocapacity in Thailand is lower than world average. In 2016, Thailand had 1.2 global hectares of biocapacity per person within its territory, a little less than world average of 1.6 global hectares per person. In contrast, in 2016, they used 2.5 global hectares of biocapacity—their ecological footprint of consumption. This means they use about twice as much biocapacity as Thailand contains, resulting in a deficit.

=== Informal economy ===

In 2012, it was estimated that informal workers comprised 62.6% of the Thai workforce. The Ministry of Labour defines informal workers to be individuals who work in informal economies and do not have employee status under a given country&#x27;s Labour Protection Act (LPA). The informal sector in Thailand has grown significantly over the past 60 years over the course of Thailand&#x27;s gradual transition from an agriculture-based economy to becoming more industrialised and service-oriented. Between 1993 and 1995, ten per cent of the Thai labour force moved from the agricultural sector to urban and industrial jobs, especially in the manufacturing sector. It is estimated that between 1988 and 1995, the number of factory workers in the country doubled from two to four million, as Thailand&#x27;s GDP tripled.

While the Asian financial crisis that followed in 1997 hit the Thai economy hard, the industrial sector continued to expand under widespread deregulation, as Thailand was mandated to adopt a range of structural adjustment reforms upon receiving funding from the IMF and World Bank. These reforms implemented an agenda of increased privatisation and trade liberalisation in the country, and decreased federal subsidisation of public goods and utilities, agricultural price supports, and regulations on fair wages and labour conditions. Many migrant farmers took jobs in sweatshops and factories with few labour regulations and often exploitative conditions. Those that could not find formal factory work, including illegal migrants and the families of rural Thai migrants, are under the regulation imposed by the structural adjustment programmes. Scholars argue that the economic consequences and social costs of Thailand&#x27;s labour reforms in the wake of the 1997 Asian financial crisis fell on individuals and families rather than the state. 
Informal labour in entertainment, nightlife, and the sex industry face additional vulnerabilities, including recruitment into circles of sexual exploitation and human trafficking. A 2012 study found that 64% of informal workers had not completed education beyond primary school. Many informal workers are also migrants, only some of which have legal status in the country. The informal labour sector is also not recognised under the Labour Protection Act (LPA). Thai social security policies fail to protect against workplace accidents and unemployment and retirement insurance. Many informal workers are not legally contracted for their employment, and many do not make a living wage. Tens of thousands of migrants from neighboring countries face exploitation in a few industries, especially in fishing where slave-like conditions have been reported.

=== Science and technology ===
Thailand ranked 41st in the Global Innovation Index in 2024. The Ministry of Higher Education, Science, Research and Innovation and its agencies oversees the development of science, technology, and research in Thailand. According to the National Research Council of Thailand, the country devoted 1.1% of its GDP to the research and development of science in 2019, with over 166,788 research and development personnel in full-time equivalent that year.

== Infrastructure ==

=== Transportation ===

The State Railway of Thailand (SRT) operates all of Thailand&#x27;s national rail lines. Krung Thep Aphiwat Central Terminal and Bangkok (Hua Lamphong) are the main termini of intercity routes. Phahonyothin and ICD Lat Krabang are the main freight terminals. SRT had of track, all of it meter gauge. Nearly all is single-track (2,847.1 km), although some important sections around Bangkok are double () or triple-tracked (), and there are plans to extend this.

Rail transport in Bangkok includes long-distance services. There are four rapid transit rail systems in the capital: the BTS Skytrain, MRT, SRT Red Lines, and the Airport Rail Link. In Bangkok, there were two failed rapid rail projects Lavalin Skytrain and Bangkok Elevated Road and Train System, before Mass Rapid Transit Master Plan in Bangkok Metropolitan Region was endorsed by the cabinet on 27 September 1994 and implemented from 1995 to the present.

Thailand has of highways. , Thailand has over 462,133 roads and 37 million registered vehicles, 20 million of them motorbikes. A number of undivided two-lane highways have been converted into divided four-lane highways. Within the Bangkok Metropolitan Region, there are a number of controlled-access highways. There are 4,125 public vans operating on 114 routes from Bangkok alone. Other forms of road transport includes tuk-tuks, taxis—with over 80,647 registered taxis nationwide as of 2018, vans (minibus), motorbike taxis, and songthaews.

, Thailand has 103 airports with 63 paved runways, in addition to 6 heliports. The busiest airport in the country is Bangkok&#x27;s Suvarnabhumi Airport.

=== Energy ===

75% of Thailand&#x27;s electrical generation is powered by natural gas in 2014. Coal-fired power plants produce an additional 20% of electricity, with the remainder coming from biomass, hydro, and biogas. Compared to other ASEAN&#x27;s countries, Thailand is the largest importer of gas in weight. In 2022, Thailand&#x27;s oil and gas production dropped by 19% and 17%, respectively.

The government, in 2018, has developed an Alternative Energy Development Plan 2018–2037 (AEDP 2018). The plan defines goals for the increase of renewable energy to almost 30,000 MW by 2037.

== Demographics ==

Thailand has an estimated population of 71.7 million as of 2023; Thailand&#x27;s first census in 1909 found the population to be 8.2 million. Thailand&#x27;s population is largely rural, concentrated in the rice-growing areas of the central, northeastern, and northern regions. About 44.2% of Thailand&#x27;s population lived in urban areas , slowly increasing from 29.4% in the 1990 census and 31.1% in the 2000 census.

Thailand&#x27;s government-sponsored family planning programme resulted in a dramatic decline in population growth from 3.1% in 1960 to around 0.4% today. In 1970, an average of 5.7 people lived in a Thai household; in 2022, the average Thai household size was 3 people. Now, more than 20% of its population is aged over 60 and has a low birth rate, posing economic challenges. The sex ratio between male and female is 1.05, with Thailand having slightly more males.

=== Ethnic groups ===
As of 2010, Thai people make up the majority of Thailand&#x27;s population (95.9%). The remaining 4.1% of the population are Burmese (2.0%), others (1.3%), and unspecified (0.9%).

According to genetic research, the present-day Thai people were divided into three groups: the northern group (Khon Mueang) are closely related to the Tai ethnic groups in southern China, the northeastern group (Isan people) are mixed Tai and several Austroasiatic-speaking ethnic groups, while the central and southern groups (formerly called Siamese) strongly share genetic profiles with the Mon people.

According to the Royal Thai Government&#x27;s 2011 Country Report to the UN Committee responsible for the International Convention for the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, available from the Department of Rights and Liberties Promotion of the Thai Ministry of Justice, 62 ethnic communities are officially recognised in Thailand. Twenty million Central Thai (together with approximately 650,000 Khorat Thai) made up approximately 20,650,000 (34.1 per cent) of the state&#x27;s population of 60,544,937 at the time of completion of the Mahidol University &quot;Ethnolinguistic Maps of Thailand&quot; data (1997).

The 2011 Thailand Country Report provides population numbers for mountain peoples (&#x27;hill tribes&#x27;) and ethnic communities in the Northeast and is explicit about its main reliance on the Mahidol University Ethnolinguistic Maps of Thailand data. Thus, though over 3.288 million people in the Northeast alone could not be categorised, the population and percentages of other ethnic communities are known for all of Thailand and constitute minimum populations. In descending order, the largest (equal to or greater than 400,000) are a) 15,080,000 Lao (24.9 per cent) consisting of the Thai Lao (14 million) and other smaller Lao groups, namely the Thai Loei (400–500,000), Lao Lom (350,000), Lao Wiang/Klang (200,000), Lao Khrang (90,000), Lao Ngaew (30,000), and Lao Ti (10,000); b) six million Khon Muang (9.9 per cent, also called Northern Thais); c) 4.5 million Pak Tai (7.5 per cent, also called Southern Thais); d) 1.4 million Khmer Leu (2.3 per cent, also called Northern Khmer); e) 900,000 Malay (1.5%); f) 500,000 Nyaw (0.8 per cent); g) 470,000 Phu Thai (0.8 per cent); h) 400,000 Kuy/Kuay (also known as Suay) (0.7 per cent), and i) 350,000 Karen (0.6 per cent). Thai Chinese, those of significant Chinese heritage, are 14% of the population, while Thais with partial Chinese ancestry comprise up to 40% of the population. Thai Malays represent 3% of the population, with the remainder consisting of Mons, Khmers, and various &quot;hill tribes&quot;.

Increasing numbers of migrants from neighbouring Myanmar, Laos, and Cambodia, as well as from Nepal and India, have pushed the total number of non-national residents to around 3.5 million , up from an estimated 2 million in 2008. Some 41,000 Britons and 20,000 Australians live in Thailand.

=== Population centres ===

=== Language ===

Thai is the official language. It is a Kra–Dai language closely related to Lao, Shan in Myanmar, and numerous smaller languages spoken in an arc from Hainan and Yunnan south to the Chinese border. It is the principal language of education and government and spoken throughout the country. The standard is based on the dialect of the central Thai people, and it is written in the Thai alphabet, an abugida script that evolved from the Khmer alphabet. 

Sixty-two languages were recognised by the Royal Thai Government. For the purposes of the national census, four dialects of Thai exist; these partly coincide with regional designations, such as Southern Thai and Northern Thai.

The largest of Thailand&#x27;s minority languages is the Lao dialect of Isan spoken in the northeastern provinces. In the far south, Kelantan-Pattani Malay is the primary language of Malay Muslims. Varieties of Chinese are also spoken by the large Thai Chinese population, with the Teochew dialect best-represented. Numerous tribal languages are also spoken, including many Austroasiatic languages such as Mon, Khmer, and Mlabri; Austronesian languages such as Cham, Moken and Urak Lawoi&#x27;; Sino-Tibetan languages like Lawa, Akha, and Karen; and other Tai languages such as Phu Thai, and Saek. Hmong is a member of the Hmong–Mien languages, which is now regarded as a language family of its own.

=== Religion ===


The country&#x27;s most prevalent religion is Theravada Buddhism, which is an integral part of Thai identity and culture. Active participation in Buddhism is among the highest in the world. Thailand has the second-largest number of Buddhists in the world after China. According to the 2018 National Statistical Office data, 93.46% of the country&#x27;s population self-identified as Buddhists.

Muslims constitute the second largest religious group in Thailand, comprising 5.37% of the population in 2018. Islam is concentrated mostly in the country&#x27;s southernmost provinces: Pattani, Yala, Satun, Narathiwat, and part of Songkhla, which are predominantly Malay, most of whom are Sunni Muslims. Christians represented 1.13% of the population in 2018, with the remaining population consisting of Hindus and Sikhs, who live mostly in the country&#x27;s cities. There is also a small Jewish community in Thailand dating back to the 17th century.

The constitution does not name an official state religion, and provides for freedom of religion. There have been no widespread reports of societal abuses or discrimination based on religious belief or practice. Thai law officially recognises five religious groups: Buddhists, Muslims, Brahmin-Hindus, Sikhs, and Christians. However, some laws are inspired from Buddhist practices, such as banning alcohol sales on religious holidays.

=== Education ===

In 1995, as minister of education, Sukavich Rangsitpollaid let out his plans for educational reform in Thailand. The reform was considered a landmark movement after nearly 100 years of education under the previous system. Thailand&#x27;s youth literacy rate was 98.1% in 2015. Education is provided by a school system of kindergartens, primary, lower secondary and upper secondary schools, numerous vocational colleges, and universities. Education is compulsory up to and including age 14, while the government is mandated to provide free education through to age 17. Issues concerning university entrance have been in constant upheaval for a number of years. The country is also one of the few that still mandates uniform up to the university years, which is still a subject of ongoing debate.

In 2013, the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology announced that 27,231 schools would receive classroom-level access to high-speed internet. However, the country&#x27;s educational infrastructure was still underprepared for online teaching, as smaller and more remote schools were particularly hindered by COVID-19 restrictions.

The number of higher education institutions in Thailand has grown over the past decades to 156 officially. The two top-ranking universities in Thailand are Chulalongkorn University and Mahidol University. Thai universities&#x27; research output is still relatively low, even though the country&#x27;s journal publications increased by 20% between 2011 and 2016. Thailand has the second highest number of English-medium private international schools in Southeast Asian Nations. Cram schools are especially popular for university entrance exams.

Students in ethnic minority areas score consistently lower in standardised national and international tests. This is likely due to unequal allocation of educational resources, weak teacher training, poverty, and low Thai language skill, the language of the tests. , Thailand was ranked 89th out of 100 countries globally for English proficiency. Thailand is the third most popular study destination in ASEAN. The number of international degree students in Thailand increased by 9.7 times between 1999 and 2012, from 1,882 to 20,309 students. Most of international students come from neighbor countries like China, Myanmar, Cambodia and Vietnam.

=== Health ===
Thailand ranks world&#x27;s sixth, and Asia&#x27;s first in the 2019 Global Health Security Index of global health security capabilities in 195 countries, making it the only developing country on the world&#x27;s top ten. Thailand had 62 hospitals accredited by Joint Commission International. In 2002, Bumrungrad became the first hospital in Asia to meet the standard.

Health and medical care is overseen by the Ministry of Public Health (MOPH), with total national expenditures on health amounting to 4.3 per cent of GDP in 2009. Non-communicable diseases form the major burden of morbidity and mortality, while infectious diseases including malaria and tuberculosis, as well as traffic accidents, are also important public health issues.

In December 2018, the interim parliament voted to legalise the use of cannabis for medical reasons, making Thailand the first Southeast Asian country to allow the use of medical cannabis.

== Culture ==
Thai culture and traditions incorporate influences from India, China, Cambodia, and the rest of Southeast Asia. Thailand&#x27;s national religion, Theravada Buddhism, is central to modern Thai identity. Thai Buddhism has evolved over time to include many regional beliefs originating from Hinduism, animism, as well as ancestor worship. The official calendar in Thailand is based on the Eastern version of the Buddhist Era (BE). Thai identity today is a social construct of the Phibun regime in the 1940s.

Several ethnic groups mediated change between their traditional local culture, national Thai, and global cultural influences. Overseas Chinese also form a significant part of Thai society, particularly in and around Bangkok. Thai Chinese businesses prosper as part of the larger bamboo network.
Respect for elderly and superiors (by age, position, monks, or certain professions) is Thai mores, reflecting in many classes of honorifics. &quot;Wai&quot; is a traditional Thai greeting, and is generally offered first by a person who is younger or lower in social status and position. Older siblings have duties to younger ones.

Taboos in Thai culture include touching someone&#x27;s head or pointing with the feet, as the head is considered the most sacred and the foot the lowest part of the body.

=== Art ===

The origins of Thai art were influenced by Buddhist art and by scenes from the Indian epics. Traditional Thai sculpture almost exclusively depicts images of the Buddha, being very similar with the other styles from Southeast Asia. Traditional Thai paintings usually consist of book illustrations, and painted ornamentation of buildings such as palaces and temples. 

Thai art was influenced by indigenous civilisations of the Mon and other civilisations. By the Sukothai and Ayutthaya periods, Thai had developed into its own unique style and was later further influenced by the other Asian styles, mostly by Sri Lankan and Chinese. Thai sculpture and painting, and the royal courts provided patronage, erecting temples and other religious shrines as acts of merit or to commemorate important events.

Traditional Thai paintings showed subjects in two dimensions without perspective. The size of each element in the picture reflected its degree of importance. The primary technique of composition is that of apportioning areas: the main elements are isolated from each other by space transformers. This eliminated the intermediate ground, which would otherwise imply perspective. Perspective was introduced only as a result of Western influence in the mid-19th century. Monk artist Khrua In Khong is well known as the first artist to introduce linear perspective to Thai traditional art.

The most frequent narrative subjects for paintings were or are: the Jataka stories, episodes from the life of the Buddha, the Buddhist heavens and hells, themes derived from the Thai versions of the &quot;Ramayana&quot; and &quot;Mahabharata&quot;, and scenes of daily life. Some of the scenes are influenced by Thai folklore instead of following strict Buddhist iconography.

=== Architecture ===

The Ayutthaya Kingdom movement is designed to display might and riches. The temples in Ayutthaya seldom built eaves stretching from the masterhead. Buddhist temples in Thailand are known as &quot;wats&quot;, from the Pāḷi &quot;vāṭa&quot;, meaning an enclosure: a temple has an enclosing wall that divides it from the secular world. Wat architecture demonstrates many differences in layout and style, but they all adhere to the same principles.

=== Literature ===

Thai literature has had a long history. Even before the establishment of the Sukhothai Kingdom there existed oral and written works.

During the Sukhothai Kingdom, most literary works were written in simple prose with certain alliteration schemes. Major works include King Ram Khamhaeng Inscription describing life at the time, which is considered the first literary work in Thai script, but some historians questioned its authenticity. &quot;Trai Phum Phra Ruang&quot;, written in 1345 by King Maha Thammaracha I, expounds Buddhist philosophy based on an extensive study with reference to over 30 sacred texts and could be considered the nation&#x27;s first piece of research dissertation.

During the Ayutthaya Kingdom, new poetic forms were created, with different rhyme schemes and metres. It is common to find a combination of different poetic forms in one poetic work. &quot;Lilit Yuan Phai&quot; is a narrative poem describing the war between King Borommatrailokkanat of Ayutthaya and Prince Tilokaraj of Lan Na. One literary work is &quot;Kap He Ruea&quot;, composed by Prince Thammathibet in the &quot;nirat&quot; tradition. Traditionally, the verse is sung during the royal barge procession and has been the model for subsequent poets to emulate. The same prince also composed the greatly admired &quot;Kap Ho Khlong&quot; on the Visit to Than Thongdaeng and &quot;Kap Ho Khlong Nirat Phrabat&quot;. The Thonburi period produced &quot;Ramakien&quot;, a verse drama contributed by King Taksin the Great.

During the 18th century Rattanakosin period, which still fought with the Burmese, many of the early Rattanakosin works dealt with war and military strategy. Some examples are &quot;Nirat Rop Phama Thi Tha Din Daeng&quot;, &quot;Phleng Yao Rop Phama Thi Nakhon Si Thammarat&quot;. There were also verse recitals with musical accompaniment, such as Mahori telling the story of &quot;Kaki&quot; and Sepha, relating the story of &quot;Khun Chang Khun Phaen&quot;. Other recitals include Sri Thanonchai. The Thai poet Sunthorn Phu is known as &quot;the bard of Rattanakosin&quot; (). Sunthorn Phu is best known for his epic poem &quot;Phra Aphai Mani&quot;, a versified fantasy-adventure novel, a genre of Siamese literature known as ().

Some of the most well-known modern Thai writers include Kukrit Pramoj, Kulap Saipradit, (penname Siburapha), Suweeriya Sirisingh (penname Botan), Chart Korbjitti, Prabda Yoon, and Duanwad Pimwana.

=== Music and dance ===

Aside from folk and regional dances (southern Thailand&#x27;s Menora and Ramwong, for example), the two major forms of Thai classical dance drama are Khon and Lakhon nai. In the beginning, both were exclusively court entertainments, and it was not until much later that a popular style of dance theatre, likay, evolved as a diversion for common folk. Folk dance forms include dance theater forms like likay, numerous regional dances (&quot;ram&quot;), the ritual dance ram muay, and homage to the teacher, wai khru. Both ram muay and wai khru take place before all traditional muay Thai matches.

The three primary classical ensembles are the Piphat, Khrueang sai, and Mahori. Mahori employ small ching hand cymbals.

=== Entertainment ===

Thai films are exported and exhibited in Southeast Asia. Thai cinema has developed its own unique identity. 

The Thai heist thriller film &quot;Bad Genius&quot; (2017) was one of the most internationally successful Thai films; it broke Thai film earning records in several Asian countries, Bad Genius won in 12 categories at the 27th Suphannahong National Film Awards, and also won the Jury Award at the 16th New York Asian Film Festival with a worldwide collection of more than $42 million. 

&quot;Shutter&quot; (2004) was one of the best-known Thai horror movies and was recognized worldwide. Films such as &quot;Ong-Bak: Muay Thai Warrior&quot; (2003) and &quot;Tom-Yum-Goong&quot; (2005), starring Tony Jaa, feature distinctive aspects of Thai martial arts &quot;Muay Thai&quot;. Thailand television dramas, known as Lakorn, have become popular in Thailand and regionally.

The entertainment industries are estimated to have directly contributed $2.1 billion in GDP to the Thai economy in 2011. They also directly supported 86,600 jobs. Amongst several dance-pop artists who have made internationally successful are &quot;Lisa&quot; Lalisa Manobal, Violette Wautier, and Tata Young.

=== Cuisine ===


Thai cuisine is one of the most popular in the world. Common ingredients include garlic, lemongrass, kaffir lime, galangal, turmeric, coriander, and coconut milk. Each region of Thailand has its specialities: &quot;kaeng khiao wan&quot; (green curry) in the central region, &quot;som tam&quot; (green papaya salad) in the northeast, &quot;khao soi&quot; in the north, and &quot;massaman&quot; curry in the south.

In 2017, seven Thai dishes appeared on a list of the &quot;World&#x27;s 50 Best Foods&quot;—an online worldwide poll by CNN Travel. Thailand had more dishes on the list than any other country. They were: &quot;tom yam goong&quot; (4th), &quot;pad Thai&quot; (5th), &quot;som tam&quot; (6th), &quot;massaman&quot; curry (10th), green curry (19th), Thai fried rice (24th) and &quot;nam tok mu&quot; (36th). Two desserts were also listed in CNN&#x27;s 50 Best Desserts Around The World: mango sticky rice and tub tim krob.

The staple food in Thailand is rice, particularly jasmine rice, which forms part of almost every meal. Thailand is a leading exporter of rice, and Thais consume over 100 kg of milled rice per person per year. Thailand is also the world leader in edible insect industry and well known for its street food; Bangkok is sometimes called the street food capital of the world.

=== Units of measurement ===

Thailand generally uses the metric system, but traditional units of measurement for land area are used, and imperial units of measurement are occasionally used for building materials. Years are numbered as B.E. (Buddhist Era) in educational settings, civil service, government, contracts, and newspaper datelines. However, in banking, and increasingly in industry and commerce, standard Western year (Christian or Common Era) counting is the standard practice.

=== Sports ===
Muay Thai () is a combat sport that uses stand-up striking along with various clinching techniques. Muay Thai became widespread internationally in the late-20th to 21st centuries. Famous practitioners include Buakaw Banchamek, Samart Payakaroon, and Apidej Sit-Hirun. Association football has overtaken Muay Thai as the most widely followed sport in Thailand. The Thailand national football team has played the AFC Asian Cup six times and reached the semifinals in 1972. The country has hosted the Asian Cup twice, in 1972 and in 2007 (along with Indonesia, Malaysia, and Vietnam for the 2007).

Volleyball is rapidly growing as one of the most popular sports. The women&#x27;s team has often participated in the World Championship, World Cup, and World Grand Prix Asian Championship. They have won the Asian Championship twice and the Asian Cup once. Takraw is a sport native to Thailand in which the players hit a rattan ball and are only allowed to use their feet, knees, chest, and head to touch the ball. Sepak takraw is a form of this sport which is similar to volleyball. A rather similar game but played only with the feet is buka ball.

Rugby is also a growing sport in Thailand with the Thailand national rugby union team rising to be ranked 61st in the world. Thailand became the first country in the world to host an international 80 welterweight rugby tournament in 2005. Thailand has also attracts golfers from Japan, Korea, and Western countries. There are more than 200 world-class golf courses nationwide. For basketball, the Chang Thailand Slammers won the 2011 ASEAN Basketball League Championship. The Thailand national basketball team had its most successful year at the 1966 Asian Games where it won the silver medal.
The Lumpinee Boxing Stadium originally sited at Rama IV Road near Lumphini Park hosted its final Muay Thai boxing matches on 8 February 2014 after the venue first opened in December 1956. On 11 February 2014, the stadium was relocated to Ram Intra Road due to the new venue&#x27;s capacity. Thammasat Stadium in Bangkok was built for the 1998 Asian Games. Rajamangala National Stadium is the biggest sporting arena in Thailand, with a capacity of around 50,000.

== See also ==

* International rankings of Thailand
* Outline of Thailand

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
Government
* Thaigov.go.th – Government of Thailand
* Chief of State and Cabinet Members (archived 10 December 2008)
* Mfa.go.th – Ministry of Foreign Affairs
* Thailand Internet information – National Electronics and Computer Technology Center
* Ministry of Culture (archived 28 April 2015)

General information

* Thailand. &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
* Thailand entry in Library of Congress Country Studies. 1987
* Thailand from &quot;UCB Libraries GovPubs&quot; (archived 7 February 2009)
* Thailand from the BBC News
* Thailand &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot; entry
* Longdo Map – Thailand maps in English and Thai
* Key Development Forecasts for Thailand from International Futures
* 2010 Thailand population census by Economic and Social statistics Bureau (archived 16 January 2013)

Travel
* Tourism Authority of Thailand – official tourism website

Other
* Thailand Country Fact Sheet from the Common Language Project (archived 31 July 2014)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="0" end="8" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="25" end="44" title="Thailand" label="Kingdom of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="71" end="75" title="Thailand" label="Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="124" end="138" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43467" start="146" end="167" title="Mainland Southeast Asia" label="Indochinese Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="252" end="259" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="290" end="294" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="316" end="324" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131217" start="346" end="362" title="Gulf of Thailand" label="Gulf of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="367" end="375" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47632" start="405" end="416" title="Andaman Sea" label="Andaman Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089219" start="433" end="448" title="maritime border" label="maritime border"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="455" end="462" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="484" end="493" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="498" end="503" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="522" end="529" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q703353" start="570" end="582" title="Tai peoples" label="Thai peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q11014588" start="675" end="694" title="Greater India" label="Indianised kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446298" start="707" end="710" title="Mon kingdoms" label="Mon"/>
<link wikidata="Q201705" start="712" end="724" title="Khmer Empire" label="Khmer Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658454" start="730" end="742" title="Monarchies of Malaysia" label="Malay states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586289" start="812" end="821" title="Ngoenyang" label="Ngoenyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q863279" start="823" end="832" title="Sukhothai Kingdom" label="Sukhothai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059707" start="834" end="840" title="Lan Na" label="Lan Na"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="846" end="855" title="Ayutthaya Kingdom" label="Ayutthaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="927" end="937" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q31307" start="1115" end="1134" title="Burmese–Siamese War (1765–1767)" label="Burmese–Siamese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q320097" start="1136" end="1157" title="Taksin" label="King Taksin the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115291" start="1233" end="1249" title="Thonburi Kingdom" label="Thonburi Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q310992" start="1322" end="1343" title="Rama I" label="Phutthayotfa Chulalok"/>
<link wikidata="Q691928" start="1387" end="1401" title="Chakri dynasty" label="Chakri dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234208" start="1425" end="1452" title="Western imperialism in Asia" label="Western imperialism in Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q815962" start="1506" end="1518" title="colonization" label="colonisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q117460359" start="1575" end="1586" title="Territorial losses of Thailand" label="territorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="1725" end="1742" title="absolute monarchy" label="absolute monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q158861" start="1773" end="1786" title="Chulalongkorn" label="Chulalongkorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1801" end="1812" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="1830" end="1840" title="Allies of World War I" label="the Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120252" start="1930" end="1940" title="Siamese revolution of 1932" label="revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138059" start="2041" end="2054" title="Thailand in World War II" label="ally of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2058" end="2070" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q975621" start="2113" end="2127" title="Sarit Thanarat" label="Sarit Thanarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="2210" end="2218" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q145560" start="2238" end="2257" title="major non-NATO ally" label="major non-NATO ally"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="2293" end="2312" title="Cold War" label="anti-communist role"/>
<link wikidata="Q277252" start="2342" end="2347" title="Southeast Asia Treaty Organization" label="SEATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575745" start="2392" end="2431" title="1973 Thai popular uprising" label="brief period of parliamentary democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="2505" end="2514" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49896" start="2519" end="2532" title="Military dictatorship" label="military rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q12376089" start="2654" end="2680" title="Prime Minister of Thailand" label="Prime Minister of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q164373" start="2681" end="2699" title="Thaksin Shinawatra" label="Thaksin Shinawatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="2723" end="2728" title="Coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coups"/>
<link wikidata="Q860423" start="2733" end="2737" title="2006 Thai coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q16914766" start="2742" end="2746" title="2014 Thai coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2785" end="2805" title="Constitution of Thailand#2017 Constitution" label="current constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q66424254" start="2809" end="2840" title="Hybrid regime" label="nominally democratic government"/>
<link wikidata="Q16937892" start="2851" end="2877" title="2019 Thai general election" label="2019 Thai general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q97667436" start="2883" end="2924" title="2020–2021 Thai protests" label="large pro-democracy protests in 2020–2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="3023" end="3036" title="Parliamentary system" label="parliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="3037" end="3060" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322988" start="3207" end="3219" title="middle power" label="middle power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="3263" end="3268" title="ASEAN" label="ASEAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1901218" start="3281" end="3303" title="Economy of Thailand" label="second-largest economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11000322" start="3330" end="3355" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP)" label="23rd-largest in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="3359" end="3362" title="purchasing power parity" label="PPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q19093" start="3377" end="3396" title="List of countries by GDP (nominal)" label="29th by nominal GPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q376860" start="3426" end="3454" title="newly industrialised economy" label="newly industrialised economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q600961" start="3493" end="3500" title="Tourism in Thailand" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q663757" start="3616" end="3628" title="George Cœdès" label="George Cœdès"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185850" start="3813" end="3826" title="Chit Phumisak" label="Chit Phumisak"/>
<link wikidata="Q15430788" start="4049" end="4062" title="Michel Ferlus" label="Michel Ferlus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319414" start="4378" end="4384" title="mueang" label="mueang"/>
<link wikidata="Q765018" start="4419" end="4429" title="Mandala (political model)" label="city-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q684172" start="4673" end="4678" title="rājan" label="rājan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36727" start="4737" end="4741" title="Pali" label="Pali"/>
<link wikidata="Q207868" start="4974" end="4994" title="Thai National Anthem" label="Thai National Anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6641967" start="5010" end="5029" title="Luang Saranupraphan" label="Luang Saranupraphan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="5330" end="5338" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q13349" start="5386" end="5389" title="Mon language" label="Mon"/>
<link wikidata="Q740417" start="5472" end="5476" title="Shan people" label="Shan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="5493" end="5498" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q118850" start="5811" end="5828" title="Chao Phraya River" label="Chao Phraya River"/>
<link wikidata="Q520338" start="5868" end="5881" title="Nakhon Pathom" label="Nakhon Pathom"/>
<link wikidata="Q190829" start="5901" end="5917" title="central Thailand" label="central Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q42891" start="5967" end="5974" title="Krishna" label="Krishna"/>
<link wikidata="Q104536486" start="6023" end="6047" title="Wat Sri Chum Inscription" label="Wat Sri Chum Inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150964" start="6097" end="6115" title="Phra Pathommachedi" label="Phra Pathommachedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q863279" start="6184" end="6201" title="Sukhothai Kingdom" label="Sukhothai Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q312849" start="6226" end="6233" title="Mongkut" label="Mongkut"/>
<link wikidata="Q745728" start="6408" end="6453" title="Bowring Treaty" label="the country&amp;#x27;s first international treaty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6847" end="6865" title="Maritime Jade Road" label="Maritime Jade Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q584125" start="7023" end="7033" title="Ban Chiang" label="Ban Chiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q867782" start="7188" end="7204" title="Kingdom of Funan" label="Kingdom of Funan"/>
<link wikidata="Q637909" start="7296" end="7306" title="Mon people" label="Mon people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268307" start="7341" end="7350" title="Dvaravati" label="Dvaravati"/>
<link wikidata="Q255931" start="7366" end="7378" title="Hariphunchai" label="Hariphunchai"/>
<link wikidata="Q201028" start="7403" end="7415" title="Khmer people" label="Khmer people"/>
<link wikidata="Q201705" start="7432" end="7444" title="Khmer empire" label="Khmer empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q163607" start="7457" end="7463" title="Angkor" label="Angkor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509414" start="7485" end="7496" title="Tambralinga" label="Tambralinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q48359" start="7542" end="7556" title="Strait of Malacca" label="Malacca Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q11014588" start="7638" end="7668" title="Indianized kingdom" label="culture and religions of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q472834" start="7741" end="7752" title="Thai people" label="Thai people"/>
<link wikidata="Q703353" start="7764" end="7780" title="Tai peoples" label="Tai ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q340004" start="7967" end="7981" title="David K. Wyatt" label="David K. Wyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q36027" start="8115" end="8128" title="Điện Biên Phủ" label="Điện Biên Phủ"/>
<link wikidata="Q11312170" start="8620" end="8634" title="Sujit Wongthes" label="Sujit Wongthes"/>
<link wikidata="Q663757" start="8731" end="8743" title="George Cœdès" label="George Cœdès"/>
<link wikidata="Q390695" start="8783" end="8796" title="Farther India" label="Farther India"/>
<link wikidata="Q216786" start="8888" end="8894" title="Champa" label="Champa"/>
<link wikidata="Q245117" start="8950" end="8960" title="bas-relief" label="bas-relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q43473" start="8965" end="8975" title="Angkor Wat" label="Angkor Wat"/>
<link wikidata="Q740417" start="9297" end="9308" title="Shan people" label="Shan people"/>
<link wikidata="Q991396" start="9314" end="9324" title="Bru people" label="Bru people"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643912" start="9333" end="9344" title="Brau people" label="Brau people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137656" start="9470" end="9478" title="ethnonym" label="ethnonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q485762" start="9669" end="9676" title="toponym" label="toponym"/>
<link wikidata="Q34171" start="9761" end="9770" title="Tai-Kadai" label="Tai-Kadai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413" start="9848" end="9861" title="Yangtze basin" label="Yangtze basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15176" start="9899" end="9906" title="Guangxi" label="Guangxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="9956" end="9963" title="China" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q15176" start="9977" end="9984" title="Guangxi" label="Guangxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q703353" start="10072" end="10082" title="Tai people" label="Tai people"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="10181" end="10195" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="10229" end="10234" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="10238" end="10243" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10369" end="10392" title="Uriyangkhadai#Invasion of Yunnan and Tibet" label="Mongol invasion of Dali"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="10448" end="10465" title="Indigenous peoples" label="indigenous tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q36027" start="10584" end="10597" title="Điện Biên Phủ" label="Điện Biên Phủ"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="10626" end="10633" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="10647" end="10661" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q863038" start="10665" end="10683" title="northeastern India" label="northeastern India"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920941" start="10811" end="10823" title="Singhanavati" label="Singhanavati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="10885" end="10892" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="10897" end="10908" title="archaeology" label="archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11032" end="11043" title="Shan people#History" label="Shan States"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="11118" end="11125" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562906" start="11138" end="11147" title="Muang Sua" label="Muang Sua"/>
<link wikidata="Q190165" start="11149" end="11162" title="Luang Prabang" label="Luang Prabang"/>
<link wikidata="Q13018274" start="11218" end="11234" title="Chiang Saen Lake" label="Chiang Saen Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="11245" end="11255" title="earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920941" start="11364" end="11376" title="Singhanavati" label="Singhanavati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586289" start="11444" end="11453" title="Ngoenyang" label="Ngoenyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q475958" start="11545" end="11561" title="Mae Sai District" label="Mae Sai District"/>
<link wikidata="Q236419" start="11563" end="11573" title="Chiang Rai province" label="Chiang Rai"/>
<link wikidata="Q52028" start="11598" end="11608" title="Chiang Mai" label="Chiang Mai"/>
<link wikidata="Q887732" start="11625" end="11632" title="Mangrai" label="Mangrai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059707" start="11673" end="11679" title="Lan Na" label="Lan Na"/>
<link wikidata="Q41179" start="11820" end="11826" title="Mekong" label="Mekong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059707" start="11904" end="11910" title="Lan Na" label="Lan Na"/>
<link wikidata="Q637909" start="11960" end="11963" title="Mon people" label="Mon"/>
<link wikidata="Q255931" start="11964" end="11976" title="Hariphunchai" label="Hariphunchai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268307" start="11980" end="11989" title="Dvaravati" label="Dvaravati"/>
<link wikidata="Q190829" start="12094" end="12110" title="central Thailand" label="central Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q637909" start="12313" end="12316" title="Mon people" label="Mon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332305" start="12320" end="12324" title="Lavo Kingdom" label="Lavo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057118" start="12353" end="12359" title="Chenla" label="Chenla"/>
<link wikidata="Q201705" start="12364" end="12369" title="Khmer Empire" label="Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q863279" start="12480" end="12497" title="Sukhothai Kingdom" label="Sukhothai Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q118850" start="12512" end="12529" title="Chao Phraya River" label="Chao Phraya River"/>
<link wikidata="Q703353" start="12577" end="12587" title="Tai people" label="Tai people"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920941" start="12670" end="12682" title="Singhanavati" label="Singhanavati"/>
<link wikidata="Q475498" start="12760" end="12764" title="Fang district" label="Fang"/>
<link wikidata="Q475958" start="12831" end="12847" title="Mae Sai district" label="Mae Sai district"/>
<link wikidata="Q13017908" start="12907" end="12912" title="Phrom" label="Phrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q13017908" start="12970" end="12975" title="Phrom" label="Phrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q273807" start="13016" end="13026" title="Kamphaeng Phet province" label="Chakangrao"/>
<link wikidata="Q867579" start="13074" end="13082" title="Phitsanulok" label="Songkwae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332305" start="13113" end="13117" title="Lavo Kingdom" label="Lavo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363891" start="13134" end="13141" title="Lopburi" label="Lopburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13017908" start="13162" end="13167" title="Phrom" label="Phrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q703353" start="13182" end="13192" title="Tai people" label="Tai people"/>
<link wikidata="Q4161873" start="13248" end="13267" title="royal intermarriage" label="royal intermarriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q472834" start="13377" end="13388" title="Thai people" label="Thai people"/>
<link wikidata="Q637909" start="13684" end="13694" title="Mon people" label="Mon people"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="13698" end="13705" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q703353" start="13715" end="13718" title="Tai peoples" label="Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138179" start="13723" end="13737" title="southern China" label="southern China"/>
<link wikidata="Q9213532" start="13779" end="13797" title="cultural diffusion" label="cultural diffusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q13349" start="14018" end="14030" title="Mon language" label="Mon language"/>
<link wikidata="Q36727" start="14043" end="14047" title="Pali" label="Pali"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="14052" end="14060" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425695" start="14076" end="14088" title="Jinakalamali" label="Jinakalamali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059707" start="14113" end="14119" title="Lan Na" label="Lan Na"/>
<link wikidata="Q255931" start="14172" end="14183" title="Haripuñjaya" label="Haripuñjaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268307" start="14187" end="14196" title="Dvaravati" label="Dvaravati"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763323" start="14438" end="14450" title="Angkor Borei" label="Angkor Borei"/>
<link wikidata="Q867782" start="14454" end="14459" title="Funan" label="Funan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900662" start="14735" end="14749" title="Bhavavarman II" label="Bhavavarman II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057118" start="14753" end="14759" title="Chenla" label="Chenla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490339" start="14960" end="14977" title="Song Huiyao Jigao" label="Song Huiyao Jigao"/>
<link wikidata="Q190829" start="15033" end="15049" title="central Thailand" label="central Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332305" start="15149" end="15153" title="Lavo Kingdom" label="Lavo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057118" start="15183" end="15189" title="Chenla" label="Chenla"/>
<link wikidata="Q201705" start="15194" end="15199" title="Khmer Empire" label="Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q255931" start="15289" end="15300" title="Haripuñjaya" label="Haripuñjaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q381897" start="15345" end="15354" title="northeastern Thailand" label="northeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268307" start="15380" end="15389" title="Dvaravati" label="Dvaravati"/>
<link wikidata="Q4161873" start="15463" end="15482" title="royal intermarriage" label="royal intermarriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="15494" end="15511" title="Ayutthaya Kingdom" label="Ayutthaya Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q381897" start="15560" end="15564" title="Isan" label="Isan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084809" start="15592" end="15603" title="Phanom Rung Historical Park" label="Phanom Rung"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381309" start="15608" end="15614" title="Phimai" label="Phimai"/>
<link wikidata="Q889067" start="15689" end="15710" title="Borommarachathirat II" label="Borommarachathirat II"/>
<link wikidata="Q381897" start="15764" end="15768" title="Isan" label="Isan"/>
<link wikidata="Q853477" start="15783" end="15791" title="Lan Xang" label="Lan Xang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562906" start="15829" end="15838" title="Muang Sua" label="Muang Sua"/>
<link wikidata="Q190165" start="15840" end="15853" title="Luang Prabang" label="Luang Prabang"/>
<link wikidata="Q9326" start="15894" end="15903" title="Vientiane" label="Vientiane"/>
<link wikidata="Q863279" start="15951" end="15960" title="Sukhothai Kingdom" label="Sukhothai"/>
<link wikidata="Q349249" start="15966" end="15979" title="Ram Khamhaeng" label="Ram Khamhaeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332305" start="16102" end="16106" title="Lavo Kingdom" label="Lavo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057118" start="16139" end="16145" title="Chenla" label="Chenla"/>
<link wikidata="Q4161873" start="16194" end="16213" title="royal intermarriage" label="royal intermarriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057118" start="16219" end="16225" title="Chenla" label="Chenla"/>
<link wikidata="Q335492" start="16292" end="16311" title="Ratchaburi province" label="Ratchaburi province"/>
<link wikidata="Q4205535" start="16339" end="16352" title="Isanavarman I" label="Isanavarman I"/>
<link wikidata="Q765018" start="16362" end="16369" title="Mandala (political model)" label="mandala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057118" start="16398" end="16404" title="Chenla" label="Chenla"/>
<link wikidata="Q867782" start="16412" end="16417" title="Funan" label="Funan"/>
<link wikidata="Q163607" start="16442" end="16448" title="Angkor" label="Angkor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7929221" start="16525" end="16531" title="Vijaya (Champa)" label="Vijaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q216786" start="16535" end="16541" title="Champa" label="Champa"/>
<link wikidata="Q335273" start="16570" end="16584" title="Jayavarman VII" label="Jayavarman VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q888574" start="16731" end="16747" title="Pagan Kingdom" label="Kingdom of Pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18758" start="16932" end="16947" title="Malay Peninsula" label="Malay Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268307" start="17025" end="17034" title="Dvaravati" label="Dvaravati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332305" start="17039" end="17051" title="Lavo Kingdom" label="Lavo Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483643" start="17055" end="17074" title="Nakhon Si Thammarat Kingdom" label="Nakhon Si Thammarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q887310" start="17169" end="17192" title="Si Inthrathit" label="Pho Khun Bang Klang Hao"/>
<link wikidata="Q863279" start="17303" end="17320" title="Sukhothai Kingdom" label="Sukhothai Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q349249" start="17458" end="17471" title="Ram Khamhaeng" label="Ram Khamhaeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q236376" start="17615" end="17626" title="Thai script" label="Thai script"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="17701" end="17710" title="Theravada" label="Theravada"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="17711" end="17719" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q889077" start="17736" end="17754" title="Maha Thammaracha I" label="Maha Thammaracha I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332305" start="17921" end="17933" title="Lavo Kingdom" label="Lavo Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q718191" start="17956" end="17962" title="Uthong" label="Uthong"/>
<link wikidata="Q765018" start="18117" end="18131" title="Mandala (political model)" label="mandala system"/>
<link wikidata="Q163607" start="18308" end="18314" title="Angkor" label="Angkor"/>
<link wikidata="Q889173" start="18511" end="18530" title="Borommatrailokkanat" label="Borommatrailokkanat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213561" start="18655" end="18662" title="sakdina" label="sakdina"/>
<link wikidata="Q466259" start="18711" end="18717" title="corvée" label="corvée"/>
<link wikidata="Q18758" start="18783" end="18798" title="Malay Peninsula" label="Malay Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q46652" start="18825" end="18842" title="Malacca Sultanate" label="Malacca Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="18879" end="18891" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981637" start="18965" end="18970" title="Duarte Fernandes" label="envoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q178630" start="18974" end="18984" title="Portuguese people" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q204397" start="18990" end="19011" title="Afonso de Albuquerque" label="Afonso de Albuquerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q519718" start="19310" end="19325" title="Taungoo dynasty" label="Taungoo dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q981475" start="19364" end="19376" title="Tabinshwehti" label="Tabinshwehti"/>
<link wikidata="Q470984" start="19381" end="19391" title="Bayinnaung" label="Bayinnaung"/>
<link wikidata="Q20991943" start="19423" end="19453" title="Burmese–Siamese War (1568–70)" label="capture of the capital in 1570"/>
<link wikidata="Q515704" start="19503" end="19511" title="Naresuan" label="Naresuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q718197" start="19695" end="19700" title="Narai" label="Narai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7506756" start="19942" end="19968" title="Siamese revolution of 1688" label="Siamese revolution of 1688"/>
<link wikidata="Q238526" start="20195" end="20205" title="golden age" label="golden age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2864755" start="20291" end="20294" title="Thai art" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049777" start="20296" end="20306" title="Thai literature" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301908" start="20394" end="20406" title="Nguyễn lords" label="Nguyễn lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="20422" end="20430" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632880" start="20673" end="20683" title="Burmese–Siamese War (1759–60)" label="invaded it"/>
<link wikidata="Q470978" start="20735" end="20745" title="Alaungpaya" label="Alaungpaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="21047" end="21054" title="Burma" label="Burmese"/>
<link wikidata="Q867579" start="21159" end="21170" title="Phitsanulok" label="Phitsanulok"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115786" start="21172" end="21177" title="Pimai" label="Pimai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015899" start="21179" end="21190" title="Chanthaburi" label="Chanthaburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012424" start="21196" end="21215" title="Nakhon Si Thammarat" label="Nakhon Si Thammarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q320097" start="21217" end="21225" title="Taksin" label="Chao Tak"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895359" start="21290" end="21307" title="right of conquest" label="right of conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015899" start="21346" end="21357" title="Chanthaburi" label="Chanthaburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q118850" start="21443" end="21454" title="Chao Phraya" label="Chao Phraya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6580711" start="21475" end="21483" title="Thonburi" label="Thonburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q320097" start="21638" end="21644" title="Taksin" label="Taksin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6580711" start="21660" end="21668" title="Thonburi" label="Thonburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q110876689" start="21830" end="21861" title="Burmese–Siamese War (1774–1775)" label="drove the Burmese out of Lan Na"/>
<link wikidata="Q111648747" start="21871" end="21889" title="Lao–Siamese War (1778–1779)" label="captured Vientiane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280725" start="21902" end="21946" title="Siamese–Vietnamese War (1769–1773)" label="tried to install a pro-Thai king in Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q310992" start="22128" end="22146" title="Rama I" label="Chao Phraya Chakri"/>
<link wikidata="Q691928" start="22204" end="22218" title="Chakri dynasty" label="Chakri dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155700" start="22238" end="22258" title="Rattanakosin Kingdom" label="Rattanakosin Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q310992" start="22345" end="22351" title="Rama I" label="Rama I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352013" start="22547" end="22560" title="John Crawfurd" label="John Crawfurd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016779" start="22716" end="22729" title="Burney Treaty" label="Burney Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q29122" start="22772" end="22795" title="First Anglo-Burmese War" label="First Anglo-Burmese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q560843" start="22799" end="22807" title="Anouvong" label="Anouvong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6407091" start="22922" end="22935" title="Lao rebellion (1826–28)" label="Lao rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q383946" start="23013" end="23023" title="Lao people" label="Lao people"/>
<link wikidata="Q874816" start="23042" end="23056" title="Khorat Plateau" label="Khorat Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q10788706" start="23089" end="23101" title="Siamese–Vietnamese wars" label="several wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034173" start="23107" end="23114" title="Tây Sơn dynasty" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q312849" start="23281" end="23288" title="Mongkut" label="Mongkut"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="23392" end="23410" title="Government of the United Kingdom" label="British government"/>
<link wikidata="Q332508" start="23469" end="23481" title="John Bowring" label="John Bowring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054923" start="23495" end="23504" title="British Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q745728" start="23532" end="23546" title="Bowring Treaty" label="Bowring Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q864737" start="23566" end="23582" title="Unequal treaty" label="unequal treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="23707" end="23714" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q158861" start="23749" end="23762" title="Chulalongkorn" label="Chulalongkorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918289" start="23769" end="23801" title="Somdet Chaophraya Sri Suriwongse" label="Somdet Chaophraya Sri Suriwongse"/>
<link wikidata="Q466259" start="23934" end="23940" title="corvée" label="corvée"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505811" start="23953" end="23972" title="Front Palace crisis" label="Front Palace crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359846" start="24285" end="24299" title="Franco-Siamese War" label="crisis of 1893"/>
<link wikidata="Q118850" start="24528" end="24539" title="Chao Phraya" label="Chao Phraya"/>
<link wikidata="Q587252" start="24549" end="24561" title="buffer state" label="buffer state"/>
<link wikidata="Q843915" start="24676" end="24695" title="extraterritoriality" label="extraterritoriality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478838" start="24854" end="24860" title="Patani (historical region)" label="Patani"/>
<link wikidata="Q6407111" start="24963" end="24984" title="Palace Revolt of 1912" label="Palace Revolt of 1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q161389" start="25079" end="25089" title="Vajiravudh" label="Vajiravudh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849805" start="25167" end="25190" title="Thaification" label="idea of the Thai nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482893" start="25206" end="25232" title="Siam in World War I" label="joined the First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="25248" end="25258" title="Allies of World War I" label="the Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q199820" start="25301" end="25323" title="Paris Peace Conference, 1919" label="Paris Peace Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120252" start="25473" end="25493" title="Siamese revolution of 1932" label="bloodless revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q313124" start="25523" end="25534" title="Prajadhipok" label="Prajadhipok"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="25633" end="25650" title="absolute monarchy" label="absolute monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="25713" end="25729" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951385" start="25855" end="25888" title="Boworadet rebellion" label="a counter-revolutionary rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q248893" start="26046" end="26060" title="Ananda Mahidol" label="Ananda Mahidol"/>
<link wikidata="Q152777" start="26202" end="26223" title="Plaek Phibunsongkhram" label="Plaek Phibunsongkhram"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498273" start="26361" end="26375" title="Westernisation" label="Westernisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144708" start="26377" end="26389" title="Sinophobia" label="anti-Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q780845" start="26550" end="26566" title="Franco–Thai War" label="a brief conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="26572" end="26584" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200928" start="26673" end="26725" title="Japanese invasion of Thailand" label="the Empire of Japan launched an invasion of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q107706" start="26783" end="26792" title="armistice" label="armistice"/>
<link wikidata="Q117460359" start="26978" end="26994" title="Territorial losses of Thailand" label="lost territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q871091" start="27114" end="27120" title="British Malaya" label="Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q708957" start="27275" end="27293" title="Free Thai Movement" label="Free Thai Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="27477" end="27487" title="Allies of World War II" label="the Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q855252" start="27589" end="27607" title="Bhumibol Adulyadej" label="Bhumibol Adulyadej"/>
<link wikidata="Q277252" start="27652" end="27686" title="Southeast Asia Treaty Organization" label="Southeast Asia Treaty Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q975621" start="27764" end="27778" title="Sarit Thanarat" label="Sarit Thanarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="28133" end="28144" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q856122" start="28267" end="28280" title="modernisation" label="modernisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498273" start="28285" end="28299" title="Westernisation" label="Westernisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="28323" end="28335" title="urbanisation" label="urbanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066261" start="28421" end="28440" title="class consciousness" label="class consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359816" start="28469" end="28496" title="Communist Party of Thailand" label="Communist Party of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575745" start="28626" end="28645" title="1973 Thai popular uprising" label="large demonstration"/>
<link wikidata="Q439990" start="28674" end="28693" title="Thanom Kittikachorn" label="Thanom Kittikachorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q974619" start="28772" end="28789" title="Sanya Dharmasakti" label="Sanya Dharmasakti"/>
<link wikidata="Q482456" start="29189" end="29203" title="fall of Saigon" label="fall of Saigon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907348" start="29295" end="29324" title="6 October 1976 massacre" label="Thammasat University massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q19891802" start="29503" end="29523" title="Communist insurgency in Thailand" label="communist insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q16211248" start="29660" end="29684" title="Indochina refugee crisis" label="Indochina refugee crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354417" start="29686" end="29709" title="Vietnamese border raids in Thailand" label="Vietnamese border raids"/>
<link wikidata="Q379827" start="29734" end="29751" title="Prem Tinsulanonda" label="Prem Tinsulanonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769841" start="29887" end="29901" title="semi-democracy" label="semi-democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13012468" start="30088" end="30092" title="1981 Thai military rebellion" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q13012458" start="30097" end="30101" title="1985 Thai coup d&amp;#x27;état attempt" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q959614" start="30199" end="30218" title="Suchinda Kraprayoon" label="Suchinda Kraprayoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6528193" start="30228" end="30251" title="National Peace Keeping Council" label="the coup leader in 1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q6507896" start="30373" end="30394" title="March 1992 Thai general election" label="1992 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037676" start="30461" end="30488" title="Black May (1992)" label="a bloody military crackdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q80880" start="30579" end="30606" title="1997 Asian financial crisis" label="1997 Asian financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q464301" start="30702" end="30715" title="Chuan Leekpai" label="Chuan Leekpai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="30742" end="30745" title="IMF" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q130754" start="30783" end="30823" title="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami" label="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q182565" start="30893" end="30899" title="Phuket" label="Phuket"/>
<link wikidata="Q204587" start="30901" end="30910" title="Phang Nga" label="Phang Nga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012440" start="30912" end="30918" title="Ranong" label="Ranong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000353" start="30920" end="30925" title="Krabi" label="Krabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q243805" start="30927" end="30932" title="Trang province" label="Trang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365666" start="30938" end="30943" title="Satun" label="Satun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542181" start="30989" end="31008" title="Thai Rak Thai party" label="Thai Rak Thai party"/>
<link wikidata="Q164373" start="31032" end="31050" title="Thaksin Shinawatra" label="Thaksin Shinawatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274205" start="31152" end="31172" title="universal healthcare" label="universal healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094356" start="31369" end="31394" title="South Thailand insurgency" label="South Thailand insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103943" start="31814" end="31850" title="People&amp;#x27;s Alliance for Democracy" label="People&amp;#x27;s Alliance for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q860423" start="32269" end="32295" title="2006 Thai coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="a coup d&amp;#x27;état in 2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q112051" start="32682" end="32707" title="People&amp;#x27;s Power Party (Thailand)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Power Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232472" start="32718" end="32725" title="2007 Thai general election" label="elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014893" start="32727" end="32753" title="2008 Thai political crisis" label="Another protest led by PAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186248" start="32797" end="32811" title="Democrat Party (Thailand)" label="Democrat Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322759" start="32869" end="32916" title="United Front for Democracy Against Dictatorship" label="United Front for Democracy Against Dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781939" start="32938" end="32945" title="2009 Thai political unrest" label="in 2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059090" start="32950" end="32957" title="2010 Thai political protests" label="in 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428188" start="32990" end="33018" title="2010 Thai military crackdown" label="a violent military crackdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q372334" start="33064" end="33092" title="2011 Thai general election" label="the general election of 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q180490" start="33098" end="33106" title="Populism" label="populist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142913" start="33107" end="33122" title="Pheu Thai Party" label="Pheu Thai Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q57670" start="33142" end="33161" title="Yingluck Shinawatra" label="Yingluck Shinawatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q15915674" start="33221" end="33262" title="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Reform Committee" label="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Reform Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q15243731" start="33273" end="33304" title="2013–2014 Thai political crisis" label="another anti-Shinawatra protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021134" start="33416" end="33434" title="2014 Thai general election" label="a general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q593273" start="33477" end="33497" title="Constitutional Court of Thailand" label="Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q15243731" start="33503" end="33509" title="2013–2014 Thai political crisis" label="crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16914766" start="33521" end="33553" title="2014 Thai coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="another coup d&amp;#x27;état in 2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q16919521" start="33568" end="33604" title="National Council for Peace and Order" label="National Council for Peace and Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108126" start="33638" end="33655" title="Prayut Chan-o-cha" label="Prayut Chan-o-cha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714218" start="33766" end="33778" title="Lèse-majesté in Thailand" label="lèse-majesté"/>
<link wikidata="Q548733" start="34011" end="34025" title="Vajiralongkorn" label="Vajiralongkorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499669" start="34299" end="34324" title="Guided democracy" label="military-guided democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16937892" start="34366" end="34393" title="2019 Thai general election" label="a general election in March"/>
<link wikidata="Q55077745" start="34448" end="34471" title="Palang Pracharath Party" label="Palang Pracharath Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q97667436" start="34563" end="34593" title="2020–2021 Thai protests" label="2020–21 pro-democracy protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042529" start="34623" end="34640" title="royal prerogative" label="royal prerogative"/>
<link wikidata="Q947702" start="34686" end="34709" title="Royal Thai Armed Forces" label="Royal Thai Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q16914766" start="34755" end="34779" title="2014 Thai coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état in 2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q50549434" start="34814" end="34834" title="Future Forward Party" label="Future Forward Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16937892" start="34852" end="34873" title="2019 Thai general election" label="2019 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q96099075" start="34973" end="34994" title="Wanchalearm Satsaksit" label="Wanchalearm Satsaksit"/>
<link wikidata="Q877848" start="35123" end="35136" title="republicanism" label="republicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q87647572" start="35221" end="35239" title="Move Forward Party" label="Move Forward Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142913" start="35263" end="35278" title="Pheu Thai Party" label="Pheu Thai Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q84081085" start="35288" end="35304" title="2023 Thai general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q118213697" start="35423" end="35439" title="Srettha Thavisin" label="Srettha Thavisin"/>
<link wikidata="Q593273" start="35733" end="35753" title="Constitutional Court of Thailand" label="Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q260023" start="35845" end="35865" title="List of countries and dependencies by area" label="50th-largest country"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709187" start="36040" end="36054" title="Thai highlands" label="Thai highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140075" start="36085" end="36097" title="Doi Inthanon" label="Doi Inthanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7710615" start="36105" end="36128" title="Thanon Thong Chai Range" label="Thanon Thong Chai Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q381897" start="36164" end="36168" title="Isan" label="Isan"/>
<link wikidata="Q874816" start="36186" end="36200" title="Khorat Plateau" label="Khorat Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q41179" start="36230" end="36242" title="Mekong River" label="Mekong River"/>
<link wikidata="Q118850" start="36309" end="36320" title="Chao Phraya" label="Chao Phraya"/>
<link wikidata="Q131217" start="36355" end="36371" title="Gulf of Thailand" label="Gulf of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q322356" start="36414" end="36425" title="Kra Isthmus" label="Kra Isthmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18758" start="36447" end="36462" title="Malay Peninsula" label="Malay Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194112" start="36692" end="36701" title="Mae Klong River" label="Mae Klong"/>
<link wikidata="Q806449" start="36703" end="36714" title="Bang Pakong River" label="Bang Pakong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195715" start="36720" end="36724" title="Tapi River, Thailand" label="Tapi"/>
<link wikidata="Q476658" start="36956" end="36964" title="Sattahip District" label="Sattahip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025958" start="36998" end="37010" title="Laem Chabang" label="Laem Chabang"/>
<link wikidata="Q182565" start="37012" end="37018" title="Phuket Province" label="Phuket"/>
<link wikidata="Q236769" start="37020" end="37025" title="Krabi Province" label="Krabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012440" start="37027" end="37033" title="Ranong" label="Ranong"/>
<link wikidata="Q204587" start="37035" end="37044" title="Phang Nga" label="Phang Nga"/>
<link wikidata="Q243805" start="37049" end="37054" title="Trang Province" label="Trang"/>
<link wikidata="Q47632" start="37107" end="37118" title="Andaman Sea" label="Andaman Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="37299" end="37305" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q113562" start="37313" end="37337" title="tropical savanna climate" label="tropical savanna climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q863882" start="37401" end="37425" title="tropical monsoon climate" label="tropical monsoon climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q209531" start="37458" end="37485" title="tropical rainforest climate" label="tropical rainforest climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="37661" end="37673" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q753858" start="37709" end="37739" title="Intertropical Convergence Zone" label="Intertropical Convergence Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q79602" start="37760" end="37768" title="cyclones" label="cyclones"/>
<link wikidata="Q841083" start="38711" end="38728" title="Sea level rise" label="rising sea levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969240" start="38796" end="38809" title="List of national parks of Thailand" label="National park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260416" start="39201" end="39259" title="Department of National Parks, Wildlife and Plant Conservation" label="National Parks, Wildlife and Plant Conservation Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970654" start="39273" end="39318" title="Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (Thailand)" label="Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261772" start="39392" end="39423" title="Environmental Performance Index" label="Environmental Performance Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="39573" end="39584" title="air quality" label="air quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q55607790" start="39658" end="39676" title="climate and energy" label="climate and energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q106358009" start="39725" end="39737" title="CO2 emission" label="CO2 emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049799" start="39805" end="39830" title="water resource management" label="water resource management"/>
<link wikidata="Q949149" start="39895" end="39905" title="sanitation" label="sanitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520600" start="39935" end="39967" title="Forest Landscape Integrity Index" label="Forest Landscape Integrity Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245895" start="40087" end="40102" title="List of national animals" label="national symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q82001" start="40199" end="40204" title="ivory" label="ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q17444380" start="40241" end="40245" title="Elephant meat" label="meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q845249" start="40435" end="40442" title="logging" label="logging"/>
<link wikidata="Q19939" start="40589" end="40595" title="Tigers" label="Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q34706" start="40597" end="40605" title="leopards" label="leopards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068311" start="40803" end="40812" title="Chatuchak Weekend Market" label="Chatuchak"/>
<link wikidata="Q124410" start="40933" end="40951" title="Asiatic black bear" label="Asiatic black bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893611" start="40953" end="40969" title="Malayan sun bear" label="Malayan sun bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q208043" start="40971" end="40987" title="Lar gibbon" label="white-handed lar"/>
<link wikidata="Q301053" start="40989" end="41004" title="pileated gibbon" label="pileated gibbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q213141" start="41010" end="41019" title="binturong" label="binturong"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="41095" end="41112" title="absolute monarchy" label="absolute monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q863279" start="41121" end="41138" title="Sukhothai Kingdom" label="Sukhothai Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q134293" start="41229" end="41235" title="Dharma" label="Dharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127720" start="41488" end="41502" title="Khana Ratsadon" label="Khana Ratsadon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="41590" end="41613" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="42096" end="42101" title="Coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coups"/>
<link wikidata="Q25424534" start="42240" end="42254" title="military junta" label="military junta"/>
<link wikidata="Q16919521" start="42274" end="42310" title="National Council for Peace and Order" label="National Council for Peace and Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="42367" end="42376" title="Separation of powers" label="separated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368318" start="42428" end="42445" title="National Assembly of Thailand" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699171" start="42465" end="42471" title="Senate of Thailand" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q637846" start="42507" end="42518" title="upper house" label="upper house"/>
<link wikidata="Q914226" start="42523" end="42547" title="House of Representatives of Thailand" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q375928" start="42572" end="42583" title="lower house" label="lower house"/>
<link wikidata="Q84081085" start="42613" end="42638" title="2023 Thai general election" label="the 2023 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q125567682" start="42711" end="42736" title="2024 Thai Senate election" label="2024 Thai Senate election"/>
<link wikidata="Q855111" start="42925" end="42942" title="Bhumjaithai Party" label="Bhumjaithai Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q12376089" start="43005" end="43031" title="Prime Minister of Thailand" label="Prime Minister of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="43037" end="43055" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q13026319" start="43341" end="43363" title="Paetongtarn Shinawatra" label="Paetongtarn Shinawatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="43404" end="43413" title="judiciary" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q233008" start="43785" end="43801" title="two-party system" label="two-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q849242" start="43913" end="43931" title="Hereditary monarchy" label="hereditary monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="43958" end="43971" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q548733" start="44005" end="44019" title="Vajiralongkorn" label="Vajiralongkorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265435" start="44339" end="44353" title="Duncan McCargo" label="Duncan McCargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q109968061" start="44438" end="44454" title="network monarchy" label="network monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714218" start="44530" end="44558" title="Lèse majesté in Thailand" label="&amp;quot;lèse majesté&amp;quot; law"/>
<link wikidata="Q16914766" start="44786" end="44810" title="2014 Thai coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état in 2014"/>
<link wikidata="" start="44837" end="44881" title=":Category:People accused of lèse majesté in Thailand" label="number of &amp;quot;lèse-majesté&amp;quot; prisoners"/>
<link wikidata="Q217564" start="44912" end="44936" title="Human rights in Thailand" label="Human rights in Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417780" start="44958" end="44966" title="Freedom in the World (report)" label="not free"/>
<link wikidata="Q242424" start="44980" end="44993" title="Freedom House" label="Freedom House"/>
<link wikidata="Q593273" start="45047" end="45067" title="Constitutional Court of Thailand" label="Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q84081085" start="45094" end="45122" title="2023 Thai general election" label="2023 parliamentary elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q87647572" start="45128" end="45146" title="Move Forward Party" label="Move Forward Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="45294" end="45307" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503597" start="45357" end="45364" title="lawfare" label="lawfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q50549434" start="45428" end="45442" title="Future Forward Party" label="Future Forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q242424" start="45649" end="45681" title="Freedom House" label="Freedom in the World 2024 Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417780" start="45729" end="45737" title="Freedom in the World" label="not free"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417780" start="45753" end="45764" title="Freedom in the world" label="partly free"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="46035" end="46048" title="unitary state" label="unitary state"/>
<link wikidata="Q50198" start="46259" end="46268" title="Provinces of Thailand" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q56061" start="46317" end="46340" title="administrative division" label="administrative division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="46404" end="46411" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q170919" start="46416" end="46423" title="Pattaya" label="Pattaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q475061" start="46524" end="46533" title="Districts of Thailand" label="districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q233588" start="46761" end="46780" title="Chiang Mai Province" label="Chiang Mai Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="47589" end="47597" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q277252" start="47709" end="47714" title="SEATO" label="SEATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="47852" end="47890" title="Association of Southeast Asian Nations" label="Association of Southeast Asian Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="47953" end="47964" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q145560" start="48513" end="48532" title="major non-NATO ally" label="major non-NATO ally"/>
<link wikidata="Q16741263" start="48557" end="48575" title="Special 301 Report" label="Special 301 Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q574" start="48603" end="48613" title="East Timor" label="East Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q123759" start="48837" end="48868" title="Organization of American States" label="Organization of American States"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="48883" end="48935" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q164373" start="48952" end="48970" title="Thaksin Shinawatra" label="Thaksin Shinawatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536928" start="49016" end="49036" title="free trade agreement" label="free trade agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="49352" end="49368" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q65045421" start="49380" end="49403" title="Thai Humanitarian Assistance Task Force 976 Thai-Iraq" label="humanitarian contingent"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="49492" end="49503" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q168329" start="49525" end="49554" title="Cambodian–Thai border dispute" label="Cambodian–Thai border dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q45949" start="49649" end="49661" title="Preah Vihear Temple" label="Preah Vihear"/>
<link wikidata="Q122962941" start="49932" end="49962" title="2023 Israel–Hamas war" label="Israel-Hamas military conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q947702" start="50354" end="50377" title="Royal Thai Armed Forces" label="Royal Thai Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749588" start="50463" end="50478" title="Royal Thai Army" label="Royal Thai Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427907" start="50498" end="50513" title="Royal Thai Navy" label="Royal Thai Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q404766" start="50539" end="50559" title="Royal Thai Air Force" label="Royal Thai Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q207320" start="50607" end="50619" title="paramilitary" label="paramilitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663787" start="50759" end="50788" title="Monarchy of Thailand" label="head of the Thai Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q851907" start="50918" end="50949" title="Ministry of Defence (Thailand)" label="Ministry of Defence of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q873368" start="51011" end="51030" title="cabinet of Thailand" label="cabinet of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6479158" start="51053" end="51089" title="Royal Thai Armed Forces Headquarters" label="Royal Thai Armed Forces Headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567632" start="51122" end="51157" title="List of Commanders of the Royal Thai Armed Forces Headquarters" label="Chief of Defence Forces of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51338" end="51361" title="List of countries by Military Strength Index" label="Military Strength Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q372657" start="51375" end="51388" title="Credit Suisse" label="Credit Suisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q464529" start="51489" end="51497" title="Rohingya" label="Rohingya"/>
<link wikidata="Q16211248" start="51574" end="51598" title="Indochina refugee crisis" label="Indochina refugee crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794236" start="51866" end="51893" title="Territorial Defence Student" label="Territorial Defence Student"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="52245" end="52266" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922031" start="52498" end="52534" title="Internal Security Operations Command" label="Internal Security Operations Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q5939072" start="52789" end="52806" title="human trafficking in Thailand" label="human trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q161165" start="52812" end="52820" title="nepotism" label="nepotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q327901" start="53076" end="53094" title="Global Peace Index" label="Global Peace Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="53217" end="53239" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505529" start="53384" end="53388" title="Rice production in Thailand" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q546395" start="53470" end="53486" title="emerging markets" label="emerging economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q376860" start="53507" end="53535" title="newly industrialised country" label="newly industrialised country"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="53588" end="53611" title="purchasing power parity" label="purchasing power parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q273005" start="53884" end="53898" title="anchor economy" label="anchor economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83873566" start="54305" end="54322" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Thailand" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q176793" start="54831" end="54869" title="List of countries by Human Development Index" label="ranked 87th in Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809938" start="54875" end="54910" title="List of countries by inequality-adjusted HDI" label="70th in the inequality-adjusted HDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q15243731" start="55208" end="55239" title="2013–2014 Thai political crisis" label="2013–2014 Thai political crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15915674" start="55277" end="55281" title="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Reform Committee" label="PDRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322759" start="55359" end="55362" title="United Front for Democracy Against Dictatorship" label="UDD"/>
<link wikidata="Q372657" start="55419" end="55432" title="Credit Suisse" label="Credit Suisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q806706" start="55701" end="55717" title="Bank of Thailand" label="Bank of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505529" start="56812" end="56816" title="Rice production in Thailand" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826744" start="57203" end="57227" title="Automotive industry in Thailand" label="Thai automotive industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="57247" end="57261" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483418" start="57270" end="57294" title="List of countries by motor vehicle production" label="9th largest in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q297472" start="57561" end="57582" title="ASEAN Free Trade Area" label="ASEAN Free Trade Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q331715" start="57681" end="57685" title="Tata Group" label="Tata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976242" start="58178" end="58200" title="World Tourism rankings" label="World Tourism rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q61923" start="58217" end="58258" title="United Nations World Tourism Organization" label="United Nations World Tourism Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="58333" end="58347" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="58352" end="58359" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="58433" end="58443" title="US dollars" label="US dollars"/>
<link wikidata="Q782762" start="59122" end="59138" title="adventure travel" label="adventure travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q381897" start="59245" end="59249" title="Isan" label="Isan"/>
<link wikidata="Q757232" start="59441" end="59456" title="medical tourism" label="medical tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17040504" start="59499" end="59531" title="World Travel and Tourism Council" label="World Travel and Tourism Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053501" start="59657" end="59681" title="sex reassignment surgery" label="sex reassignment surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q12660" start="59789" end="59813" title="Prostitution in Thailand" label="Prostitution in Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3577963" start="60240" end="60251" title="agriculture in Thailand" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246672" start="60535" end="60559" title="Greater Mekong Subregion" label="Greater Mekong Subregion"/>
<link wikidata="Q864404" start="61038" end="61049" title="biocapacity" label="biocapacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q234173" start="61322" end="61342" title="ecological footprint" label="ecological footprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923085" start="61575" end="61593" title="Ministry of Labour (Thailand)" label="Ministry of Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q80880" start="62311" end="62333" title="1997 Asian financial crisis" label="Asian financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4196458" start="64260" end="64283" title="Global Innovation Index" label="Global Innovation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q63555964" start="64297" end="64359" title="Ministry of Higher Education, Science, Research and Innovation" label="Ministry of Higher Education, Science, Research and Innovation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64364" end="64376" title="Ministry of Higher Education, Science, Research and Innovation#Organization" label="its agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165702" start="64735" end="64760" title="State Railway of Thailand" label="State Railway of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q23925684" start="64820" end="64855" title="Krung Thep Aphiwat Central Terminal" label="Krung Thep Aphiwat Central Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q125929" start="64860" end="64882" title="Bangkok (Hua Lamphong) railway station" label="Bangkok (Hua Lamphong)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806807" start="64946" end="64957" title="Lat Krabang" label="Lat Krabang"/>
<link wikidata="Q24609" start="65018" end="65029" title="meter gauge" label="meter gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283953" start="65193" end="65218" title="Rail transport in Bangkok" label="Rail transport in Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q806501" start="65314" end="65326" title="BTS Skytrain" label="BTS Skytrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q806485" start="65328" end="65331" title="MRT (Bangkok)" label="MRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2542280" start="65333" end="65346" title="SRT Red Lines" label="SRT Red Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133704" start="65356" end="65373" title="Airport Rail Link (Bangkok)" label="Airport Rail Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q15576653" start="65429" end="65445" title="Lavalin Skytrain" label="Lavalin Skytrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855202" start="65450" end="65488" title="Bangkok Elevated Road and Train System" label="Bangkok Elevated Road and Train System"/>
<link wikidata="Q387067" start="65497" end="65558" title="Mass Rapid Transit Master Plan in Bangkok Metropolitan Region" label="Mass Rapid Transit Master Plan in Bangkok Metropolitan Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q6578640" start="65933" end="65959" title="Controlled-access highways in Thailand" label="controlled-access highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q59720" start="66072" end="66080" title="Auto rickshaw" label="tuk-tuks"/>
<link wikidata="Q946479" start="66151" end="66158" title="minibus" label="minibus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935247" start="66182" end="66191" title="songthaew" label="songthaew"/>
<link wikidata="Q194316" start="66327" end="66347" title="Suvarnabhumi Airport" label="Suvarnabhumi Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="66425" end="66436" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068155" start="67766" end="67775" title="sex ratio" label="sex ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q703353" start="68206" end="68209" title="Tai people" label="Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138179" start="68227" end="68241" title="southern China" label="southern China"/>
<link wikidata="Q6078806" start="68267" end="68278" title="Isan people" label="Isan people"/>
<link wikidata="Q33199" start="68306" end="68319" title="Austroasiatic" label="Austroasiatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q637909" start="68449" end="68459" title="Mon people" label="Mon people"/>
<link wikidata="Q743306" start="68568" end="68650" title="International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination" label="International Convention for the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q842823" start="68875" end="68886" title="Khorat Thai" label="Khorat Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408653" start="70272" end="70284" title="Thai Chinese" label="Thai Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578980" start="70432" end="70443" title="Thai Malays" label="Thai Malays"/>
<link wikidata="Q637909" start="70509" end="70513" title="Mon people" label="Mons"/>
<link wikidata="Q201028" start="70515" end="70521" title="Khmers" label="Khmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q820410" start="70541" end="70552" title="Hill tribe (Thailand)" label="hill tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q842438" start="70803" end="70810" title="British people" label="Britons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318423" start="70822" end="70833" title="Australians" label="Australians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9217" start="70899" end="70903" title="Thai language" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q34171" start="70938" end="70954" title="Kra–Dai language" label="Kra–Dai language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9211" start="70974" end="70977" title="Lao language" label="Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q56482" start="70979" end="70983" title="Shan language" label="Shan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42200" start="71049" end="71055" title="Hainan" label="Hainan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="71060" end="71066" title="Yunnan" label="Yunnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q236376" start="71278" end="71291" title="Thai alphabet" label="Thai alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q335806" start="71296" end="71303" title="abugida" label="abugida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054190" start="71333" end="71347" title="Khmer alphabet" label="Khmer alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q56508" start="71545" end="71558" title="Southern Thai language" label="Southern Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q565110" start="71563" end="71576" title="Northern Thai language" label="Northern Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q9211" start="71636" end="71639" title="Lao language" label="Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q33417" start="71651" end="71655" title="Isan language" label="Isan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199751" start="71712" end="71734" title="Kelantan-Pattani Malay" label="Kelantan-Pattani Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408653" start="71827" end="71839" title="Thai Chinese" label="Thai Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q36759" start="71861" end="71876" title="Teochew dialect" label="Teochew dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q33199" start="71953" end="71976" title="Austroasiatic languages" label="Austroasiatic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q13349" start="71985" end="71988" title="Mon language" label="Mon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9205" start="71990" end="71995" title="Khmer language" label="Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073465" start="72001" end="72007" title="Mlabri language" label="Mlabri"/>
<link wikidata="Q49228" start="72009" end="72031" title="Austronesian languages" label="Austronesian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q241146" start="72040" end="72044" title="Cham language" label="Cham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217488" start="72046" end="72051" title="Moken language" label="Moken"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031144" start="72056" end="72072" title="Urak Lawoi&amp;#x27; language" label="Urak Lawoi&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q45961" start="72074" end="72096" title="Sino-Tibetan languages" label="Sino-Tibetan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503548" start="72102" end="72106" title="Lawa language" label="Lawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q56643" start="72108" end="72112" title="Akha language" label="Akha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364815" start="72118" end="72123" title="Karen languages" label="Karen"/>
<link wikidata="Q749720" start="72135" end="72148" title="Tai languages" label="Tai languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3626597" start="72157" end="72165" title="Phu Thai language" label="Phu Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q36437" start="72171" end="72175" title="Saek language" label="Saek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307894" start="72177" end="72182" title="Hmong language" label="Hmong"/>
<link wikidata="Q33322" start="72202" end="72222" title="Hmong–Mien languages" label="Hmong–Mien languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="72345" end="72354" title="Theravada" label="Theravada"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="72531" end="72539" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924172" start="72589" end="72616" title="National Statistical Office (Thailand)" label="National Statistical Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q74323" start="72694" end="72701" title="Islam in Thailand" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q236781" start="72880" end="72887" title="Pattani Province" label="Pattani"/>
<link wikidata="Q242977" start="72889" end="72893" title="Yala Province" label="Yala"/>
<link wikidata="Q236263" start="72895" end="72900" title="Satun Province" label="Satun"/>
<link wikidata="Q271442" start="72902" end="72912" title="Narathiwat Province" label="Narathiwat"/>
<link wikidata="Q235574" start="72926" end="72934" title="Songkhla Province" label="Songkhla"/>
<link wikidata="Q142702" start="72960" end="72965" title="Malays (ethnic group)" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="72984" end="72996" title="Sunni Muslim" label="Sunni Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q65301060" start="73099" end="73105" title="Hinduism in Thailand" label="Hindus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7513726" start="73110" end="73115" title="Sikhism in Thailand" label="Sikhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820630" start="73185" end="73213" title="Jews and Judaism in Thailand" label="Jewish community in Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q13022811" start="73737" end="73756" title="Sukavich Rangsitpol" label="Sukavich Rangsitpol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919134" start="74511" end="74563" title="Ministry of Information and Communication Technology (Thailand)" label="Ministry of Information and Communication Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="74634" end="74653" title="internet" label="high-speed internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q855730" start="75000" end="75024" title="Chulalongkorn University" label="Chulalongkorn University"/>
<link wikidata="Q626804" start="75029" end="75047" title="Mahidol University" label="Mahidol University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="75296" end="75319" title="ASEAN" label="Southeast Asian Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q118547" start="75321" end="75332" title="Cram school" label="Cram school"/>
<link wikidata="Q86696643" start="76119" end="76147" title="Global Health Security Index" label="Global Health Security Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="76224" end="76242" title="developing country" label="developing country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703687" start="76312" end="76342" title="Joint Commission" label="Joint Commission International"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246596" start="76353" end="76363" title="Bumrungrad International Hospital" label="Bumrungrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970641" start="76464" end="76489" title="Ministry of Public Health (Thailand)" label="Ministry of Public Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137154" start="76583" end="76607" title="Non-communicable disease" label="Non-communicable disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q79817" start="76863" end="76871" title="cannabis" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033379" start="76963" end="76979" title="medical cannabis" label="medical cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="77143" end="77161" title="Theravada" label="Theravada Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q108456050" start="77184" end="77197" title="Thai identity" label="Thai identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209722" start="77199" end="77212" title="Buddhism in Thailand" label="Thai Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="77285" end="77293" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q43004" start="77295" end="77302" title="animism" label="animism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130398" start="77337" end="77354" title="Thai solar calendar" label="official calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q370752" start="77406" end="77418" title="Buddhist calendar" label="Buddhist Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849805" start="77450" end="77466" title="Thaification" label="social construct"/>
<link wikidata="Q152777" start="77474" end="77480" title="Phibun" label="Phibun"/>
<link wikidata="Q779191" start="77629" end="77645" title="Overseas Chinese" label="Overseas Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003193" start="77782" end="77796" title="bamboo network" label="bamboo network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115221" start="77890" end="77895" title="mores" label="mores"/>
<link wikidata="Q6585583" start="77927" end="77937" title="Thai honorifics" label="honorifics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614911" start="77945" end="77948" title="Thai greeting" label="Wai"/>
<link wikidata="Q171180" start="78130" end="78135" title="Taboo" label="Taboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001041" start="78358" end="78370" title="Buddhist art" label="Buddhist art"/>
<link wikidata="Q11634" start="78425" end="78434" title="sculpture" label="sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001041" start="78462" end="78482" title="Buddha image" label="images of the Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="78530" end="78544" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11629" start="78563" end="78571" title="painting" label="painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q16560" start="78659" end="78665" title="palace" label="palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q44539" start="78671" end="78677" title="temple" label="temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268307" start="78741" end="78744" title="Dvaravati" label="Mon"/>
<link wikidata="Q831768" start="78924" end="78934" title="Indian art" label="Sri Lankan"/>
<link wikidata="Q756615" start="78939" end="78946" title="Chinese art" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q4440864" start="79167" end="79176" title="dimension" label="dimension"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900281" start="79186" end="79197" title="Perspective (graphical)" label="perspective"/>
<link wikidata="Q462437" start="79300" end="79311" title="Composition (visual arts)" label="composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="79542" end="79549" title="Western world" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q13013275" start="79597" end="79611" title="Khrua In Khong" label="Khrua In Khong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900281" start="79659" end="79677" title="linear perspective" label="linear perspective"/>
<link wikidata="Q668439" start="79772" end="79778" title="Jataka" label="Jataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="79818" end="79824" title="Gautama Buddha" label="Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489450" start="79839" end="79845" title="heaven" label="heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q564" start="79851" end="79855" title="hell" label="hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q12070822" start="80016" end="80029" title="Thai folklore" label="Thai folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q208145" start="80067" end="80078" title="iconography" label="iconography"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="80107" end="80124" title="Ayutthaya Kingdom" label="Ayutthaya Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761177" start="80251" end="80279" title="Buddhist temples in Thailand" label="Buddhist temples in Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q427287" start="80299" end="80302" title="wat" label="wat"/>
<link wikidata="Q36727" start="80320" end="80324" title="Pāḷi" label="Pāḷi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="80440" end="80452" title="architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q863279" start="80714" end="80731" title="Sukhothai Kingdom" label="Sukhothai Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924088" start="80842" end="80867" title="Ram Khamhaeng Inscription" label="Ram Khamhaeng Inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400958" start="81022" end="81032" title="Phra Ruang" label="Phra Ruang"/>
<link wikidata="Q889077" start="81064" end="81082" title="Maha Thammaracha I" label="Maha Thammaracha I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266946" start="81246" end="81258" title="dissertation" label="dissertation"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="81272" end="81289" title="Ayutthaya Kingdom" label="Ayutthaya Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709192" start="81295" end="81301" title="Thai poetry" label="poetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6586618" start="81456" end="81465" title="Yuan Phai" label="Yuan Phai"/>
<link wikidata="Q4831848" start="81503" end="81510" title="Ayutthaya–Lan Na War (1441–1474)" label="the war"/>
<link wikidata="Q889173" start="81524" end="81543" title="Borommatrailokkanat" label="Borommatrailokkanat"/>
<link wikidata="Q586326" start="81568" end="81577" title="Tilokaraj" label="Tilokaraj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059707" start="81581" end="81587" title="Lan Na" label="Lan Na"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408970" start="81654" end="81666" title="Thammathibet" label="Thammathibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049777" start="81680" end="81685" title="nirat" label="nirat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5258439" start="81747" end="81758" title="royal barge" label="royal barge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115291" start="81983" end="81991" title="Thonburi Kingdom" label="Thonburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567623" start="82014" end="82022" title="Ramakien" label="Ramakien"/>
<link wikidata="Q320097" start="82059" end="82080" title="King Taksin the Great" label="King Taksin the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155700" start="82107" end="82119" title="Rattanakosin Kingdom" label="Rattanakosin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355815" start="82430" end="82436" title="Mahori" label="Mahori"/>
<link wikidata="Q16304736" start="82464" end="82468" title="Kaki Klon Suphap" label="Kaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q6504452" start="82479" end="82484" title="Sepha" label="Sepha"/>
<link wikidata="Q863500" start="82514" end="82535" title="Khun Chang Khun Phaen" label="Khun Chang Khun Phaen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2315316" start="82566" end="82580" title="Sri Thanonchai" label="Sri Thanonchai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209915" start="82596" end="82608" title="Sunthorn Phu" label="Sunthorn Phu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581559" start="82713" end="82728" title="Phra Aphai Mani" label="Phra Aphai Mani"/>
<link wikidata="Q959588" start="82873" end="82886" title="Kukrit Pramoj" label="Kukrit Pramoj"/>
<link wikidata="Q6442803" start="82888" end="82903" title="Kulap Saipradit" label="Kulap Saipradit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6442803" start="82914" end="82923" title="Siburapha" label="Siburapha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134257" start="82963" end="82978" title="Chart Korbjitti" label="Chart Korbjitti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047767" start="82980" end="82991" title="Prabda Yoon" label="Prabda Yoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16139660" start="82997" end="83012" title="Duanwad Pimwana" label="Duanwad Pimwana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817305" start="83102" end="83108" title="Menora (dance)" label="Menora"/>
<link wikidata="Q6586192" start="83113" end="83120" title="Ramwong" label="Ramwong"/>
<link wikidata="Q915953" start="83190" end="83194" title="Khon" label="Khon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479660" start="83199" end="83209" title="Lakhon nai" label="Lakhon nai"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547039" start="83344" end="83349" title="likay" label="likay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547039" start="83441" end="83446" title="likay" label="likay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041490" start="83509" end="83517" title="ram muay" label="ram muay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041490" start="83546" end="83554" title="Wai khru ram muay" label="wai khru"/>
<link wikidata="Q120931" start="83617" end="83626" title="muay Thai" label="muay Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q478176" start="83683" end="83689" title="Piphat" label="Piphat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6629917" start="83691" end="83703" title="Khrueang sai" label="Khrueang sai"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355815" start="83709" end="83715" title="Mahori" label="Mahori"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="83822" end="83836" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29465710" start="83926" end="83936" title="Bad Genius" label="Bad Genius"/>
<link wikidata="Q6585353" start="84116" end="84149" title="Suphannahong National Film Awards" label="Suphannahong National Film Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013039" start="84191" end="84219" title="New York Asian Film Festival" label="New York Asian Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519981" start="84282" end="84289" title="Shutter (2004 film)" label="Shutter"/>
<link wikidata="" start="84398" end="84424" title="Ong-Bak: Muay Thai Warrior" label="Ong-Bak: Muay Thai Warrior"/>
<link wikidata="Q471911" start="84448" end="84461" title="Tom-Yum-Goong" label="Tom-Yum-Goong"/>
<link wikidata="Q298551" start="84485" end="84493" title="Tony Jaa" label="Tony Jaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q120931" start="84550" end="84559" title="Muay Thai" label="Muay Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658957" start="84604" end="84610" title="Thai television soap opera" label="Lakorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q211756" start="84840" end="84849" title="dance-pop" label="dance-pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q26707663" start="84920" end="84934" title="Lalisa Manobal" label="Lalisa Manobal"/>
<link wikidata="Q20563731" start="84936" end="84952" title="Violette Wautier" label="Violette Wautier"/>
<link wikidata="Q253607" start="84958" end="84968" title="Tata Young" label="Tata Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q23400" start="85070" end="85076" title="garlic" label="garlic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5727732" start="85078" end="85088" title="lemongrass" label="lemongrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q465934" start="85090" end="85101" title="kaffir lime" label="kaffir lime"/>
<link wikidata="Q734727" start="85103" end="85111" title="galangal" label="galangal"/>
<link wikidata="Q42562" start="85113" end="85121" title="turmeric" label="turmeric"/>
<link wikidata="Q41611" start="85123" end="85132" title="coriander" label="coriander"/>
<link wikidata="Q841779" start="85138" end="85150" title="coconut milk" label="coconut milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q629345" start="85227" end="85238" title="green curry" label="green curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q106768821" start="85284" end="85302" title="green papaya salad" label="green papaya salad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922950" start="85328" end="85336" title="khao soi" label="khao soi"/>
<link wikidata="Q301587" start="85361" end="85387" title="Massaman curry" label="&amp;quot;massaman&amp;quot; curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="85523" end="85533" title="CNN Travel" label="CNN Travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052469" start="85613" end="85620" title="tom yam" label="tom yam"/>
<link wikidata="Q730298" start="85646" end="85654" title="pad Thai" label="pad Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q629345" start="85730" end="85741" title="green curry" label="green curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922489" start="85750" end="85765" title="Thai fried rice" label="Thai fried rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063709" start="85783" end="85793" title="nam tok mu" label="nam tok mu"/>
<link wikidata="Q13013369" start="85887" end="85904" title="mango sticky rice" label="mango sticky rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305712" start="85909" end="85921" title="tub tim krob" label="tub tim krob"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733021" start="85974" end="85986" title="jasmine rice" label="jasmine rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q232405" start="86354" end="86367" title="metric system" label="metric system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709205" start="86373" end="86405" title="Thai units of measurement" label="traditional units of measurement"/>
<link wikidata="Q641227" start="86434" end="86448" title="imperial units" label="imperial units"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130398" start="86538" end="86550" title="Thai solar calendar" label="Buddhist Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="86740" end="86750" title="Common Era" label="Common Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q120931" start="86803" end="86812" title="Muay Thai" label="Muay Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128792" start="86821" end="86833" title="combat sport" label="combat sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q304821" start="86881" end="86890" title="clinch fighting" label="clinching"/>
<link wikidata="Q366494" start="87012" end="87028" title="Buakaw Banchamek" label="Buakaw Banchamek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107899" start="87030" end="87047" title="Samart Payakaroon" label="Samart Payakaroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750695" start="87053" end="87069" title="Apidej Sit-Hirun" label="Apidej Sit-Hirun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="87071" end="87091" title="Association football" label="Association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q239549" start="87167" end="87198" title="Thailand national football team" label="Thailand national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q157894" start="87214" end="87227" title="AFC Asian Cup" label="AFC Asian Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q548634" start="87321" end="87325" title="1972 AFC Asian Cup" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q334192" start="87333" end="87337" title="2007 AFC Asian Cup" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="87399" end="87409" title="Volleyball" label="Volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301638" start="87468" end="87485" title="Thailand women&amp;#x27;s national volleyball team" label="women&amp;#x27;s team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468836" start="87516" end="87534" title="FIVB Volleyball Women&amp;#x27;s World Championship" label="World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q15088720" start="87536" end="87545" title="FIVB Volleyball Women&amp;#x27;s World Cup" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q300180" start="87551" end="87567" title="FIVB Volleyball World Grand Prix" label="World Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2949123" start="87568" end="87586" title="Asian Championship" label="Asian Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q15067587" start="87606" end="87624" title="Asian Women&amp;#x27;s Volleyball Championship" label="Asian Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583126" start="87639" end="87648" title="AVC Cup for Women" label="Asian Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q188818" start="87655" end="87661" title="Takraw" label="Takraw"/>
<link wikidata="Q188818" start="87813" end="87825" title="Sepak takraw" label="Sepak takraw"/>
<link wikidata="Q188818" start="87937" end="87946" title="buka ball" label="buka ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378" start="87949" end="87954" title="Rugby football" label="Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475539" start="88000" end="88034" title="Thailand national rugby union team" label="Thailand national rugby union team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189445" start="88383" end="88406" title="ASEAN Basketball League" label="ASEAN Basketball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986863" start="88425" end="88458" title="Thailand national basketball team" label="Thailand national basketball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867664" start="88495" end="88511" title="Basketball at the 1966 Asian Games" label="1966 Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427500" start="88547" end="88570" title="Lumpinee Boxing Stadium" label="Lumpinee Boxing Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017005" start="88591" end="88603" title="Rama IV Road" label="Rama IV Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q977437" start="88609" end="88622" title="Lumphini Park" label="Lumphini Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408962" start="88834" end="88851" title="Thammasat Stadium" label="Thammasat Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q729664" start="88881" end="88897" title="1998 Asian Games" label="1998 Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q840546" start="88899" end="88927" title="Rajamangala National Stadium" label="Rajamangala National Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6055066" start="89024" end="89058" title="International rankings of Thailand" label="International rankings of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112484" start="89061" end="89080" title="Outline of Thailand" label="Outline of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="89499" end="89517" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="89525" end="89552" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823132" start="89574" end="89609" title="Library of Congress Country Studies" label="Library of Congress Country Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="89713" end="89721" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050701" start="89870" end="89891" title="International Futures" label="International Futures"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30129" wikidata="Q379391" url="?curid=30129" title="History of Thailand">
<text>The Tai or Thai ethnic group migrated into mainland Southeast Asia over a period of centuries. The word &quot;Siam&quot; ( ) may have originated from Pali (&quot;suvaṇṇabhūmi&quot;, &quot;land of gold&quot;), Sanskrit श्याम (&quot;śyāma&quot;, &quot;dark&quot;), or Mon ရာမည (&quot;rhmañña&quot;, &quot;stranger&quot;), with likely the same root as Shan and Ahom. &quot;Xianluo&quot; () was the Chinese name for the Ayutthaya Kingdom, merged from Suphannaphum city-state, centered in modern-day Suphan Buri; and Lavo city-state, centered in modern-day Lop Buri. To the Thai, the name of their country has mostly been &quot;Mueang Thai&quot;.

The country&#x27;s designation as Siam by Westerners likely came from the Portuguese. Portuguese chronicles noted that Borommatrailokkanat, king of Ayutthaya, sent an expedition to the Malacca Sultanate, at the southern tip of the Malay Peninsula, in 1455. Following their conquest of Malacca in 1511, the Portuguese sent a diplomatic mission to Ayutthaya. A century later, on 15 August 1612, &quot;The Globe&quot;, an East India Company merchantman bearing a letter from King James I, arrived in &quot;the Road of Syam&quot;. &quot;By the end of the 19th century, &quot;Siam&quot; had become so enshrined in geographical nomenclature that it was believed that by this name and no other would it continue to be known and styled.&quot;

Indianised kingdoms such as the Mon, the Khmer Empire, and Malay states of the Malay Peninsula and Sumatra ruled the region. The Thai established their states: Ngoenyang, the Sukhothai Kingdom, the Kingdom of Chiang Mai, Lan Na, and the Ayutthaya Kingdom. These states fought each other and were under constant threat from the Khmers, Burma, and Vietnam. In the 19th and early 20th centuries, only Thailand survived the European colonial threat in Southeast Asia due to centralizing reforms enacted by King Chulalongkorn, and because the French and the British decided to maintain it as a neutral territory to avoid conflicts between their colonies. After the end of absolute monarchy in 1932, Thailand endured 60 years of almost permanent military rule before the establishment of a democratically elected government.

==Prehistory==

Mainland Southeast Asia had been a home to various indigenous communities for thousands of years. The discovery of Homo erectus fossils such as Lampang man is an example of archaic hominids. The remains were first discovered during excavations in Lampang Province. The finds have been dated from roughly 1,000,000–500,000 years ago in the Pleistocene. Stone artefacts dating to 40,000 years ago have been recovered from, e.g., Tham Lod rockshelter in Mae Hong Son and Lang Rongrien Rockshelter in Krabi, peninsular Thailand. The archaeological data between 18,000 and 3,000 years ago primarily derive from cave and rock shelter sites, and are associated with Hoabinhian foragers.

== Initial states and Indianized states ==
There are many sites in present-day Thailand dating to the Bronze (1500–500 BCE) and Iron Ages (500 BCE–500 CE). Areas comprising what is now Thailand participated in the Maritime Jade Road, as ascertained by archeological research. The trading network existed for 3,000 years, between 2000 BC and 1000 AD. The site of Ban Chiang (around Udon Thani Province) currently ranks as the earliest known center of copper and bronze production in Southeast Asia and has been dated to around 2,000 years BCE.

The oldest known records of a political entity in Indochina are attributed to Funan—centered in the Mekong Delta and comprising territories inside modern-day Thailand. Chinese annals confirm Funan&#x27;s existence as early as the first century CE. Archaeological documentation implies an extensive human settlement history since the fourth century BCE.

The region also hosted a number of indigenous Austroasiatic-speaking and Malayo-Sumbawan-speaking civilisations. However, little is known about Thailand before the 13th century, as literary and concrete sources are scarce, and most of the knowledge about this period is gleaned from archaeological evidence. Similar to other regions in Southeast Asia, Thailand was heavily influenced by the culture and religions of India, starting with the Kingdom of Funan, around the first century, until the Khmer Empire. These &quot;Indianised kingdoms&quot; are composed of Dvaravati, Srivijaya, and the Khmer Empire. E. A. Voretzsch believes that Buddhism must have been flowing into Thailand from India at the time of the Indian emperor Ashoka of the Maurya Empire and into the first millennium. Later, Thailand was influenced by the south Indian Pallava dynasty and north Indian Gupta Empire.

===Central Thailand===
The Chao Phraya River in what is now central Thailand had once been the home of the Mon Dvaravati culture, which prevailed from the seventh century to the tenth century. Samuel Beal discovered the polity among the Chinese writings on Southeast Asia as &quot;Duoluobodi&quot;. During the early 20th century, archaeological excavations led by George Coedès found Nakhon Pathom Province to be a centre of Dvaravati culture. The two most important sites were Nakorn Pathom and U Thong (in modern Suphan Buri Province). The inscriptions of Dvaravati were in Sanskrit and Mon using the script derived from the Pallava alphabet of the South Indian Pallava dynasty.

It is believed that the Dvaravati borrowed Theravada Buddhism through its contacts with Sri Lanka, while the ruling class participated in Hindu rites. Dvaravati art, including the Buddha sculptures and stupas, showed strong similarities to those of the Gupta Empire of India. The eastern parts of the Chao Phraya valley were subjected to a more Khmer and Hindu influence as the inscriptions are found in Khmer and Sanskrit.

Dvaravati was a network of city-states paying tribute to more powerful ones according to the mandala political model. Dvaravati culture expanded into Isan as well as south as far as the Kra Isthmus. Dvaravati culture lost its influence around the tenth century when they submitted to the more unified Lavo-Khmer polity.
Around the tenth century, the city-states of Dvaravati merged into the mandalas of: Lavo (modern Lopburi) and Suvarnabhumi (modern Suphan Buri). According to a legend in the Northern Chronicles, in 903, a king of Tambralinga invaded and took Lavo and installed a Malay prince on the Lavo throne. The Malay prince was married to a Khmer princess who had fled an Angkorian dynastic bloodbath. The son of the couple contested the Khmer throne and became Suryavarman I (1006–1050), thus bringing Lavo under Khmer domination through marital union. Suryavarman I also expanded into the Khorat Plateau (later styled &quot;Isan&quot;), constructing many temples.

Suryavarman, however, had no male heirs and Lavo again became independent. After the death of King Narai of Lavo, the Lavo kingdom was plunged into a bloody civil war. The Khmer Empire under Suryavarman II took advantage by invading Lavo and installed his son as the King of Lavo. The repeated but discontinued Khmer domination eventually Khmerized Lavo. Lavo was transformed from a Theravadin Mon Dvaravati city into a Hindu Khmer one. Lavo became the entrepôt of Khmer culture and power of the Chao Phraya river basin. The bas-relief at Angkor Wat shows a Lavo army as one of the subordinates to Angkor. One interesting note is that a Tai army was shown as part of the Lavo army, a century before the establishment of the Sukhothai Kingdom.

===Southern Thailand===
Malay civilisations dominated the area below the Kra Isthmus. Early Malay kingdoms are described as tributaries to Funan by second-century Chinese sources, though most of them proved to be tribal organisations instead of full-fledged kingdoms. From the sixth century on, two major mandalas ruled southern Thailand, the Kanduli and Langkasuka. Kanduli centred on what is now Surat Thani Province and Langasuka in Pattani Province.

Southern Thailand was the centre of Hinduism and Mahayana Buddhism. The 7th century Tang monk Yijing stopped at Langkasuka to study Pali grammar and Mahayana during his journey to India. At that time, the kingdoms of Southern Thailand quickly fell under the influences of the Malay kingdom of Srivijaya from Sumatra. The Tamil King Rajendra Chola I of the Chola dynasty invaded Tambralinga in the 11th century.

===Northern Thailand===

According to the &quot;Cāmadevivaṃsa&quot;, the city of Hariphunchai (modern Lamphun) was founded by hermits. Camadevi, a princess of the Lavo Kingdom, was invited to rule the city around 700. Hariphunchai may be a later (10th century) offshoot of the Lavo Kingdom or instead related to the Thaton Kingdom.

Hariphunchai was the centre of Theravada in the north. The kingdom flourished during the reign of King Attayawong who built Wat Phra That Hariphunchai in 1108. The kingdom had strong relations with the Mon Kingdom of Thaton. During the 11th century, Hariphunchai waged lengthy wars with the Tai Ngoenyang Kingdom of Chiang Saen. Weakened by Tai invasions, Hariphunchai eventually fell in 1293 to Mangrai, king of Lan Na, the successor state of the Ngoenyang Kingdom.

==Arrival of the Tais==

The most recent and accurate theory about the origin of the Tai people proposes that Guangxi in China is really the Tai motherland instead of Yunnan. A large number of Tai people known as the Zhuang still live in Guangxi today. Around 700 AD, Tai people who did not come under Chinese influence settled in what is now Điện Biên Phủ in modern Vietnam according to the Khun Borom legend. Based on layers of Chinese loanwords in proto-Southwestern Tai and other historical evidence, Pittayawat Pittayaporn (2014) proposed that this migration must have taken place sometime between the eighth–10th centuries. Tai speaking tribes migrated southwestward along the rivers and over the lower passes into Southeast Asia, perhaps prompted by the Chinese expansion and suppression. Chinese historical texts record that, in 722, 400,000 &#x27;Lao&#x27; rose in revolt behind a leader who declared himself the king of Nanyue in Guangdong. After the 722 revolt, some 60,000 were beheaded. In 726, after the suppression of a rebellion by a &#x27;Lao&#x27; leader in the present-day Guangxi, over 30,000 rebels were captured and beheaded. In 756, another revolt attracted 200,000 followers and lasted four years. In the 860s, many local people in what is now North Vietnam sided with attackers from Nanchao, and in the aftermath, some 30,000 of them were beheaded. In the 1040s, a powerful matriarch-shamaness by the name of A Nong, her chiefly husband, and their son, Nong Zhigao, raised a revolt, took Nanning, besieged Guangzhou for 57 days, and slew the commanders of five Chinese armies sent against them before they were defeated, and many of their leaders were killed. As a result of these three bloody centuries, the Tai began to migrate southwestward.

The &quot;Simhanavati legend&quot; tells us that a Tai chief named Simhanavati drove out the native Wa people and founded the city of Chiang Saen around 800 CE. For the first time, the Tai people made contact with the Theravadin Buddhist kingdoms of Southeast Asia. Through Hariphunchai, the Tais of Chiang Saen embraced Theravada Buddhism and Sanskrit royal names. Wat Phrathat Doi Tong, constructed around 850, signified the piety of Tai people on the Theravada Buddhism. Around 900, major wars were fought between Chiang Saen and Hariphunchai. Mon forces captured Chiang Saen and its king fled. In 937, Prince Prom the Great took Chiang Saen back from the Mon and inflicted severe defeats on Hariphunchai.

Around 1000 CE, Chiang Saen was destroyed by an earthquake with many inhabitants killed. A council was established to govern the kingdom for a while, and then a local Wa man known as Lavachakkaraj was elected king of the new city of Chiang Saen or Ngoenyang. The Lavachakkaraj dynasty would rule over the region for about 500 years.

Overpopulation might have encouraged the Tais to seek their fortune further southwards. By 1100 CE, the Tai had established themselves as &quot;Po Khun&quot;s (ruling fathers) at Nan, Phrae, Songkwae, Sawankhalok, and Chakangrao on the upper Chao Phraya River. These southern Tai princes faced Khmer influence from the Lavo Kingdom. Some of them became subordinates to it.

==Sukhothai Kingdom (1238–1438)==
Thai city-states gradually became independent of the weakened Khmer Empire. It is said that Sukhothai Kingdom was established as a strong sovereign kingdom by Sri Indraditya in 1238 AC. A political feature which &quot;classic&quot; Thai historians call &quot;father governs children&quot; existed at this time. Everybody could bring their problems to the king directly, as there was a bell in front of the palace for this purpose. The city briefly dominated the area under King Ram Khamhaeng, who tradition and legend states established the Thai alphabet, but after his death in 1365, Sukhothai fell into decline and became subject to another emerging Thai state, the Ayutthaya Kingdom in the lower Chao Phraya area.

Another Thai state that coexisted with Sukhothai was the eastern state of Lan Na centred in Chiang Mai. King Mangrai was its founder. This city-state emerged in the same period as Sukhothai. Evidently, Lan Na became closely allied with Sukhothai. After the Ayutthaya Kingdom had emerged and expanded its influence from the Chao Phraya valley, Sukhothai was finally subdued. Fierce battles between Lan Na and Ayutthaya also constantly took place and Chiang Mai was eventually subjugated, becoming Ayutthaya&#x27;s vassal.

Lan Na&#x27;s independent history ended in 1558, when it finally fell to the Burmese. It was dominated by Burma until the late-18th century. Local leaders then rose up against the Burmese with the help of the rising Thai kingdom of Thonburi of King Taksin. The &quot;Northern City-States&quot; then became vassals of the lower Thai kingdoms of Thonburi and Bangkok. In the early 20th century, they were annexed and became part of modern Siam, the country that is now called &quot;Thailand&quot;.

==Ayutthaya Period (1351–1767)==
The city of Ayutthaya was on a small island, encircled by three rivers. Due to its defensible location, Ayutthaya quickly became powerful, politically, and economically. Ayutthaya&#x27;s name is derived from Ayodhya, an Indian holy city.

The first ruler of the Kingdom of Ayutthaya, King Uthong (r. 1351–1369), made two important contributions to Thai history: the establishment and promotion of Theravada Buddhism as the official religion to differentiate his kingdom from the neighbouring Hindu kingdom of Angkor and the compilation of the &quot;Dharmaśāstra&quot;, a legal code based on Hindu sources and traditional Thai custom. The &quot;Dharmaśāstra&quot; remained a tool of Thai law until late in the 19th century.

In 1511 Duke Afonso de Albuquerque dispatched Duarte Fernandes as an envoy to the Ayutthaya Kingdom, known then to Europeans as the &quot;Kingdom of Siam&quot;. This contact with the West during the 16th century led to a period of economic growth as lucrative trade routes were established. Ayutthaya became one of the most prosperous cities in Southeast Asia. According to George Modelski, Ayutthaya is estimated to have been the largest city in the world in 1700 CE, with a population around one million. Trade flourished, with the Dutch and Portuguese among the most active foreigners in the kingdom, together with the Chinese and Malayans. Even Luzones merchants and warriors from Luzon, Philippines were also present. Philippines-Thailand relations already had precursors in that, Thailand often exported ceramics to several Filipino states as evidenced that when the Magellan expedition landed at the Cebu Rajahnate, they noted a Thai embassy to the king, Rajah Humabon. When the Spanish colonized the Philippines via Latin America, Spaniards and Mexicans joined the Filipinos in trading at Thailand.

The Ayutthaya Period is known as the golden age of Thai literature, Art and Trade with the eastern and western world. The Ayutthaya period was also considered as &quot;a golden age of medicine in Thailand&quot; due to progress in the field of medicine at that time.

===Burmese wars ===
Starting in the middle of the 16th century, the kingdom came under repeated attacks by the Taungoo Dynasty of Burma. The Burmese–Siamese War (1547–49) began with a Burmese invasion and a failed siege of Ayutthaya. A second siege (1563–64) led by King Bayinnaung forced King Maha Chakkraphat to surrender in 1564. The royal family was taken to Bago, Burma, with the king&#x27;s second son Mahinthrathirat installed as a vassal king. In 1568, Mahinthrathirat revolted when his father managed to return from Bago as a Buddhist monk. The ensuing third siege captured Ayutthaya in 1569 and Bayinnaung made Mahathammarachathirat his vassal king.

After Bayinnaung&#x27;s death in 1581, Uparaja Naresuan proclaimed Ayutthaya&#x27;s independence in 1584. The Thai fought off repeated Burmese invasions (1584–1593), capped by an elephant duel between King Naresuan and Burmese heir-apparent Mingyi Swa in 1593 during the fourth siege of Ayutthaya in which Naresuan famously slew Mingyi Swa. The Burmese–Siamese War (1594–1605) was a Thai attack on Burma, resulting in the capture of the Tanintharyi Region as far as Mottama in 1595 and Lan Na in 1602. Naresuan even invaded mainland Burma as far as Taungoo in 1600, but was driven back.

Ayutthaya expanded its sphere of influence over a considerable area, ranging from the Islamic states on the Malay Peninsula, the Andaman seaports of present-day India, the Angkor kingdom of Cambodia, to states in northern Thailand. In the 18th century, the power of the Ayutthaya Kingdom gradually declined as fighting between princes and officials plagued its politics. Outlying principalities became more and more independent, ignoring the capital&#x27;s orders and decrees.

In the 18th century, the last phase of the kingdom arrived. The Bamar people, who had taken control of Lan Na and had also unified their kingdom under the powerful Konbaung Dynasty, launched several blows against Ayutthaya in the 1750s and 1760s. Finally, in 1767, after several months of siege, the Burmese broke through Ayutthaya&#x27;s outer and inner walls, sacked the city, and burned it down. The royal family fled the city and Ayutthaya&#x27;s last king, Ekkathat, died of starvation ten days later while in hiding.

==Thonburi and Early Rattanakosin period (1767–1851)==
=== Unification under Taksin ===

After more than 400 years of power, in 1767, the Kingdom of Ayutthaya was brought down by invading Burmese armies, its capital burned, and the territory split. Despite its complete defeat and occupation by Burma, Siam made a rapid recovery. The resistance to Burmese rule was led by a noble of Chinese descent, Taksin, a capable military leader. Initially based at Chanthaburi in the southeast, within a year he had defeated the Burmese occupation army and re-established a Siamese state with its capital at Thonburi on the west bank of the Chao Phraya, 20 km from the sea. In 1767 he was crowned as King Taksin (now officially known as &quot;Taksin the Great&quot;).
After the sacking of Ayutthaya, the country fell apart due to the lack of a central authority. Besides King Taksin, who had organised his force in the southeastern provinces, four other claimants and warlords had seized power and set up their own sphere of influence. Prince Thepphiphit, King Boromakot&#x27;s son, who had been unsuccessful in a diversionary action against the Burmese in 1766, had set himself up as the ruler of Phimai holding sway over the eastern provinces including Nakhon Ratchasima or Khorat. The Governor of Phitsanulok, whose first name was Ruang, had proclaimed himself independent, with the territory under his control extending to the province of Nakhon Sawan. A Buddhist monk named Ruan made himself a prince, appointing fellow monks as army commanders, at the town of Sawangburi (known as Fang in Uttaradit Province). Previously, He had pursued Buddhist studies at Ayutthaya with such excellent results that he had been appointed the chief monk of Sawangburi by King Boromakot. In the southern provinces as far north as Chumphon, a Pra Palad who was the acting Governor of Nakhon Si Thammarat declared his independence and raised himself to a princely rank.

Having firmly established his power at Thonburi, King Taksin set out to reunify the old kingdom, crushing regional rivals. After a temporary repulse by the Governor of Phitsanulok, he concentrated on the defeat of the weakest warlord first: Prince Thepphiphit of Phimai was subjugated and executed in 1768. Chao Narasuriyawongse, one of Taksin&#x27;s nephews, replaced Thepphiphit as governor. The last so-called ruler who still challenged the King was the Prince of Sawangburi (Ruan) or Chao Pra Fang, as he had just annexed Phitsanulok on the death of its Governor. King Taksin himself led an expedition against him and took it, but the prince disappeared. In dealing with the Prince of Nakhon Si Thammarat, who was taken prisoner by the loyal Governor of Pattani, the king not only pardoned him but also favoured him with a residence at Thonburi.

In the Thonburi period, the beginning of the Chinese mass immigration fell to Siam. Through the availability of Chinese workers, trade, agriculture and craftsmen flourished. However, the first Chinese rebellions had to be suppressed. However, later due to stress and many factors, King Taksin supposedly suffered mental breakdowns. After a coup d&#x27;état removing Taksin from power, stability was restored by Chaophraya Chakri (later King Rama I). Taksin was sentenced to death on Wednesday, 10 April 1782.

=== Restoration under Rama I ===
A noble of Mon descent, General Chakri succeeded Taksin in 1782 as Rama I (Phra Phutthayotfa), the first king of the Chakri dynasty. In the same year he founded a new capital city across the Chao Phraya River in an area known as Rattanakosin Island. (While settlements on both banks were commonly called Bangkok, both the and the refer to the capital as the City of Sia-Yut&#x27;hia.) In the 1790s, Burma was defeated and driven out of Siam, as it was then called. Lan Na also became free of Burmese occupation, but was reduced to the Kingdom of Chiang Mai. The king of the new dynasty was installed as a tributary ruler of the Chakri monarch.
It is probable that Chakri and his family had planned his ascent to the throne during his predecessor Taksin&#x27;s reign. After his coronation, he operated a systematic bloody extermination of the followers of Taksin, which corresponds to the typical approach of the usurpers in Thai history.

The new dynasty moved the capital of Thonburi to Rattanakosin Island, in today&#x27;s Bangkok. Bangkok had previously been a small settlement with a fort, but it was strategically located on the eastern shores of the Chao Phraya river and was known among the foreign traders as the &#x27;key to Siam&#x27;. New palaces and temples were built: construction of the Grand Palace and Wat Phra Kaew, where the Emerald Buddha is held, began. The king&#x27;s goal was to transfer the old splendor of Ayutthaya to the new capital. In his new capital, Rama I crowned himself in 1785 in a splendid ceremony.

During the reign of Rama I, the foreign policy was still focused on the threat of Burma. In 1786, Burma&#x27;s new king Bodawpaya ordered the nine Burmese armies in a surprise attack against Siam. The Burmese army invaded through the Three Pagoda Pass. The war came to be known as the &quot;Nine Armies&#x27; Wars&quot;. However, the Siamese were victorious. In 1805 Lanna (North Thailand) was largely brought under control of Bangkok. Rama I also attempted unsuccessfully to conquer the important trading ports of Tenasserim.

At the time of Rama I, Cambodia was practically administered as a province of Siam, as rival Vietnam had to deal with internal problems. Only when the new Vietnamese emperor Gia Long had ascended to the throne was the influence of Siam in Cambodia again contested. Relations with Vietnam took on a prominent place in this epoch, as there was yet to be significant relations with the European colonial powers during the reign of Rama I.

One of the most important achievements of Rama I was the codification of all the country&#x27;s laws into a work of 1,700 pages called the Three Seals Law. This law remained valid in its basic traits until the beginning of the twentieth century.

Siam also had a high level of cultural achievement. The Buddhist canon (Pāli Canon) was collected and reformulated within the framework of a Grand Council. The arts were promoted, as well as the construction of new palaces and temples in the capital. Literature and theatre also thrived: important works such as the 3,000-page Ramakian epic were produced. Additionally, works from Chinese, Mon, Javanese, Persian, and Indian languages were translated into Thai.

Although Rama I continued the traditions of Ayutthaya in many respects, the new empire was more centralized than its predecessors. A particularly important innovation was the stronger emphasis on rationality in the relationship between the monarch and his subjects. Rama I was the first king in the history of the country who justified his decisions before the highest officials.

=== Maintaining the status quo under Rama II and Rama III ===
King Rama II (Phra Phutthaloetla) was the son of Rama I. His accession to the throne was accompanied by a plot, during which 40 people were killed. The calmness of the interior and the exterior, which during the reign of Rama II and his successor Rama III (Phra Nangklao), prevailed mainly through giving in to conflicts and building good relations with influential clans in the country.

During Rama II&#x27;s reign, the kingdom saw a cultural renaissance after the massive wars that plagued his predecessor&#x27;s reign; particularly in the fields of arts and literature. Poets employed by Rama II included Sunthorn Phu the drunken writer (&quot;Phra Aphai Mani&quot;) and Narin Dhibet (&quot;Nirat Narin&quot;).

Foreign relations were initially dominated by relations with the neighbouring states, while those with European colonial powers started to enter in the background. In Cambodia and Laos, Vietnam gained the supremacy, a fact which Rama II initially accepted. When a rebellion broke out in Vietnam under Rama III in 1833–34, he tried to subdue the Vietnamese militarily, but this led to a costly defeat for the Siamese troops. In the 1840s, however, the Khmer themselves succeeded in expelling the Vietnamese, which subsequently led to the greater influence of Siam in Cambodia. At the same time, Siam kept sending tribute to China.

There was a serious touch with British colonial interests when Siam conquered the Sultanate Kedah on the Malay Peninsula in 1821. Kedah belonged to the sphere of interest of Great Britain. In the following year, Siam had to recognise the pre-conquest status after tough negotiations with the British envoy John Crawfurd. There was also the cautious resumption of trade and missionary activity in this epoch. In particular, British traders such as Robert Hunter (&quot;discoverer&quot; of the conjoined brothers Chang and Eng, the original &quot;Siamese twins&quot;) or James Hayes, but also missionaries from Europe and the United States like Jacob Tomlin, Karl Gützlaff, Dan Beach Bradley and Jean-Baptiste Pallegoix became active in Siam. In 1825 an agreement was signed with British emissary Henry Burney; Siam recognised British colonial possessions on the Malay Peninsula and made commercial concessions. This agreement was due not least to the rapid British success in the First Anglo-Burmese War.

A potentially dangerous event occurred with the Anouvong&#x27;s Rebellion in 1827, when the troops of the tributary King Anouvong of the Kingdom of Vientiane advanced towards Bangkok. They were, however, destroyed, which strengthened the position of Siam in Laos. The Lao-population of the areas west of the Mekong were relocated to Thai provinces in Isan.

Under Rama II and Rama III, culture, dance, poetry and above all the theatre reached a climax. The temple Wat Pho was built by Rama III, known as the first university of the country.

The reign of Rama III. was finally marked by a division of the aristocracy with regard to foreign policy. A small group of advocates of the takeover of Western technologies and other achievements were opposed by conservative circles, which proposed a stronger isolation instead. Since the kings Rama II and Rama III, the conservative-religious circles largely stuck with their isolationist tendency.

The death of Rama III in 1851 also signified the end of the old traditional Siamese monarchy: there were already clear signs of profound changes, which were implemented by the two successors of the king.

== Modernization under Rama IV and Rama V (1851–1910) ==

When King Mongkut (Rama IV) ascended the Siamese throne, he was severely threatened by the neighbouring states. The colonial powers of Britain and France had already advanced into territories which originally belonged to the Siamese sphere of influence. Mongkut and his successor Chulalongkorn (Rama V) recognised this situation and tried to strengthen the defence forces of Siam by modernisation, to absorb Western scientific and technical achievements, thus avoiding colonisation.

The two monarchs, who ruled in this epoch, were the first with Western formation. King Mongkut had lived 26 years as a wandering monk and later as an abbot of Wat Bowonniwet Vihara. He was not only skilled in the traditional culture and Buddhist sciences of Siam, but he had also dealt extensively with modern western science, drawing on the knowledge of European missionaries and his correspondence with Western leaders and the Pope. He was the first Siamese monarch to speak English.

The colonial encroachment in the 1880s in Burma to the West by the British Empire and Indochina to the East by the French caused anxiety amongst the Siamese elites including the British-educated Prince Prisdang who put forward a proposal alongside eleven other senior dignitaries to King Chulalongkorn to strengthen Siamese institutions following the European model. Some of these reforms reflect need to keep up with European convention of liberal statecraft and justice to maintain legitimacy. Prisdang suggested that the following reforms should be carried out:

# Change the absolute monarchy to a constitutional monarchy, 
# Establish a cabinet system or ministerial government, 
# Distribute power to the heads of departments, 
# Promulgate a law of royal succession, 
# Change the payment system for the bureaucracy from the commission system to a salary system, 
# Promote equality under the law, 
# Reform the legal system on the Western model, 
# Promote freedom of speech, and 
# Establish a merit system for the bureaucracy.

The majority of these reforms were implemented decades after Chulalongkorn&#x27;s death.

As early as 1855, John Bowring, the British governor in Hong Kong, appeared on a warship at the mouth of the Chao Phraya River. Under the influence of Britain&#x27;s achievements in neighbouring Burma, King Mongkut signed the so-called &quot;Bowring Treaty&quot;, which abolished the royal foreign trade monopoly, abolished import duties, and granted Britain a most favourable clause. The Bowring Treaty meant the integration of Siam into the world economy, but at the same time, the royal house lost its most important sources of income. Similar treaties were concluded with all Western powers in the following years, such as in 1862 with Prussia and 1869 with Austria-Hungary. From the Prussian emissary Count Friedrich Albrecht zu Eulenburg comes a much-respected travel report about Siam. The survival diplomacy, which Siam had cultivated abroad for a long time, reached its climax in this epoch.

The integration into the global economy meant to Siam that it became a sales market for Western industrial goods and an investment for Western capital. The export of agricultural and mineral raw materials began, including the three products rice, pewter and teakwood, which were used to produce 90% of the export turnover. King Mongkut actively promoted the expansion of agricultural land by tax incentives, while the construction of traffic routes (canals, roads and later also railways) and the influx of Chinese immigrants allowed the agricultural development of new regions. Subsistence farming in the Lower Menam Valley developed into farmers actually earning money with their produce.

Mongkut&#x27;s son, King Chulalongkorn (Rama V), ascended to the throne in 1868. He was the first Siamese king to have a full Western education, having been taught by a British governess, Anna Leonowens, whose place in Siamese history has been fictionalised as &quot;The King and I&quot;. At first Rama V&#x27;s reign was dominated by the conservative regent, Somdet Chaophraya Sri Suriwongse, but when the king came of age in 1873 he soon took control. He created a Privy Council and a Council of State, a formal court system and budget office. He announced that slavery would be gradually abolished and debt-bondage restricted.

===Western colonialism and cession of protectorates ===


Two kings, Mongkut and Chulalongkorn, witnessed the expansion of both France and Great Britain to increase their colonial territories in Southeast Asia and encircle Siam. From the west, the British conquered India, Burma and Malaya, and from the east, the French conquered South Vietnam, Vietnam and claimed to be &quot;protecting&quot; Cambodia, while Siam lost its extraterritorial rights in these areas to the new conquerors.

The construction of Kra Isthmus Canal, planned by a group of entrepreneurs led by the engineer Ferdinand de Lesseps, was not constructed after the British conquered Kongbaung-ruled Burma in the Third Anglo-Burmese War in 1885. A major event was the Paknam incident, when, on 13 July 1893, French cannon boats entered the Chao Phraya River toward Bangkok and were fired upon from a Siamese coastal fort, leading to the Franco-Siamese crisis. In the same year, Siam was compelled to conclude a treaty with France, in which the territory of Laos, located east of the Mekong, was annexed to French Indochina. The French forced Siam to refrain from any influence on its former vassal state. In 1887, the Indo-Chinese Union was founded. In 1896, British and French concluded a treaty which made a border between their colonies, with Siam defined as a buffer state.

After the French crisis of 1893, King Chulalongkorn realised the threat of the western colonial powers, and accelerated extensive reforms in the administration, military, economy and society of Siam, completing the development of the nation from a traditional feudalist structure based on personal domination and dependencies, whose peripheral areas were only indirectly bound to the central power (the King), to a centrally-governed national state with established borders and modern political institutions.

The Entente Cordiale of 8 April 1904 ended the rivalry between Great Britain and France over Siam. French and British zones of influence in Siam, were outlined, with the eastern territories, adjacent to French Indochina, becoming a French zone, and the western, adjacent to Burmese Tenasserim, a British zone. The British recognised a French sphere of influence to the east of the River Menam&#x27;s basin; in turn, the French recognised British influence over the territory to the west of the Menam basin. Both parties disclaimed any idea of annexing Siamese territory.

The Anglo-Siamese Treaty of 1909 defined the modern border between Siam and British Malaya. The treaty stated that Siam relinquished their claims over Kelantan, Terengganu, Kedah and Perlis to Great Britain, which were previously part of the semi-independent Malay sultanates of Pattani and Kedah. A series of treaties with France fixed the country&#x27;s current eastern border with Laos and Cambodia.

In 1904, 1907 and 1909, there were new border corrections in favour of France and Great Britain. When King Chulalongkorn died in 1910, Siam had achieved the borders of today&#x27;s Thailand. In 1910 he was peacefully succeeded by his son Vajiravudh, who reigned as Rama VI. He had been educated at Royal Military Academy Sandhurst and University of Oxford and was an anglicised Edwardian gentleman. Indeed, one of Siam&#x27;s problems was the widening gap between the Westernised royal family and upper aristocracy and the rest of the country. It took another 20 years for Western education to extend to the rest of the bureaucracy and the army.

== Nation formation under Vajiravudh and Prajadhipok (1910–1932) ==


The successor of King Chulalongkorn was King Rama VI in October 1910, better known as Vajiravudh. He had studied law and history at the University of Oxford as the Siamese crown prince in Great Britain. After his ascension to the throne, he forgave important officials for his devoted friends, who were not part of the nobility, and even less qualified than their predecessors, an action which had hitherto been unprecedented in Siam. In his reign (1910–1925) many changes were made, which brought Siam closer to modern countries. For example, the Gregorian Calendar was introduced, all the citizens of his country had to accept Family names, women were encouraged to wear skirts and long hair fringements and a citizenship law, Principle of the &quot;Ius sanguinis&quot; was adopted. In 1917 the Chulalongkorn University was founded and school education was introduced for all 7 to 14-year-olds.

King Vajiravudh was a favour of literature, theatre, he translated many foreign literatures into Thai. He created the spiritual foundation for a kind of Thai nationalism, a phenomenon unknown in Siam. He was based on the unity of nation, Buddhism, and kingship, and demanded loyalty from his subjects to all these three institutions. King Vajiravudh also took refuge in an irrational and contradictory anti-Sinicism. As a result of the mass immigration, in contrast to previous immigration waves from China, women and entire families had also come into the country, which meant that the Chinese were less assimilated and retained their cultural independence. In an article published by King Vajiravudh under a pseudonym, he described the Chinese minority as &quot;Jews of the East&quot;.

King Vajiravudh also created some new social associations, for example, the Wild Tiger Corps (1911), a kind of Scout movement.

In 1912, a Palace revolt, plotted by young military officers, tried unsuccessfully to overthrow and replace the king. Their goals were to change the system of government, overthrowing the ancien régime and replacing it with a modern, Westernised constitutional system, and perhaps to replace Rama VI with a prince more sympathetic to their beliefs., but the king went against the conspirators, and sentenced many of them to long prison sentences. The members of the conspiracy consisted of military and the navy, the status of the monarchy, had become challenged.

===World War I===

In 1917 Siam declared war on German Empire and Austria-Hungary, mainly to gain favour with the British and the French. Siam&#x27;s token participation in World War I secured it a seat at the Versailles Peace Conference, and Foreign Minister Devawongse used this opportunity to argue for the repeal of the 19th-century unequal treaties and the restoration of full Siamese sovereignty. The United States obliged in 1920, while France and Britain followed in 1925. This victory gained the king some popularity, but it was soon undercut by discontent over other issues, such as his extravagance, which became more noticeable when a sharp postwar recession hit Siam in 1919. There was also the fact that the king had no son. He obviously preferred the company of men to women (a matter which of itself did not much concern Siamese opinion, but which did undermine the stability of the monarchy due to the absence of heirs).

Thus when Rama VI died suddenly in 1925, aged only 44, the monarchy was already in a weakened state. He was succeeded by his younger brother Prajadhipok.

By 1925–1926, Siamese extraterritorial rights were restored a period of five years thereafter.

==Early years of constitutional monarchy (1932–1945)==
=== Revolution and difficult compromise ===

A small circle from the rising bourgeoisie of former students (all of whom had completed their studies in Europe – mostly Paris), supported by some military men, seized power from the absolute monarchy on 24 June 1932 in an almost nonviolent revolution. This was also called the &quot;Siamese Revolution&quot;. The group, which called themselves &quot;Khana Ratsadon&quot; or &quot;sponsors&quot;, gathered officers, intellectuals and bureaucrats, who represented the idea of the refusal of the absolute monarchy.

The Khana Ratsadon installed a constitutional monarchy with Prajadhipok as king at the top – a corresponding constitution was proclaimed on 10 December of the year. On the same day, the experienced and rather conservative lawyer Phraya Manopakorn Nititada, was appointed as first Siamese Prime Minister. By selecting a non-party head of government, the Khana Ratsadon wanted to avoid the suspicion that the coup had only been carried out in order to come to power itself. However, the overthrow of the monarchy did not lead to free elections, and political unions were forbidden. Bureaucracy and the military shared the power in the National Assembly. The constitution was annexed to the monarchist ideology (&quot;nation, religion, king&quot;) as a fourth pillar.

In the following period it became clear how heterogeneous the group of Khana Ratsadon was, and it fell into several rival wings, especially those of the high officers, the younger officers and the civilians. From the liberal and civilian wing, Pridi Phanomyong sought a profound transformation of the country&#x27;s social and economic system. To this end, he presented an economic plan in January 1933, which became known as a &quot;Yellow Cover Dossier&quot; (). Among other things, he proposed the nationalisation of farmland, industrialization through public companies, universal healthcare and pension insurance. The King, the rather conservative Prime Minister Phraya Manopakorn, and the high-ranking officers in the Khana Ratsadon around Phraya Songsuradet and even Pridi&#x27;s friend and co-worker Prayun Phamonmontri, opposed the plan.

Fearing that Pridi&#x27;s liberal wing, who had the majority in the National Assembly, would decide to take action, Phraya Manopakorn dissolved the parliament in April, imposed an emergency, and rescinded the constitution, which had not yet been a year old. He imposed a law against Communist activities, which was directed not so much against the almost insignificant Communist Party of Thailand, but rather against the alleged Communist projects of Pridi. However, the younger officers of the Khana Ratsadon resisted and countered the actions of Phraya Manopakorn in another coup d&#x27;état only one year later, in June 1933, resulting in the appointment of Phraya Phahon as Siam&#x27;s second prime minister.

=== Khana Ratsadon&#x27;s rise ===

After the fall of Phraya Manopakorn, Phraya Phahon became the new Prime Minister. Pridi Phanomyong was expelled from the charge of communism, but his economic plan was largely ignored. Only a few of his ideas, such as the expansion of primary schools and industrialisation with state enterprises, were gradually implemented. In 1933, Pridis founded the Thammasat University in Bangkok, which with its liberal self-image has remained a symbol of freedom and democracy. At the same time, the nationalist group led by Phibunsongkhram strengthened in the People&#x27;s Party, oriented to the totalitarian ideas of Italy, Germany, Japan, but also the &quot;young Turks&quot; (Kemal Atatürk).

The many unsettled constitutional roles of the crown and the dissatisfaction with Khana Ratsadon, especially Pridi&#x27;s post in the new government, culminated in October 1933 in a reactionary Boworadet Rebellion staged by royalist factions. The royalists were led by Prince Boworadet, Prajadhipok&#x27;s minister of defence. His forces who mobilised from provincial garrisons captured the Don Muang Aerodrome and led Siam into small-scale civil War. After heavy fighting in the outskirts of Bangkok, the royalists were finally defeated and Prince Boworadet left for exile in French Indochina.

After the Boworadet rebellion and some other disagreements with Khana Khana Ratsadon thereafter, King Prajadhipok abdicated the throne and exiled himself. He was replaced as king by his nine-year-old nephew Prince Ananda Mahidol (King Rama VIII), who at that time was attending school in Lausanne, Switzerland. Plaek Phibunsongkhram&#x27;s popularity increased from his role in leading anti-rebellion forces.

During this time, Pridi played an important role in modernising Thai public administration: completed Thai legal codes, created the local government system.

=== Dictatorship of Phibunsongkhram ===
When Phibulsonggram succeeded Phraya Phahon as Prime Minister in September 1938, the military and civilian wings of Khana Ratsadon diverged even further, and military domination became more overt. Phibunsongkhram began moving the government towards militarism, and totalitarianism, as well as building personality cult around himself.

The defeat of France in the Battle of France was the catalyst for the Thai leadership to begin an attack on French Indochina. This began with smaller conflicts in 1940 and resulted in the Franco-Thai War in 1941. It suffered a heavy defeat in the sea battle of Ko Chang, but it dominated on land and in the air. The Empire of Japan, already the dominant power in the Southeast Asian region, took over the role of mediator. The negotiations ended the conflict with Thai territorial gains in the French colonies of Laos and Cambodia.

By 1942, he had issued a series of cultural decrees (&quot;ratthaniyom&quot;) or Thai cultural mandates, which reflected the desire for social modernisation, but also an authoritarian and exaggerated nationalist spirit. First, in 1939, he changed the country&#x27;s name of Siam to Thailand &quot;(Prathet Thai)&quot; (). This is based on the idea of a &quot;Thai race&quot;, a Pan-Thai nationalism whose program is the integration of the Shan, the Lao and other Tai peoples, such as those in Vietnam, Burma and South China, into a &quot;Great Kingdom of Thailand&quot; (). Other decrees urged the citizens to embrace Western-style modernisation.

===World War II===

After the Franco-Thai war ended, the Thai government declared neutrality. When the Japanese invaded Thailand on 8 December 1941, a few hours after the attack on Pearl Harbor, Japan demanded the right to move troops across Thailand to the Malayan frontier. Phibun accepted Japanese demands after a brief resistance. The government improved relations with Japan by signing a military alliance in December 1941. Japanese armies used the country as a base for their invasions of Burma and Malaya. Hesitancy, however, gave way to enthusiasm after the Japanese rolled their way through Malaya in a &quot;Bicycle Blitzkrieg&quot; with surprisingly little resistance. The following month, Phibun declared war on Britain and the United States. South Africa and New Zealand declared war on Thailand on the same day. Australia followed soon after. All who opposed the Japanese alliance were sacked from his government. Pridi Phanomyong was appointed acting regent for the absent King Ananda Mahidol, while Direk Jayanama, the prominent foreign minister who had advocated continued resistance against the Japanese, was later sent to Tokyo as an ambassador. The United States considered Thailand to be a puppet of Japan and refused to declare war. When the allies were victorious, the United States blocked British efforts to impose a punitive peace.

The Thais and Japanese agreed that Shan State and Kayah State were to be under Thai control. On 10 May 1942, the Thai Phayap Army entered Burma&#x27;s eastern Shan State, the Thai Burma Area Army entered Kayah State and some parts of central Burma. Three Thai infantry and one cavalry division, spearheaded by armoured reconnaissance groups and supported by the air force, engaged the retreating Chinese 93rd Division. Kengtung, the main objective, was captured on 27 May. Renewed offensives in June and November saw the Chinese retreat into Yunnan. The area containing the Shan States and Kayah State was annexed by Thailand in 1942. They would be ceded back to Burma in 1945.

The Seri Thai (Free Thai Movement) was an underground resistance movement against Japan founded by Seni Pramoj, the Thai ambassador in Washington. Led from within Thailand from the office of the regent Pridi, it operated freely, often with support from members of the royal family such as Prince Chula Chakrabongse, and members of the government. As Japan neared defeat and the underground anti-Japanese resistance Seri Thai steadily grew in strength, the National Assembly forced out Phibun. His six-year reign as the military commander-in-chief was at an end. His resignation was partly forced by his two grandiose plans gone awry. One was to relocate the capital from Bangkok to a remote site in the jungle near Phetchabun in north-central Thailand. The other was to build a &quot;Buddhist city&quot; near Saraburi. Announced at a time of severe economic difficulty, these ideas turned many government officers against him.

At war&#x27;s end, Phibun was put on trial at Allied insistence on charges of having committed war crimes, mainly that of collaborating with the Axis powers. However, he was acquitted amid intense public pressure. Public opinion was still favourable to Phibun, as he was thought to have done his best to protect Thai interests, specifically using alliance with Japan to support the expansion of Thai territory in Malaya and Burma.

==Cold War period==
===Allied occupation of Thailand (1946)===
After Japan&#x27;s defeat in 1945, British, Indian troops, and US observers landed in September, and during their brief occupation of parts of the country disarmed the Japanese troops. After repatriating them, the British left in March 1946.

In early September the leading elements of Major General Geoffrey Charles Evans&#x27;s 7th Indian Infantry Division landed, accompanied by Edwina Mountbatten. Later that month Seni Pramoj returned from Washington to succeed Tawee as prime minister. It was the first time in over a decade that the government had been controlled by civilians. But the ensuing factional scramble for power in late 1945 created political divisions in the ranks of the civilian leaders that destroyed their potential for making a common stand against the resurgent political force of the military in the post-war years.

Following the signature by Thailand of the Washington Accord of 1946, the territories that had been annexed after the Franco-Thai War, which included Phibunsongkhram Province, Nakhon Champassak Province, Phra Tabong Province, Koh Kong Province and Lan Chang Province, were returned to Cambodia and Laos.

Moreover, the post-war accommodations with the Allies weakened the civilian government. As a result of the contributions made to the Allied war effort by the Free Thai Movement, the United States, which unlike the other Allies had never officially been at war with Thailand, refrained from dealing with Thailand as an enemy country in post-war peace negotiations. Before signing a peace treaty, however, Britain demanded war reparations in the form of rice shipments to Malaya. An Anglo-Thai Peace Treaty was signed on 1 January 1946, and an Australian–Thai Peace Treaty on 3 April. France refused to permit admission of Thailand to the United Nations until Indochinese territories annexed during the war were returned. The Soviet Union insisted on the repeal of anti-communist legislation.

===Democratic elections and the return of the military===
Elections were held in January 1946. These were the first elections in which political parties were legal, and Pridi&#x27;s People&#x27;s Party and its allies won a majority. In March 1946 Pridi became Siam&#x27;s first democratically elected prime minister. In 1946, after he agreed to hand back the Indochinese territories occupied in 1941 as the price for admission to the United Nations, all wartime claims against Siam were dropped and substantial US aid was received.
In December 1945, the young king Ananda Mahidol had returned to Siam from Europe, but in June 1946 he was found shot dead in his bed, under mysterious circumstances. Three palace servants were tried and executed for his murder, although there are significant doubts as to their guilt and the case remains both murky and a highly sensitive topic in Thailand today. The king was succeeded by his younger brother, Bhumibol Adulyadej. In August Pridi was forced to resign amid suspicion that he had been involved in the regicide. Without his leadership, the civilian government foundered, and in November 1947 the army, its confidence restored after the debacle of 1945, seized power. After an interim Khuang-headed government, in April 1948 the army brought Phibun back from exile and made him prime minister. Pridi, in turn, was driven into exile, eventually settling in Beijing as a guest of the PRC.

Phibun&#x27;s return to power coincided with the onset of the Cold War and the establishment of a communist regime in North Vietnam. He soon won the support of the United Nations. Once again political opponents were arrested and tried, and some were executed. During this time, several of the key figures in the wartime Free Thai underground, including Thawin Udom, Thawi Thawethikul, Chan Bunnak, and Tiang Sirikhanth, were eliminated in extra-legal fashion by the Thai police, run by Phibun&#x27;s ruthless associate Phao Sriyanond. There were attempted counter-coups by Pridi supporters in 1948, 1949, and 1951, the second leading to heavy fighting between the army and navy before Phibun emerged victorious. In the navy&#x27;s 1951 attempt, popularly known as the Manhattan Coup, Phibun was nearly killed when the ship where he was held hostage was bombed by the pro-government air force.

Although nominally a constitutional monarchy, Thailand was ruled by a series of military governments, most prominently led by Phibun, interspersed with brief periods of democracy. Thailand took part in the Korean War. Communist Party of Thailand guerrilla forces operated inside the country from the early-1960s to 1987. They included 12,000 full-time fighters at the peak of movement, but never posed a serious threat to the state.

By 1955 Phibun was losing his leading position in the army to younger rivals led by Field Marshal Sarit Thanarat and General Thanom Kittikachorn, the Sarit&#x27;s army staged a bloodless coup on 17 September 1957, ending Phibun&#x27;s career for good. The coup beginning a long tradition of US-backed military regimes in Thailand. Thanom became prime minister until 1958, then yielded his place to Sarit, the real head of the regime. Sarit held power until his death in 1963, when Thanom again took the lead.

===The rise of American influence===

In 1948 the government of Phibun Songkhram declared that Thailand would adopt an anti-communist stance in the emerging Cold War. Around the same time the United States began to see Thailand as an important bastion against communism in Asia and sought ways to support the government. A State Department policy statement in 1950 noted that &#x27;effective resistance to Communism must be based on widespread public support within the country&#x27; and set out that Thailand would receive a payment of $10,000,000 in aid. In 1950 Thailand sent troops to the Korean War and in 1954 Thailand joined the South East Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO). US financial and technical support greatly benefited the armed forces. 

During the First Indochina War, the United States increasingly focused on securing Thailand&#x27;s long term status as an anti-communist state through psychological programmes. In September 1953, a key architect of the CIA, William Donovan was sent to Thailand to win the support of Thailand&#x27;s nationalist elite. This involved a large indoctrination campaign aimed at convincing Thailand&#x27;s bureaucracy that their country&#x27;s interests aligned with those of the US. 

===Thailand during the Indochina wars and communist insurgency ===
The regimes of Sarit and Thanom were strongly supported by the US. Thailand had formally become a US ally in 1954 with the formation of the SEATO. While the war in Indochina was being fought between the Vietnamese and the French, Thailand (disliking both equally) stayed aloof, but once it became a war between the US and the Vietnamese communists, Thailand committed itself strongly to the US side, concluding a secret agreement with the US in 1961, sending troops to Vietnam and Laos, and allowing the US to use airbases in the east of the country to conduct its bombing war against North Vietnam. The Vietnamese retaliated by supporting the Communist Party of Thailand&#x27;s insurgency in the north, northeast, and sometimes in the south, where guerrillas co-operated with local discontented Muslims. In the postwar period, Thailand had close relations with the US, which it saw as a protector from communist revolutions in neighbouring countries. The Seventh and Thirteenth US Air Forces were headquartered at Udon Royal Thai Air Force Base.
Agent Orange, a herbicide and defoliant chemical used by the U.S. military as part of its herbicidal warfare program, Operation Ranch Hand, was tested by the United States in Thailand during the war in Southeast Asia. Buried drums were uncovered and confirmed to be Agent Orange in 1999. Workers who uncovered the drums fell ill while upgrading the airport near Hua Hin District, 100 km south of Bangkok.

US Vietnam-era veterans whose service involved duty on or near the perimeters of military bases in Thailand anytime between 28 February 1961, and 7 May 1975, may have been exposed to herbicides and may qualify for VA benefits.

A declassified US Department of Defense report written in 1973 suggests that there was a significant use of herbicides on the fenced-in perimeters of military bases in Thailand to remove foliage that provided cover for enemy forces.

Between 1962 and 1965, 350 Thai nationals underwent an eight-month training course in North Vietnam. In the first half of 1965, the rebels smuggled approximately 3,000 US-made weapons and 90,000 rounds of ammunition from Laos.

Between 1961 and 1965, insurgents carried out 17 political assassinations. They avoided full scale guerrilla warfare until the summer of 1965, when militants began engaging Thai security forces. A total of 13 clashes were recorded during that period. The second half of 1965 was marked by a further 25 violent incidents, and starting in November 1965, Communist Party of Thailand insurgents began undertaking more elaborate operations.

The insurgency spread to other parts of Thailand in 1966, although 90 percent of insurgency-related incidents occurred in the northeast of the country. On 14 January 1966, a spokesman representing the Thai Patriotic Front called for the start of a &quot;people&#x27;s war&quot; in Thailand. The statement marked an escalation of violence in the conflict. The insurgency had come to an end only by 1983.

The Vietnam War hastened the modernisation and Westernisation of Thai society. The American presence and the exposure to Western culture that came with it had an effect on almost every aspect of Thai life. Before the late 1960s, full access to Western culture was limited to a highly educated elite in society, but the Vietnam War brought the outside world face to face with large segments of the Thai society as never before. With US dollars pumping up the economy, the service, transportation, and construction industries grew phenomenally as did drug abuse and prostitution, which using Thailand as a &quot;Rest and Recreation&quot; facility by US forces. The traditional rural family unit was broken down as more and more rural Thais moved to the city to find new jobs. This led to a clash of cultures as Thais were exposed to Western ideas about fashion, music, values, and moral standards.

The population began to grow explosively as the standard of living rose, and a flood of people began to move from the villages to the cities, and above all to Bangkok. Thailand had 30 million people in 1965, while by the end of the 20th century the population had doubled. Bangkok&#x27;s population had grown tenfold since 1945 and had tripled since 1970.

Educational opportunities and exposure to mass media increased during the Vietnam War years. Bright university students learned more about ideas related to Thailand&#x27;s economic and political systems, resulting in a revival of student activism. The Vietnam War period also saw the growth of the Thai middle class which gradually developed its own identity and consciousness.

Economic development did not bring prosperity to all. During the 1960s many of the rural poor felt increasingly dissatisfied with their condition in society and disillusioned by their treatment by the central government in Bangkok. Efforts by the Thai government to develop poor rural regions often did not have the desired effect in that they contributed to the farmers&#x27; awareness of how bad off they really were. It was not always the poorest of the poor who joined the anti-government insurgency. Increased government presence in the rural villages did little to improve the situation. Villagers became subject to increased military and police harassment and bureaucratic corruption. Villagers often felt betrayed when government promises of development were frequently not fulfilled. By the early 1970s rural discontent had manifested itself into a peasant&#x27;s activist movement.

In 1972, hundreds of peasants, perhaps more than 3,000, suspected of supporting the communist rebellion, were massacred by the armed forces in Phattalung province in southern Thailand. Until then, communist suspects arrested by the army were usually shot and their bodies left behind. This time, the &quot;red barrel&quot; method was introduced to eliminate any possible evidence. Suspects were beaten into semi-consciousness before being thrown into barrels containing gasoline and burned alive.

===The 1973 democracy movement===
With the dissatisfaction of pro-US policies of Military administration that allowed the US forces for using the country as a military bases, the high rate of prostitution problems, the freedom of press and speech were limited and influx of the corruption that lead to inequality of social classes. Student demonstrations had started in 1968 and grew in size and numbers in the early 1970s despite the continued ban on political meetings. In June 1973, nine Ramkhamhaeng University students were expelled for publishing an article in a student newspaper that was critical of the government. Shortly after, thousands of students held a protest at the Democracy Monument demanding the re-enrolment of the nine students. The government ordered the universities to shut, but shortly afterwards allowed the students to be re-enrolled.

In October another 13 students were arrested on charges of conspiracy to overthrow the government. This time the student protesters were joined by workers, businessmen, and other ordinary citizens. The demonstrations swelled to several hundred thousand and the issue broadened from the release of the arrested students to demands for a new constitution and the replacement of the current government.

On 13 October, the government released the detainees. Leaders of the demonstrations, among them Seksan Prasertkul, called off the march in accordance with the wishes of the king who was publicly against the democracy movement. In a speech to graduating students, he criticised the pro-democracy movement by telling students to concentrate on their studies and leave politics to their elders [military government].

As the crowds were breaking up the next day (14 October), many students found themselves unable to leave because the police blocked the southern route to Rajavithi Road. Cornered and overwhelmed by the hostile crowd, the police responded with teargas and gunfire.

The military was called in, and tanks rolled down Ratchadamnoen Avenue and helicopters fired down at Thammasat University. A number of students commandeered buses and fire engines in an attempt to halt the progress of the tanks by ramming into them. With chaos on the streets, King Bhumibol opened the gates of Chitralada Palace to the students who were being gunned down by the army. Despite orders from Thanom that the military action be intensified, army commander Kris Sivara had the army withdrawn from the streets.

The king condemned the government&#x27;s inability to handle the demonstrations and ordered Thanom, Praphas, and Narong to leave the country, and notably condemned the students&#x27; supposed role as well. At 18:10 Field Marshal Thanom Kittikachorn resigned from his post as prime minister. An hour later, the king appeared on national television, asking for calm, and announcing that Field Marshal Thanom Kittikachorn had been replaced with Dr. Sanya Dharmasakti, a respected law professor, as prime minister.

The 1973 Uprising brought about the most free era in Thai recent history, called an &quot;age when democracy blossomed&quot; and a &quot;democratic experiment,&quot; which ended in the Thammasat University massacre and a coup on 6 October 1976.

==Democratisation and setbacks==
Post-1973 has been marked by a struggle to define the political contours of the state. It was won by the king and General Prem Tinsulanonda, who favoured a monarchial constitutional order.

The post-1973 years have seen a difficult and sometimes bloody transition from military to civilian rule, with several reversals along the way. The revolution of 1973 inaugurated a brief, unstable period of democracy, with military rule being reimposed after the 6 October 1976 Massacre. For most of the 1980s, Thailand was ruled by Prem Tinsulanonda, a democratically inclined strongman who restored parliamentary politics. Thereafter the country remained a democracy apart from a brief period of military rule from the 1991 Thai coup d&#x27;état for two years.

== Political conflicts since 2001 ==

=== Thaksin Shinawatra period ===

The populist Thai Rak Thai party, led by Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra, came to power in 2001. He was popular with the urban, suburban, and rural poor for his populist social programs. His rule came under attack from elites who saw danger in his &quot;parliamentary dictatorship&quot;. In mid-2005, Sondhi Limthongkul, a well-known media tycoon, became the foremost Thaksin critic. Eventually, Sondhi and his allies developed the movement into a mass protest and later unified under the name of People&#x27;s Alliance for Democracy (PAD).

On 19 September 2006, after the dissolution of parliament, Thaksin became head of a provisional government. While he was in New York for a meeting of the UN, Army Commander-in-Chief Lieutenant General Sonthi Boonyaratglin launched the bloodless September 2006 Thailand military coup d&#x27;état supported by anti-Thaksin elements in civil society and the Democrat Party. A general election on 23 December 2007 restored a civilian government, led by Samak Sundaravej of the People&#x27;s Power Party, as a successor to Thai Rak Thai.

=== 2006 coup d&#x27;état ===

Without meeting much resistance, a military junta overthrew the interim government of Thaksin Shinawatra on 19 September 2006. The junta the constitution, dissolved Parliament and the Constitutional Court, detained and later removed several members of the government, declared martial law, and appointed one of the king&#x27;s Privy Counselors, General Surayud Chulanont, as the Prime Minister. On 1 October 2006, Surayud Chulanont, the former head of Thailand&#x27;s army, was sworn in as interim prime minister. The junta later wrote a highly abbreviated interim constitution and appointed a panel to draft a new permanent constitution. The junta also appointed a 250-member legislature, called by some critics a &quot;chamber of generals&quot; while others claimed that it lacks representatives from the poor majority.

In this interim constitution draft, the head of the junta was allowed to remove the prime minister at any time. The legislature was not allowed to hold a vote of confidence against the cabinet and the public was not allowed to file comments on bills. This interim constitution was later surpassed by the permanent constitution on 24 August 2007. Martial law was partially revoked in January 2007. The ban on political activities was lifted in July 2007, following the 30 May dissolution of the Thai Rak Thai party. The new constitution was approved by referendum on 19 August, which led to a return to a democratic general election on 23 December 2007. Š

=== 2008–2010 political crisis ===


The People&#x27;s Power Party (Thailand) (PPP), led by Samak Sundaravej formed a government with five smaller parties. Following several court rulings against him in a variety of scandals, and surviving a vote of no confidence, and protesters blockading government buildings and airports, in September 2008, Sundaravej was found guilty of conflict of interest by the Constitutional Court of Thailand (due to being host of a TV cooking program), and thus, ended his term in office.

He was replaced by PPP member Somchai Wongsawat. As of October 2008, Wongsawat was unable to gain access to his offices, which were occupied by protesters from the People&#x27;s Alliance for Democracy. On 2 December 2008, Thailand&#x27;s Constitutional Court in a highly controversial ruling found the Peoples Power Party (PPP) guilty of electoral fraud, which led to the dissolution of the party according to the law. It was later alleged in media reports that at least one member of the judiciary had a telephone conversation with officials working for the Office of the Privy Council and one other person. The phone call was taped and has since circulated on the Internet. In it, the callers discuss finding a way to ensure the ruling PPP party would be disbanded. Accusations of judicial interference were levelled in the media but the recorded call was dismissed as a hoax. However, in June 2010, supporters of the eventually disbanded PPP were charged with tapping a judge&#x27;s phone.

Immediately following what many media described as a &quot;judicial coup&quot;, a senior member of the armed forces met with factions of the governing coalition to get their members to join the opposition and the Democrat Party was able to form a government, a first for the party since 2001. The leader of the Democrat Party, and former leader of the opposition, Abhisit Vejjajiva was appointed and sworn in as the 27th Prime Minister, together with a new cabinet, on 17 December 2008.

In April 2009, protests by the National United Front of Democracy Against Dictatorship (UDD, or &quot;Red Shirts&quot;) forced the cancellation of the Fourth East Asia Summit after protesters stormed the Royal Cliff Hotel venue in Pattaya, smashing the glass doors of the venue to gain entry, and a blockade prevented the Chinese premier at the time, Wen Jiabao, from attending.

About a year later, a set of new Red Shirts protests resulted in 87 deaths (mostly civilian and some military) and 1,378 injured. When the army tried to disperse protesters on 10 April 2010, the army was met with automatic gunfire, grenades, and fire bombs from an opposition faction in the army. This resulted in the army returning fire with rubber bullets and some live ammunition. During the time of the Red Shirt protests against the government, there were numerous grenade and bomb attacks against government offices and the homes of government officials. Gas grenades were fired at Yellow Shirt protesters who were protesting against the Red Shirts and in favour of the government, by unknown gunmen killing one pro-government protester, the government stated that the Red Shirts were firing the weapons at civilians. Red Shirts continued to hold a position in the business district of Bangkok and it was shut down for several weeks.

On 3 July 2011, the opposition Pheu Thai Party, led by Yingluck Shinawatra (the youngest sister of Thaksin Shinawatra), won the general election by a landslide (265 seats in the House of Representatives, out of 500). She had never previously been involved in politics, Pheu Thai campaigning for her with the slogan &quot;Thaksin thinks, Pheu Thai acts&quot;. Yingluck was the nation&#x27;s first female prime minister and her role was officially endorsed in a ceremony presided over by King Bhumibol Adulyadej. The Pheu Thai Party is a continuation of Thaksin&#x27;s Thai Rak Thai party.

===2013–2014 political crisis===

Protests recommenced in late 2013, as a broad alliance of protesters, led by former opposition deputy leader Suthep Thaugsuban, demanded an end to the Thaksin regime. A blanket amnesty for people involved in the 2010 protests, altered at the last minute to include all political crimes, including all convictions against Thaksin, triggered a mass show of discontent, with numbers variously estimated between 98,500 (the police) and 400,000 (an aerial photo survey done by the &quot;Bangkok Post&quot;), taking to the streets. The Senate was urged to reject the bill to quell the reaction, but the measure failed. A newly named group, the People&#x27;s Democratic Reform Committee (PDRC) along with allied groups, escalated the pressure, with the opposition Democrat party resigning en masse to create a parliamentary vacuum. Protesters demand variously evolved as the movement&#x27;s numbers grew, extending a number of deadlines and demands that became increasingly unreasonable or unrealistic, yet attracting a groundswell of support. They called for the establishment of an indirectly elected &quot;people&#x27;s council&quot;, in place of Yingluck&#x27;s government, that would cleanse Thai politics and eradicate the Thaksin regime.

In response to the protests, Yingluck dissolved parliament on 9 December 2013 and proposed a new election for 2 February 2014, a date that was later approved by the election commission. The PDRC insisted that the prime minister stand down within 24 hours, regardless of her actions, with 160,000 protesters in attendance at Government House on 9 December. Yingluck insisted that she would continue her duties until the scheduled election in February 2014, urging the protesters to accept her proposal: &quot;Now that the government has dissolved parliament, I ask that you stop protesting and that all sides work towards elections. I have backed down to the point where I don&#x27;t know how to back down any further.&quot;

In response to the Electoral Commission (EC)&#x27;s registration process for party-list candidates—for the scheduled election in February 2014—anti-government protesters marched to the Thai-Japanese sports stadium, the venue of the registration process, on 22 December 2013. Suthep and the PDRC led the protest, which security forces claimed that approximately 270,000 protesters joined. Yingluck and the Pheu Thai Party reiterated their election plan and anticipated presenting a list of 125 party-list candidates to the EC.

On 7 May 2014, the Constitutional Court ruled that Yingluck would have to step down as the prime minister as she was deemed to have abused her power in transferring a high-level government official. On 21 August 2014 she was replaced by army chief General Prayut Chan-o-cha.

===2014 coup d&#x27;état ===

On 20 May 2014 the Thai army declared martial law and began to deploy troops in the capital, denying that it was a coup attempt. On 22 May, the army admitted that it was a coup and that it was taking control of the country and suspending the country&#x27;s constitution. On the same day, the military imposed a curfew between the hours of 22:00–05:00, ordering citizens and visitors to remain indoors during this period. On 21 August 2014 the National Assembly of Thailand elected the army chief, General Prayut Chan-o-cha, as prime minister. Martial law was declared formally ended on 1 April 2015. &quot;Uniformed or ex-military men have led Thailand for 55 of the 83 years since absolute monarchy was overthrown in 1932...&quot; observed one journalist in 2015.

The rise of fascism in Thailand began around the coup, first coined by James Taylor of University of Adelaide in 2011, after the junta took control, academics and political commentators started to identify a political system by fascism. Pithaya Pookaman and James Taylor called it &#x27;New Right&#x27; consisting of ultraconservatives, reactionaries, semi-fascists, pseudo-intellectuals and former leftists. John Draper, an academic and political commentator, noted that the rise of fascism in Thailand began in 2014. The King&#x27;s sufficient economy was mentioned that it serves as one of the ideological foundations of the military regime, and reminiscent of fascist regimes in Europe in the 1930s.

===Military Junta (2014–2019)===

The ruling junta led by Prayuth Chan-o-cha promised to hold new elections, but wanted to enact a new constitution before the elections were held. An initial draft constitution was rejected by government officials in 2015. A national referendum, the first since the 2014 coup, on a newly drafted constitution was held on 7 August 2016. There was a 55% turnout of which around 61% voted in favour of the constitution. Under the new constitution an unelected person other than a member of parliament can be appointed as Prime Minister, which would open the post to a military official. The new constitution also gives the National Council for Peace and Order the authority to make all the appointments to the 250-member Senate in the next government.

===Vajiralongkorn reign (2016–present)===
On 13 October 2016, King Bhumibol Adulyadej of Thailand died at the age of 89, in Siriraj Hospital in Bangkok. On the night of 1 December 2016, the fiftieth day after the death of Bhumibol, Regent Prem Tinsulanonda led the heads of the country&#x27;s three branches of government to an audience with Vajiralongkorn to invite him to ascend to the throne as the tenth king of the Chakri dynasty. In April 2017, King Vajiralongkorn signs the new constitution which will aid in the return to democracy.

In May 2017, Bangkok hospital was bombed, wounding 24 people on the third anniversary of the military coup of 2014.

In June 2019, both houses of Thailand&#x27;s parliament elected Prayuth Chan-ocha, retired general and former military junta leader, as the country&#x27;s next prime minister. The vote officially restored civilian rule in Thailand. The opposition complained of voting irregularities in the 24 March elections.

In February 2020, pro-democracy party Future Forward, the third largest party in the parliament with 80 seats, was disbanded. The ruling was made by the Constitutional Court, because of a donation the party&#x27;s founder, Thanathorn Juangroongruangkit, made for the party.

In September 2022, Thailand&#x27;s Constitutional Court ruled that Prime Minister Prayuth Chan-ocha can stay in office. The opposition had challenged him, because the new constitution limits the term for prime minister as a total period of eight years in office. The Constitutional Court&#x27;s ruling was that his term in office began in April 2017, simultaneously with the new constitution, although General Prayuth had ruled as the leader of the government since the 2014 military coup.

In May 2023, Thailand&#x27;s reformist opposition, the progressive Move Forward Party (MFP) and the populist Pheu Thai Party, won the general election, meaning the royalist-military parties that supported Prime Minister Prayuth Chan-ocha lost power. Initially, the opposition parties attempted to form a government together with MFP&#x27;s Pita Limjaroenrat as prime ministerial candidate. This failed despite a majority in the lower house, as under the 2017 constitution the junta-appointed Senate also voted for the prime minister along with the elected lower house. Pheu Thai then dissolved its coalition with MFP and allied instead with the royalist-military parties, which allowed the new coalition to garner votes in the military-dominated Senate. On 22 August 2023, its candidate Srettha Thavisin became Thailand&#x27;s new prime minister, while the Pheu Thai party&#x27;s billionaire figurehead Thaksin Shinawatra returned to Thailand after years in self-imposed exile.

== Historical maps ==
==See also==

* Dhamma Society Fund
* History of Bangkok
* History of Southeast Asia
* History of Isan
* History of the Thai Forest Tradition
* List of Thai monarchs
** Monarchs&#x27; family tree
* List of prime ministers of Thailand
* Peopling of Thailand
* Politics of Thailand
* Reactions to the death of Bhumibol Adulyadej
* Siam Society
* Thai cultural mandates
* Thai studies
* Thaification
* South Thailand insurgency

==Notes==
== References ==
=== Citations ===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Section &#x27;The Japanese invasion of Thailand, 8 December 1941&#x27; Part one Part three 
==External links==
*Thailand Country Study for the Library of Congress, 1987. Barbara Leitch LePoer, editor. This text comes from the Country Studies Program. The series presents a description and analysis of the historical setting and the social, economic, political, and national security systems and institutions of countries throughout the world. 
*Thailand profile – Timeline at the BBC News Online</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q703353" start="4" end="7" title="Tai people" label="Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q43467" start="43" end="66" title="mainland Southeast Asia" label="mainland Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36727" start="150" end="154" title="Pali" label="Pali"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="209" end="217" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q13349" start="266" end="269" title="Mon language" label="Mon"/>
<link wikidata="Q740417" start="349" end="353" title="Shan people" label="Shan"/>
<link wikidata="Q402392" start="358" end="362" title="Ahom people" label="Ahom"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="416" end="433" title="Ayutthaya Kingdom" label="Ayutthaya Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q13026185" start="447" end="459" title="Suphannaphum" label="Suphannaphum"/>
<link wikidata="Q272247" start="495" end="506" title="Suphan Buri Province" label="Suphan Buri"/>
<link wikidata="Q336122" start="552" end="560" title="Lop Buri Province" label="Lop Buri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="617" end="640" title="Mueang#Thailand" label="&amp;quot;Mueang Thai&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q178630" start="717" end="727" title="Portuguese people" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q889173" start="762" end="781" title="Borommatrailokkanat" label="Borommatrailokkanat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="802" end="820" title="Borommatrailokkanat#Expedition to Malacca" label="sent an expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q46652" start="828" end="845" title="Malacca Sultanate" label="Malacca Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q18758" start="874" end="889" title="Malay Peninsula" label="Malay Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988343" start="916" end="935" title="Portuguese Malacca" label="conquest of Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="1062" end="1080" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="1115" end="1127" title="James VI and I" label="King James I"/>
<link wikidata="Q913035" start="1150" end="1154" title="Roadstead" label="Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q11014588" start="1379" end="1397" title="Indianised kingdom" label="Indianised kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446298" start="1411" end="1414" title="Mon kingdoms" label="Mon"/>
<link wikidata="Q201705" start="1420" end="1432" title="Khmer Empire" label="Khmer Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="1478" end="1485" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q472834" start="1508" end="1512" title="Thai people" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586289" start="1539" end="1548" title="Ngoenyang" label="Ngoenyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q863279" start="1554" end="1571" title="Sukhothai Kingdom" label="Sukhothai Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202331" start="1577" end="1598" title="Kingdom of Chiang Mai" label="Kingdom of Chiang Mai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059707" start="1600" end="1606" title="Lan Na" label="Lan Na"/>
<link wikidata="Q201028" start="1706" end="1712" title="Khmers" label="Khmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="1725" end="1732" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q158861" start="1881" end="1899" title="King Chulalongkorn" label="King Chulalongkorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q218719" start="1968" end="1985" title="neutral territory" label="neutral territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q43467" start="2215" end="2238" title="Mainland Southeast Asia" label="Mainland Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q101362" start="2330" end="2342" title="Homo erectus" label="Homo erectus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164231" start="2359" end="2370" title="Prehistoric Thailand" label="Lampang man"/>
<link wikidata="Q240495" start="2462" end="2478" title="Lampang Province" label="Lampang Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="2554" end="2565" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q18388980" start="2642" end="2662" title="Tham Lod rockshelter" label="Tham Lod rockshelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q743005" start="2666" end="2678" title="Mae Hong Son" label="Mae Hong Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621515" start="2874" end="2884" title="Hoabinhian" label="Hoabinhian"/>
<link wikidata="Q584125" start="3258" end="3268" title="Ban Chiang" label="Ban Chiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q380752" start="3277" end="3296" title="Udon Thani Province" label="Udon Thani Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="3346" end="3352" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q34095" start="3357" end="3363" title="bronze" label="bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q867782" start="3518" end="3523" title="Funan" label="Funan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33199" start="3840" end="3862" title="Austroasiatic languages" label="Austroasiatic-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363818" start="3867" end="3891" title="Malayo-Sumbawan languages" label="Malayo-Sumbawan-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q201705" start="4289" end="4301" title="Khmer Empire" label="Khmer Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268307" start="4357" end="4366" title="Dvaravati" label="Dvaravati"/>
<link wikidata="Q234197" start="4368" end="4377" title="Srivijaya" label="Srivijaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q8589" start="4522" end="4528" title="Ashoka" label="Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="4536" end="4549" title="Maurya Empire" label="Maurya Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q466803" start="4632" end="4647" title="Pallava dynasty" label="Pallava dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774" start="4665" end="4677" title="Gupta Empire" label="Gupta Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q118850" start="4707" end="4724" title="Chao Phraya River" label="Chao Phraya River"/>
<link wikidata="Q663757" start="5044" end="5057" title="George Coedès" label="George Coedès"/>
<link wikidata="Q334841" start="5064" end="5086" title="Nakhon Pathom Province" label="Nakhon Pathom Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q272247" start="5195" end="5215" title="Suphan Buri Province" label="Suphan Buri Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q15104320" start="5307" end="5323" title="Pallava alphabet" label="Pallava alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="5331" end="5342" title="South India" label="South India"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="5405" end="5423" title="Theravada" label="Theravada Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="5500" end="5505" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q48999164" start="5513" end="5526" title="Dvaravati art" label="Dvaravati art"/>
<link wikidata="Q180987" start="5564" end="5569" title="stupa" label="stupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774" start="5615" end="5627" title="Gupta Empire" label="Gupta Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q765018" start="5880" end="5903" title="Mandala (Southeast Asian political model)" label="mandala political model"/>
<link wikidata="Q381897" start="5937" end="5941" title="Isan" label="Isan"/>
<link wikidata="Q322356" start="5973" end="5984" title="Kra Isthmus" label="Kra Isthmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17061192" start="6191" end="6195" title="Lavo" label="Lavo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363891" start="6204" end="6211" title="Lopburi" label="Lopburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941127" start="6217" end="6229" title="Suvarnabhumi" label="Suvarnabhumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q978805" start="6238" end="6249" title="Suphan Buri" label="Suphan Buri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509414" start="6320" end="6331" title="Tambralinga" label="Tambralinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q501356" start="6558" end="6571" title="Suryavarman I" label="Suryavarman I"/>
<link wikidata="Q874816" start="6687" end="6701" title="Khorat Plateau" label="Khorat Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q201705" start="6935" end="6947" title="Khmer Empire" label="Khmer Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q313298" start="6954" end="6968" title="Suryavarman II" label="Suryavarman II"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="7183" end="7188" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q218739" start="7216" end="7224" title="entrepôt" label="entrepôt"/>
<link wikidata="Q43473" start="7302" end="7312" title="Angkor Wat" label="Angkor Wat"/>
<link wikidata="Q863279" start="7487" end="7504" title="Sukhothai Kingdom" label="Sukhothai Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q322356" start="7580" end="7591" title="Kra Isthmus" label="Kra Isthmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q867782" start="7646" end="7651" title="Funan" label="Funan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320075" start="7862" end="7872" title="Langkasuka" label="Langkasuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q240463" start="7905" end="7925" title="Surat Thani Province" label="Surat Thani Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q236781" start="7943" end="7959" title="Pattani Province" label="Pattani Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="7998" end="8006" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q48362" start="8011" end="8028" title="Mahayana" label="Mahayana Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q457629" start="8056" end="8062" title="Yijing (monk)" label="Yijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q36727" start="8094" end="8098" title="Pali" label="Pali"/>
<link wikidata="Q234197" start="8255" end="8264" title="Srivijaya" label="Srivijaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="8270" end="8277" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q211483" start="8294" end="8310" title="Rajendra Chola I" label="Rajendra Chola I"/>
<link wikidata="Q151148" start="8318" end="8331" title="Chola dynasty" label="Chola dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509414" start="8340" end="8351" title="Tambralinga" label="Tambralinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907007" start="8422" end="8435" title="Cāmadevivaṃsa" label="Cāmadevivaṃsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q255931" start="8455" end="8467" title="Hariphunchai" label="Hariphunchai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211214" start="8476" end="8483" title="Lamphun" label="Lamphun"/>
<link wikidata="Q189829" start="8500" end="8506" title="hermit" label="hermit"/>
<link wikidata="Q541875" start="8509" end="8517" title="Camadevi" label="Camadevi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332305" start="8537" end="8549" title="Lavo Kingdom" label="Lavo Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651832" start="8690" end="8704" title="Thaton Kingdom" label="Thaton Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552374" start="8831" end="8857" title="Wat Phra That Hariphunchai" label="Wat Phra That Hariphunchai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586289" start="9002" end="9011" title="Ngoenyang" label="Ngoenyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q887732" start="9103" end="9110" title="Mangrai" label="Mangrai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059707" start="9120" end="9126" title="Lan Na" label="Lan Na"/>
<link wikidata="Q703353" start="9260" end="9270" title="Tai peoples" label="Tai people"/>
<link wikidata="Q15176" start="9285" end="9292" title="Guangxi" label="Guangxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q36692" start="9392" end="9398" title="Zhuang people" label="Zhuang"/>
<link wikidata="Q36027" start="9518" end="9531" title="Điện Biên Phủ" label="Điện Biên Phủ"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="9542" end="9549" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353324" start="9567" end="9577" title="Khun Borom" label="Khun Borom"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="9613" end="9621" title="loanword" label="loanword"/>
<link wikidata="Q10889250" start="9632" end="9648" title="Southwestern Tai" label="Southwestern Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q827040" start="10105" end="10111" title="Nanyue" label="Nanyue"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="10115" end="10124" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q15176" start="10255" end="10274" title="Guangxi" label="present-day Guangxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045322" start="10483" end="10490" title="Nanchao" label="Nanchao"/>
<link wikidata="Q29902645" start="10609" end="10615" title="A Nong" label="A Nong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858865" start="10653" end="10664" title="Nong Zhigao" label="Nong Zhigao"/>
<link wikidata="Q179608" start="10688" end="10695" title="Nanning" label="Nanning"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="10706" end="10715" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11013" end="11024" title="Simhanavati" label="Simhanavati"/>
<link wikidata="Q843392" start="11046" end="11055" title="Wa people" label="Wa people"/>
<link wikidata="Q475399" start="11080" end="11091" title="Chiang Saen District" label="Chiang Saen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="11290" end="11298" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11312" end="11333" title="Doi Tung#Description" label="Wat Phrathat Doi Tong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586289" start="11904" end="11913" title="Ngoenyang" label="Ngoenyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014345" start="12169" end="12172" title="Nan, Thailand" label="Nan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207145" start="12174" end="12179" title="Phrae" label="Phrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q476671" start="12191" end="12202" title="Sawankhalok District" label="Sawankhalok"/>
<link wikidata="Q118850" start="12232" end="12249" title="Chao Phraya River" label="Chao Phraya River"/>
<link wikidata="Q201705" start="12460" end="12472" title="Khmer Empire" label="Khmer Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q863279" start="12490" end="12507" title="Sukhothai Kingdom" label="Sukhothai Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q887310" start="12557" end="12571" title="Sri Indraditya" label="Sri Indraditya"/>
<link wikidata="Q349249" start="12876" end="12889" title="Ram Khamhaeng" label="Ram Khamhaeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q236376" start="12939" end="12952" title="Thai alphabet" label="Thai alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="13066" end="13083" title="Ayutthaya Kingdom" label="Ayutthaya Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059707" start="13190" end="13196" title="Lan Na" label="Lan Na"/>
<link wikidata="Q52028" start="13208" end="13218" title="Chiang Mai" label="Chiang Mai"/>
<link wikidata="Q887732" start="13225" end="13232" title="Mangrai" label="Mangrai"/>
<link wikidata="Q223266" start="13629" end="13635" title="vassal" label="vassal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6580711" start="13870" end="13878" title="Thonburi" label="Thonburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q320097" start="13887" end="13893" title="Taksin" label="Taksin"/>
<link wikidata="Q203370" start="14180" end="14189" title="Phra Nakhon Si Ayutthaya (city)" label="Ayutthaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q55604583" start="14376" end="14383" title="Ayodhya (Ramayana)" label="Ayodhya"/>
<link wikidata="Q718191" start="14457" end="14463" title="Uthong" label="Uthong"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="14565" end="14574" title="Theravada" label="Theravada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076046" start="14717" end="14729" title="Dharmaśāstra" label="Dharmaśāstra"/>
<link wikidata="Q204397" start="14905" end="14926" title="Afonso de Albuquerque" label="Afonso de Albuquerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981637" start="14938" end="14954" title="Duarte Fernandes" label="Duarte Fernandes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542539" start="15266" end="15281" title="George Modelski" label="George Modelski"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625002" start="15323" end="15348" title="List of largest cities throughout history" label="largest city in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q6706732" start="15541" end="15548" title="Luções" label="Luzones"/>
<link wikidata="Q125384" start="15577" end="15582" title="Luzon" label="Luzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185486" start="15615" end="15645" title="Philippines-Thailand relations" label="Philippines-Thailand relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225170" start="15765" end="15784" title="Magellan expedition" label="Magellan expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4401071" start="15799" end="15813" title="Rajahnate of Cebu" label="Cebu Rajahnate"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="15916" end="15929" title="Viceroyalty of New Spain" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6826093" start="15945" end="15953" title="Mexican settlement in the Philippines" label="Mexicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049777" start="16051" end="16066" title="Thai literature" label="Thai literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2864755" start="16068" end="16071" title="Thai art" label="Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q519718" start="16378" end="16393" title="Taungoo Dynasty" label="Taungoo Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="16397" end="16402" title="Burma" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164169" start="16408" end="16437" title="Burmese–Siamese War (1547–49)" label="Burmese–Siamese War (1547–49)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16141404" start="16501" end="16525" title="Burmese–Siamese War (1563–1564)" label="A second siege (1563–64)"/>
<link wikidata="Q470984" start="16538" end="16548" title="Bayinnaung" label="Bayinnaung"/>
<link wikidata="Q728777" start="16561" end="16577" title="Maha Chakkraphat" label="Maha Chakkraphat"/>
<link wikidata="Q800122" start="16630" end="16641" title="Bago, Burma" label="Bago, Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q580075" start="16675" end="16690" title="Mahinthrathirat" label="Mahinthrathirat"/>
<link wikidata="Q854997" start="16802" end="16815" title="bhikkhu" label="Buddhist monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q20991943" start="16829" end="16867" title="Burmese–Siamese War (1568–70)" label="third siege captured Ayutthaya in 1569"/>
<link wikidata="Q888861" start="16888" end="16909" title="Mahathammarachathirat (king of Ayutthaya)" label="Mahathammarachathirat"/>
<link wikidata="Q515704" start="16975" end="16983" title="Naresuan" label="Naresuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q61357727" start="17107" end="17120" title="elephant duel" label="elephant duel"/>
<link wikidata="Q515704" start="17134" end="17142" title="Naresuan" label="Naresuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13018893" start="17169" end="17179" title="Mingyi Swa" label="Mingyi Swa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280714" start="17273" end="17304" title="Burmese–Siamese War (1594–1605)" label="Burmese–Siamese War (1594–1605)"/>
<link wikidata="Q843954" start="17365" end="17383" title="Tanintharyi Region" label="Tanintharyi Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950091" start="17394" end="17401" title="Mottama" label="Mottama"/>
<link wikidata="Q18758" start="17624" end="17639" title="Malay Peninsula" label="Malay Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q47632" start="17645" end="17652" title="Andaman Sea" label="Andaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373706" start="17688" end="17702" title="Siamese–Cambodian War (1591–1594)" label="Angkor kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q503963" start="18058" end="18070" title="Bamar people" label="Bamar people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062422" start="18158" end="18174" title="Konbaung Dynasty" label="Konbaung Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632880" start="18224" end="18239" title="Burmese–Siamese War (1759–60)" label="1750s and 1760s"/>
<link wikidata="Q31307" start="18250" end="18257" title="Burmese–Siamese War (1765–67)" label="in 1767"/>
<link wikidata="Q779323" start="18456" end="18464" title="Ekkathat" label="Ekkathat"/>
<link wikidata="Q13072944" start="18706" end="18720" title="Royal Burmese armed forces" label="Burmese armies"/>
<link wikidata="Q779191" start="18901" end="18916" title="Chinese descent" label="Chinese descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q320097" start="18918" end="18924" title="Taksin" label="Taksin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015899" start="18972" end="18983" title="Chanthaburi" label="Chanthaburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6580711" start="19115" end="19123" title="Thonburi" label="Thonburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13012514" start="19543" end="19561" title="Kromma Muen Thepphiphit" label="Prince Thepphiphit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381309" start="19705" end="19711" title="Phimai" label="Phimai"/>
<link wikidata="Q633036" start="19762" end="19779" title="Nakhon Ratchasima" label="Nakhon Ratchasima"/>
<link wikidata="Q867579" start="19807" end="19818" title="Phitsanulok" label="Phitsanulok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012434" start="19950" end="19962" title="Nakhon Sawan" label="Nakhon Sawan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13025323" start="20094" end="20098" title="Fang (town)" label="Fang"/>
<link wikidata="Q273794" start="20102" end="20120" title="Uttaradit Province" label="Uttaradit Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q637500" start="20325" end="20333" title="Chumphon" label="Chumphon"/>
<link wikidata="Q60469469" start="20335" end="20346" title="Chaophraya Nakhon (Nu)" label="a Pra Palad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012424" start="20378" end="20397" title="Nakhon Si Thammarat" label="Nakhon Si Thammarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q236781" start="21222" end="21229" title="Pattani Province" label="Pattani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408653" start="21360" end="21384" title="Thai Chinese" label="Chinese mass immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q310992" start="21726" end="21743" title="Rama I" label="Chaophraya Chakri"/>
<link wikidata="Q637909" start="21869" end="21880" title="Mon people" label="Mon descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q310992" start="21925" end="21931" title="Rama I" label="Rama I"/>
<link wikidata="Q691928" start="21975" end="21989" title="Chakri dynasty" label="Chakri dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q118850" start="22049" end="22066" title="Chao Phraya River" label="Chao Phraya River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132910" start="22087" end="22106" title="Rattanakosin Island" label="Rattanakosin Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="22162" end="22169" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22257" end="22290" title="Burmese–Siamese wars#Konbaung–Bangkok" label="Burma was defeated and driven out"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="22294" end="22298" title="Siam" label="Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059707" start="22323" end="22329" title="Lan Na" label="Lan Na"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202331" start="22393" end="22414" title="Kingdom of Chiang Mai" label="Kingdom of Chiang Mai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241965" start="22463" end="22478" title="tributary state" label="tributary ruler"/>
<link wikidata="Q691928" start="22486" end="22500" title="Chakri dynasty" label="Chakri monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q310992" start="22522" end="22528" title="Rama I" label="Chakri"/>
<link wikidata="Q320097" start="22604" end="22617" title="Taksin" label="Taksin&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q39087739" start="22635" end="22645" title="Coronation of the Thai monarch" label="coronation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136723" start="22770" end="22778" title="usurpation" label="usurpers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132910" start="22846" end="22865" title="Rattanakosin Island" label="Rattanakosin Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="22883" end="22890" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q118850" start="23014" end="23031" title="Chao Phraya river" label="Chao Phraya river"/>
<link wikidata="Q873769" start="23160" end="23172" title="Grand Palace" label="Grand Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045876" start="23177" end="23190" title="Wat Phra Kaew" label="Wat Phra Kaew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502138" start="23202" end="23216" title="Emerald Buddha" label="Emerald Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q796571" start="23516" end="23525" title="Bodawpaya" label="Bodawpaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256860" start="23630" end="23647" title="Three Pagoda Pass" label="Three Pagoda Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280723" start="23687" end="23709" title="Burmese–Siamese War (1785–86)" label="Nine Armies&amp;#x27; Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059707" start="23763" end="23768" title="Lanna" label="Lanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q843954" start="23911" end="23921" title="Tenasserim Division" label="Tenasserim"/>
<link wikidata="Q210417" start="24098" end="24106" title="Gia Long" label="Gia Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q13012442" start="24500" end="24515" title="Three Seals Law" label="Three Seals Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q215685" start="24680" end="24690" title="Pāli Canon" label="Pāli Canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567623" start="24935" end="24943" title="Ramakian" label="Ramakian"/>
<link wikidata="Q310992" start="25080" end="25086" title="Rama I" label="Rama I"/>
<link wikidata="Q319675" start="25519" end="25526" title="Rama II" label="Rama II"/>
<link wikidata="Q319669" start="25761" end="25769" title="Rama III" label="Rama III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209915" start="26123" end="26135" title="Sunthorn Phu" label="Sunthorn Phu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581559" start="26162" end="26177" title="Phra Aphai Mani" label="Phra Aphai Mani"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26189" end="26201" title="Narin Dhibet" label="Narin Dhibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q188947" start="26953" end="26958" title="Kedah" label="Kedah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352013" start="27167" end="27180" title="John Crawfurd" label="John Crawfurd"/>
<link wikidata="Q13023380" start="27308" end="27321" title="Robert Hunter (trader)" label="Robert Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q660581" start="27400" end="27425" title="Chang and Eng Bunker" label="&amp;quot;Siamese twins&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677653" start="27504" end="27516" title="Jacob Tomlin" label="Jacob Tomlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q67221" start="27518" end="27531" title="Karl Gützlaff" label="Karl Gützlaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158990" start="27533" end="27550" title="Dan Beach Bradley" label="Dan Beach Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355913" start="27555" end="27578" title="Jean-Baptiste Pallegoix" label="Jean-Baptiste Pallegoix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288021" start="27656" end="27668" title="Henry Burney" label="Henry Burney"/>
<link wikidata="Q29122" start="27840" end="27863" title="First Anglo-Burmese War" label="First Anglo-Burmese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6407091" start="27914" end="27939" title="Lao rebellion (1826–28)" label="Anouvong&amp;#x27;s Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q560843" start="27987" end="27995" title="Anouvong" label="Anouvong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141632" start="28003" end="28023" title="Kingdom of Vientiane" label="Kingdom of Vientiane"/>
<link wikidata="Q381897" start="28217" end="28221" title="Isan" label="Isan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059910" start="28330" end="28337" title="Wat Pho" label="Wat Pho"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918" start="28380" end="28390" title="university" label="university"/>
<link wikidata="Q312849" start="29082" end="29089" title="Mongkut" label="Mongkut"/>
<link wikidata="Q158861" start="29352" end="29365" title="Chulalongkorn" label="Chulalongkorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477699" start="29715" end="29736" title="Wat Bowonniwet Vihara" label="Wat Bowonniwet Vihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="30085" end="30090" title="Myanmar" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="30110" end="30124" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726411" start="30238" end="30253" title="Prisdang" label="Prince Prisdang"/>
<link wikidata="Q158861" start="30331" end="30344" title="Chulalongkorn" label="Chulalongkorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q332508" start="31189" end="31201" title="John Bowring" label="John Bowring"/>
<link wikidata="Q745728" start="31413" end="31427" title="Bowring Treaty" label="Bowring Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="31751" end="31765" title="Western powers" label="Western powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="31811" end="31818" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="31833" end="31848" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q71203" start="31883" end="31914" title="Friedrich Albrecht zu Eulenburg" label="Friedrich Albrecht zu Eulenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q156938" start="32331" end="32339" title="teak tree" label="teakwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165702" start="32552" end="32560" title="State Railway of Thailand" label="railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q118850" start="32679" end="32697" title="Chao Phraya River" label="Lower Menam Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q158861" start="32790" end="32803" title="Chulalongkorn" label="Chulalongkorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q234244" start="32953" end="32967" title="Anna Leonowens" label="Anna Leonowens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6431690" start="33032" end="33046" title="The King and I" label="The King and I"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918289" start="33125" end="33157" title="Somdet Chaophraya Sri Suriwongse" label="Somdet Chaophraya Sri Suriwongse"/>
<link wikidata="Q179023" start="33524" end="33530" title="French colonial empire" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="33535" end="33548" title="British Empire" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q18758" start="33679" end="33685" title="Malay Peninsula" label="Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935371" start="33727" end="33740" title="Cochinchina Campaign" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="33791" end="33799" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q843915" start="33821" end="33837" title="extraterritorial" label="extraterritorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q645991" start="33904" end="33921" title="Thai Canal" label="Kra Isthmus Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q209169" start="33979" end="33999" title="Ferdinand de Lesseps" label="Ferdinand de Lesseps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062422" start="34049" end="34070" title="Konbaung Dynasty" label="Kongbaung-ruled Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209946" start="34078" end="34101" title="Third Anglo-Burmese War" label="Third Anglo-Burmese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924112" start="34133" end="34148" title="Paknam incident" label="Paknam incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359846" start="34302" end="34323" title="Franco-Siamese crisis" label="Franco-Siamese crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41179" start="34448" end="34454" title="Mekong" label="Mekong"/>
<link wikidata="Q185682" start="34583" end="34601" title="French Indochina" label="Indo-Chinese Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q587252" start="34729" end="34741" title="buffer state" label="buffer state"/>
<link wikidata="Q464399" start="35258" end="35274" title="Entente Cordiale" label="Entente Cordiale"/>
<link wikidata="Q185682" start="35457" end="35473" title="French Indochina" label="French Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376315" start="35528" end="35535" title="Colonial Burma" label="Burmese"/>
<link wikidata="Q843954" start="35536" end="35546" title="Tenasserim Division" label="Tenasserim"/>
<link wikidata="Q593682" start="35596" end="35615" title="sphere of influence" label="sphere of influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q118850" start="35641" end="35646" title="Menam" label="Menam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658466" start="35830" end="35858" title="Anglo-Siamese Treaty of 1909" label="Anglo-Siamese Treaty of 1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q871091" start="35902" end="35916" title="British Malaya" label="British Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q185944" start="35977" end="35985" title="Kelantan" label="Kelantan"/>
<link wikidata="Q189701" start="35987" end="35997" title="Terengganu" label="Terengganu"/>
<link wikidata="Q188947" start="35999" end="36004" title="Kedah" label="Kedah"/>
<link wikidata="Q213467" start="36009" end="36015" title="Perlis" label="Perlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="36019" end="36032" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q188947" start="36117" end="36122" title="Kedah" label="Kedah"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="36219" end="36227" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13021956" start="36233" end="36237" title="Franco-Siamese treaty of 1904" label="1904"/>
<link wikidata="Q131300664" start="36239" end="36243" title="Franco-Siamese treaty of 1907" label="1907"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658466" start="36248" end="36252" title="Anglo-Siamese treaty of 1909" label="1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q161389" start="36468" end="36478" title="Vajiravudh" label="Vajiravudh"/>
<link wikidata="Q575618" start="36528" end="36560" title="Royal Military Academy Sandhurst" label="Royal Military Academy Sandhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="36565" end="36585" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q161389" start="37033" end="37043" title="Vajiravudh" label="Vajiravudh"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="37083" end="37103" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q12138" start="37495" end="37513" title="Gregorian Calendar" label="Gregorian Calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q282955" start="37576" end="37588" title="Thai name" label="Family names"/>
<link wikidata="Q333015" start="37699" end="37712" title="Ius sanguinis" label="Ius sanguinis"/>
<link wikidata="Q855730" start="37744" end="37768" title="Chulalongkorn University" label="Chulalongkorn University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080794" start="37785" end="37801" title="school education" label="school education"/>
<link wikidata="Q56707181" start="37998" end="38014" title="Thai nationalism" label="Thai nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8000830" start="38710" end="38726" title="Wild Tiger Corps" label="Wild Tiger Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q872181" start="38745" end="38759" title="Scout movement" label="Scout movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6407111" start="38773" end="38786" title="Palace Revolt of 1912" label="Palace revolt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38950" end="38963" title="Ancien Régime#Terminology" label="ancien régime"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="39375" end="39388" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="39393" end="39408" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q199820" start="39537" end="39564" title="Versailles Peace Conference" label="Versailles Peace Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q123032" start="39587" end="39597" title="Devawongse" label="Devawongse"/>
<link wikidata="Q864737" start="39664" end="39680" title="unequal treaties" label="unequal treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q313124" start="40407" end="40418" title="Prajadhipok" label="Prajadhipok"/>
<link wikidata="Q843915" start="40443" end="40459" title="extraterritorial" label="extraterritorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120252" start="40902" end="40920" title="Siamese revolution of 1932" label="Siamese Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127720" start="40969" end="40983" title="Khana Ratsadon" label="Khana Ratsadon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="41163" end="41186" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q983541" start="41361" end="41387" title="Phraya Manopakorn Nititada" label="Phraya Manopakorn Nititada"/>
<link wikidata="Q12376089" start="41420" end="41434" title="Prime Minister of Thailand" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368318" start="41765" end="41782" title="National Assembly (Thailand)" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q120012437" start="41847" end="41869" title="nation, religion, king" label="nation, religion, king"/>
<link wikidata="Q714934" start="42142" end="42158" title="Pridi Phanomyong" label="Pridi Phanomyong"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="42399" end="42414" title="nationalisation" label="nationalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="42428" end="42445" title="industrialization" label="industrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q891723" start="42454" end="42470" title="Public Company" label="public companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274205" start="42472" end="42492" title="Universal health care" label="universal healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q156223" start="42497" end="42504" title="pension" label="pension"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562525" start="42643" end="42661" title="Phraya Songsuradet" label="Phraya Songsuradet"/>
<link wikidata="Q731982" start="42705" end="42724" title="Prayun Phamonmontri" label="Prayun Phamonmontri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359816" start="43114" end="43141" title="Communist Party of Thailand" label="Communist Party of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119303" start="43322" end="43338" title="Siamese coup d&amp;#x27;état of 1933" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q301290" start="43406" end="43419" title="Phot Phahonyothin" label="Phraya Phahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209733" start="43848" end="43868" title="Thammasat University" label="Thammasat University"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="44083" end="44095" title="totalitarian" label="totalitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152" start="44166" end="44179" title="Kemal Atatürk" label="Kemal Atatürk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951385" start="44377" end="44396" title="Boworadet Rebellion" label="Boworadet Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q895485" start="44452" end="44468" title="Prince Boworadet" label="Prince Boworadet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046755" start="44574" end="44593" title="Don Mueang International Airport" label="Don Muang Aerodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q185682" start="44760" end="44776" title="French Indochina" label="French Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q248893" start="44993" end="45007" title="Ananda Mahidol" label="Ananda Mahidol"/>
<link wikidata="Q807" start="45067" end="45075" title="Lausanne" label="Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q152777" start="45090" end="45111" title="Plaek Phibunsongkhram" label="Plaek Phibunsongkhram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155688" start="45317" end="45344" title="Thesaban" label="the local government system"/>
<link wikidata="Q177266" start="45636" end="45646" title="militarism" label="militarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="45652" end="45667" title="totalitarianism" label="totalitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q192914" start="45689" end="45705" title="personality cult" label="personality cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="45751" end="45767" title="Battle of France" label="Battle of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q185682" start="45831" end="45847" title="French Indochina" label="French Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q780845" start="45911" end="45926" title="Franco-Thai War" label="Franco-Thai War"/>
<link wikidata="Q702579" start="45974" end="45992" title="battle of Ko Chang" label="battle of Ko Chang"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="46039" end="46054" title="Empire of Japan" label="Empire of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="46236" end="46240" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="46245" end="46253" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="46530" end="46534" title="Siam" label="Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="46538" end="46546" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q65120597" start="46634" end="46654" title="Pan-Thaiism" label="Pan-Thai nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q740417" start="46695" end="46699" title="Shan people" label="Shan"/>
<link wikidata="Q383946" start="46705" end="46708" title="Lao people" label="Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q703353" start="46719" end="46730" title="Tai peoples" label="Tai peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q185963" start="46986" end="46996" title="Country neutrality (international relations)" label="neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200928" start="47007" end="47032" title="Japanese invasion of Thailand" label="Japanese invaded Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="47075" end="47097" title="attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q152777" start="47180" end="47186" title="Phibun" label="Phibun"/>
<link wikidata="Q696664" start="47504" end="47510" title="Malayan Campaign" label="Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47522" end="47529" title="Bicycle infantry#World Wars" label="Bicycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q193619" start="47659" end="47671" title="Union of South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47676" end="47687" title="New Zealand#Foreign relations and military" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q714934" start="47832" end="47848" title="Pridi Phanomyong" label="Pridi Phanomyong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280736" start="47919" end="47933" title="Direk Jayanama" label="Direk Jayanama"/>
<link wikidata="Q456847" start="48298" end="48308" title="Shan State" label="Shan State"/>
<link wikidata="Q652845" start="48313" end="48324" title="Kayah State" label="Kayah State"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181127" start="48381" end="48392" title="Phayap Army" label="Phayap Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027111" start="48682" end="48690" title="Kengtung" label="Kengtung"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="48805" end="48811" title="Yunnan" label="Yunnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="48926" end="48931" title="Burma" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q708957" start="48946" end="48955" title="Seri Thai" label="Seri Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q708957" start="48957" end="48975" title="Free Thai Movement" label="Free Thai Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q714042" start="49041" end="49052" title="Seni Pramoj" label="Seni Pramoj"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="49077" end="49087" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="49137" end="49143" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q714934" start="49144" end="49149" title="Pridi" label="Pridi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247114" start="49238" end="49256" title="Chula Chakrabongse" label="Chula Chakrabongse"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="49470" end="49488" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q240520" start="49657" end="49667" title="Phetchabun Province" label="Phetchabun"/>
<link wikidata="Q337627" start="49751" end="49759" title="Saraburi Province" label="Saraburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="49965" end="49974" title="war crime" label="war crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q696664" start="50283" end="50289" title="Malayan Campaign" label="Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q221519" start="50294" end="50299" title="Burma Campaign" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534514" start="50665" end="50687" title="Geoffrey Charles Evans" label="Geoffrey Charles Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644067" start="50695" end="50723" title="7th Indian Infantry Division" label="7th Indian Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q271995" start="50747" end="50765" title="Edwina Mountbatten" label="Edwina Mountbatten"/>
<link wikidata="Q714042" start="50784" end="50795" title="Seni Pramoj" label="Seni Pramoj"/>
<link wikidata="Q780845" start="51326" end="51341" title="Franco-Thai War" label="Franco-Thai War"/>
<link wikidata="Q13014104" start="51358" end="51382" title="Phibunsongkhram Province" label="Phibunsongkhram Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q13014099" start="51384" end="51410" title="Nakhon Champassak Province" label="Nakhon Champassak Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q15647332" start="51412" end="51432" title="Phra Tabong Province" label="Phra Tabong Province"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51434" end="51451" title="Koh Kong Province (1941)" label="Koh Kong Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q13014113" start="51456" end="51474" title="Lan Chang Province" label="Lan Chang Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q16208241" start="51994" end="52017" title="Anglo-Thai Peace Treaty" label="Anglo-Thai Peace Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q18712772" start="52055" end="52083" title="Australian–Thai Peace Treaty" label="Australian–Thai Peace Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="52150" end="52164" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="52237" end="52249" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="52739" end="52753" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q248893" start="52870" end="52884" title="Ananda Mahidol" label="Ananda Mahidol"/>
<link wikidata="Q855252" start="53248" end="53266" title="Bhumibol Adulyadej" label="Bhumibol Adulyadej"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119306" start="53504" end="53516" title="1947 Thai coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="seized power"/>
<link wikidata="Q13019387" start="53579" end="53583" title="1948 Thai coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="army"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="53706" end="53713" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="53732" end="53735" title="China" label="PRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="53800" end="53808" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q172640" start="53856" end="53869" title="North Vietnam" label="North Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084948" start="54257" end="54271" title="Phao Sriyanond" label="Phao Sriyanond"/>
<link wikidata="Q6407100" start="54506" end="54520" title="Manhattan Coup" label="Manhattan Coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709257" start="54821" end="54830" title="Thailand in the Korean War" label="took part"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="54838" end="54848" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359816" start="54850" end="54877" title="Communist Party of Thailand" label="Communist Party of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q975621" start="55164" end="55178" title="Sarit Thanarat" label="Sarit Thanarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q439990" start="55191" end="55210" title="Thanom Kittikachorn" label="Thanom Kittikachorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q277252" start="57017" end="57022" title="Southeast Asia Treaty Organization" label="SEATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374907" start="57391" end="57399" title="Royal Thai Air Force Bases" label="airbases"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359816" start="57521" end="57548" title="Communist Party of Thailand" label="Communist Party of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299161" start="57892" end="57922" title="Udon Royal Thai Air Force Base" label="Udon Royal Thai Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q53744" start="57954" end="57963" title="defoliant" label="defoliant"/>
<link wikidata="Q485875" start="58042" end="58062" title="Operation Ranch Hand" label="Operation Ranch Hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666491" start="58286" end="58302" title="Hua Hin District" label="Hua Hin District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359816" start="59372" end="59399" title="Communist Party of Thailand" label="Communist Party of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59658" end="59678" title="Thai Patriotic Front" label="Thai Patriotic Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184856" start="60410" end="60420" title="drug abuse" label="drug abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q36633" start="60425" end="60437" title="prostitute" label="prostitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q12660" start="60471" end="60490" title="Prostitution in Thailand" label="Rest and Recreation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185548" start="63376" end="63399" title="Ramkhamhaeng University" label="Ramkhamhaeng University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186076" start="63568" end="63586" title="Democracy Monument" label="Democracy Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q6667199" start="64246" end="64263" title="Seksan Prasertkul" label="Seksan Prasertkul"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64719" end="64733" title="Rajavithi Road" label="Rajavithi Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398390" start="64880" end="64900" title="Ratchadamnoen Avenue" label="Ratchadamnoen Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209733" start="64931" end="64951" title="Thammasat University" label="Thammasat University"/>
<link wikidata="Q855252" start="65112" end="65120" title="Bhumibol" label="Bhumibol"/>
<link wikidata="Q61053357" start="65141" end="65158" title="Chitralada Palace" label="Chitralada Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674984" start="65298" end="65309" title="Kris Sivara" label="Kris Sivara"/>
<link wikidata="Q974619" start="65798" end="65815" title="Sanya Dharmasakti" label="Sanya Dharmasakti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907348" start="66049" end="66078" title="Thammasat University massacre" label="Thammasat University massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q379827" start="66265" end="66282" title="Prem Tinsulanonda" label="Prem Tinsulanonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q25424534" start="66556" end="66569" title="Military junta" label="military rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907348" start="66596" end="66619" title="6 October 1976 Massacre" label="6 October 1976 Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q379827" start="66666" end="66683" title="Prem Tinsulanonda" label="Prem Tinsulanonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6585266" start="66854" end="66880" title="1991 Thai coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1991 Thai coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542181" start="66983" end="66996" title="Thai Rak Thai" label="Thai Rak Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q164373" start="67026" end="67044" title="Thaksin Shinawatra" label="Thaksin Shinawatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q717617" start="67273" end="67291" title="Sondhi Limthongkul" label="Sondhi Limthongkul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103943" start="67469" end="67505" title="People&amp;#x27;s Alliance for Democracy" label="People&amp;#x27;s Alliance for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q334722" start="67715" end="67735" title="Sonthi Boonyaratglin" label="Sonthi Boonyaratglin"/>
<link wikidata="Q860423" start="67759" end="67808" title="September 2006 Thailand military coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="September 2006 Thailand military coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186248" start="67869" end="67883" title="Democrat Party (Thailand)" label="Democrat Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q243623" start="67963" end="67979" title="Samak Sundaravej" label="Samak Sundaravej"/>
<link wikidata="Q112051" start="67987" end="68012" title="People&amp;#x27;s Power Party (Thailand)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Power Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q25424534" start="68114" end="68128" title="military junta" label="military junta"/>
<link wikidata="Q164373" start="68165" end="68183" title="Thaksin Shinawatra" label="Thaksin Shinawatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q49896" start="68210" end="68215" title="Military dictatorship" label="junta"/>
<link wikidata="Q715625" start="68356" end="68367" title="martial law" label="martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q298079" start="68432" end="68449" title="Surayud Chulanont" label="Surayud Chulanont"/>
<link wikidata="Q4606454" start="68636" end="68656" title="2006 Interim Constitution of Thailand" label="interim constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929104" start="69202" end="69228" title="2007 Constitution of Thailand" label="the permanent constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4607020" start="69370" end="69388" title="Party dissolution charges in Thai politics, 2006" label="30 May dissolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542181" start="69396" end="69409" title="Thai Rak Thai" label="Thai Rak Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232472" start="69506" end="69533" title="2007 Thai general election" label="democratic general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q112051" start="69599" end="69635" title="People&amp;#x27;s Power Party (Thailand)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Power Party (Thailand)"/>
<link wikidata="Q243623" start="69650" end="69666" title="Samak Sundaravej" label="Samak Sundaravej"/>
<link wikidata="Q593273" start="69962" end="69994" title="Constitutional Court of Thailand" label="Constitutional Court of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q298088" start="70107" end="70124" title="Somchai Wongsawat" label="Somchai Wongsawat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103943" start="70241" end="70277" title="People&amp;#x27;s Alliance for Democracy" label="People&amp;#x27;s Alliance for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186248" start="71284" end="71298" title="Democrat Party (Thailand)" label="Democrat Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q174267" start="71435" end="71452" title="Abhisit Vejjajiva" label="Abhisit Vejjajiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q12376089" start="71492" end="71506" title="Prime Minister of Thailand" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322759" start="71590" end="71645" title="National United Front of Democracy Against Dictatorship" label="National United Front of Democracy Against Dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q48968147" start="71661" end="71671" title="Red Shirts (Thailand)" label="Red Shirts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476073" start="71710" end="71733" title="Fourth East Asia Summit" label="Fourth East Asia Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q16628" start="71910" end="71920" title="Wen Jiabao" label="Wen Jiabao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059090" start="71972" end="71991" title="2010 Thai political protests" label="Red Shirts protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142913" start="72911" end="72926" title="Pheu Thai Party" label="Pheu Thai Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q57670" start="72935" end="72954" title="Yingluck Shinawatra" label="Yingluck Shinawatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q372334" start="73008" end="73024" title="2011 Thai general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q914226" start="73058" end="73082" title="House of Representatives of Thailand" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369912" start="73612" end="73629" title="Suthep Thaugsuban" label="Suthep Thaugsuban"/>
<link wikidata="Q15915674" start="74141" end="74182" title="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Reform Committee" label="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Reform Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021134" start="75157" end="75196" title="2014 Thai general election" label="the scheduled election in February 2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108126" start="76250" end="76267" title="Prayut Chan-o-cha" label="Prayut Chan-o-cha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368318" start="76743" end="76772" title="National Assembly of Thailand" label="National Assembly of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108126" start="76805" end="76822" title="Prayut Chan-o-cha" label="Prayut Chan-o-cha"/>
<link wikidata="Q16919521" start="77195" end="77200" title="National Council for Peace and Order" label="junta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436685" start="77730" end="77755" title="Fascism in Europe" label="fascist regimes in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q24908725" start="78038" end="78048" title="2016 Thai constitutional referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4385323" start="78678" end="78694" title="Siriraj Hospital" label="Siriraj Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q379827" start="78793" end="78810" title="Prem Tinsulanonda" label="Prem Tinsulanonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q548733" start="78896" end="78910" title="Vajiralongkorn" label="Vajiralongkorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q691928" start="78974" end="78988" title="Chakri dynasty" label="Chakri dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q16937892" start="79512" end="79521" title="2019 Thai general election" label="elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q50549434" start="79562" end="79576" title="Future Forward Party" label="Future Forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q593273" start="79677" end="79696" title="Constitutional Court of Thailand" label="Constitutional Cour"/>
<link wikidata="Q55439404" start="79747" end="79776" title="Thanathorn Juangroongruangkit" label="Thanathorn Juangroongruangkit"/>
<link wikidata="Q593273" start="79834" end="79854" title="Constitutional Court of Thailand" label="Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q87647572" start="80357" end="80375" title="Move Forward Party" label="Move Forward Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142913" start="80399" end="80414" title="Pheu Thai Party" label="Pheu Thai Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q84081085" start="80424" end="80440" title="2023 Thai general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q85998709" start="80630" end="80647" title="Pita Limjaroenrat" label="Pita Limjaroenrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q118213697" start="81077" end="81093" title="Srettha Thavisin" label="Srettha Thavisin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268836" start="81307" end="81326" title="Dhamma Society Fund" label="Dhamma Society Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q5775209" start="81329" end="81347" title="History of Bangkok" label="History of Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227514" start="81350" end="81375" title="History of Southeast Asia" label="History of Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060225" start="81378" end="81393" title="History of Isan" label="History of Isan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808661" start="81396" end="81432" title="History of the Thai Forest Tradition" label="History of the Thai Forest Tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q889791" start="81435" end="81456" title="List of Thai monarchs" label="List of Thai monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q39088421" start="81460" end="81486" title="Family tree of Thai monarchs" label="Monarchs&amp;#x27; family tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147625" start="81489" end="81524" title="List of prime ministers of Thailand" label="List of prime ministers of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166096" start="81527" end="81547" title="Peopling of Thailand" label="Peopling of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154151" start="81550" end="81570" title="Politics of Thailand" label="Politics of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q27696236" start="81573" end="81617" title="Reactions to the death of Bhumibol Adulyadej" label="Reactions to the death of Bhumibol Adulyadej"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280705" start="81620" end="81632" title="Siam Society" label="Siam Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q6585252" start="81635" end="81657" title="Thai cultural mandates" label="Thai cultural mandates"/>
<link wikidata="Q174028" start="81660" end="81672" title="Thai studies" label="Thai studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849805" start="81675" end="81687" title="Thaification" label="Thaification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094356" start="81690" end="81715" title="South Thailand insurgency" label="South Thailand insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823132" start="81934" end="81975" title="Library of Congress Country Studies" label="Country Study for the Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704926" start="82293" end="82308" title="BBC News Online" label="BBC News Online"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30130" wikidata="Q1546292" url="?curid=30130" title="Geography of Thailand">
<text>Thailand is in the middle of mainland Southeast Asia. It has a total size of which is the 50th largest in the world. The land border is long with Myanmar, Cambodia, Laos and Malaysia. The nation&#x27;s axial position influenced many aspects of Thailand&#x27;s society and culture. It controls the only land route from Asia to Malaysia and Singapore. It has an exclusive economic zone of .

==Physical geography==
A fertile floodplain and tropical monsoon climate, ideally suited to wet-rice (&quot;tham na&quot;) cultivation, attracted settlers to this central area in preference to the marginal uplands and the highlands of the northern region or the Khorat Plateau to the northeast.

By the 11th century AD, a number of loosely connected rice-growing and trading states flourished in the upper Chao Phraya Valley. They broke free from domination of the Khmer Empire, but from the middle of the 14th century gradually came under the control of the Ayutthaya Kingdom at the southern extremity of the floodplain.

Successive capitals, built at various points along the river, became centers of great Thai kingdoms based on rice cultivation and foreign commerce. Unlike the neighboring Khmer and Burmese, the Thai continued to look outward across the Gulf of Thailand and the Andaman Sea toward foreign ports of trade.

When European colonisation of Southeast Asia brought a new phase in Southeast Asian commerce in the late-1800s, Thailand (known then as Siam) was able to maintain its independence as a buffer zone between British-controlled Burma to the west and French-dominated Indochina to the east, but losing over 50% of its territory in the process. Most of the areas lost contained a non-Thai population (Khmer, Lao or Shan). The Thai-speaking heartland remains intact.

==Boundaries==

===Land boundaries===
*Total: 
*Border countries: Myanmar , Cambodia , Laos , Malaysia 

===Coastline===
*Total: 

===Maritime claims===
*Territorial sea: 
*Exclusive economic zone: and 
*Continental shelf: depth or to the depth of exploitation

==Topography and drainage==

The most conspicuous features of Thailand&#x27;s terrain are high mountains, a central plain, and an upland plateau. Mountains cover much of northern Thailand and extend along the Myanmar border down through the Kra Isthmus and the Malay Peninsula. The central plain is a lowland area drained by the Chao Phraya River and its tributaries, the country&#x27;s principal river system, which feeds into the delta at the head of the Bay of Bangkok. The Chao Phraya system drains about one-third of the nation&#x27;s territory. In the northeastern part of the country the Khorat Plateau, a region of gently rolling low hills and shallow lakes, drains into the Mekong River via the Mun River. The Mekong system empties into the South China Sea and includes a series of canals and dams.

Together, the Chao Phraya and Mekong systems sustain Thailand&#x27;s agricultural economy by supporting wet-rice cultivation and providing waterways for the transport of goods and people. In contrast, the distinguishing natural features of peninsular Thailand are long coastlines, offshore islands, and mangrove swamps. A recent global remote sensing analysis suggested that there were of tidal flats in Thailand, making it the 45th ranked country in terms of tidal flat extent.

==Area==
:*Total: 
:**country rank in the world: &quot;50th&quot;
:*Land: 
:*Water: 

Thailand uses a unit of land area called the &quot;rai&quot;, which is .
;Area – comparative: 
:*Australia comparative: slightly less than the size of New South Wales
:*Canada comparative: approximately the size of Quebec
:*United States comparative: slightly more than twice the size of Oregon
:*United Kingdom comparative: approximately times the size of the United Kingdom
:*EU comparative: slightly larger than Spain

==Extreme points==

Extreme points of the mainland
*Northernmost point: Myanmar border, Mae Sai District, Chiang Rai Province, at 
*Southernmost point: Malaysian border, Betong District, Yala Province, at 
*Easternmost point: Laos border, Khong Chiam District, Ubon Ratchathani Province, at 
*Westernmost point: Myanmar border, Mae Sariang District, Mae Hong Son Province, at 

===Elevation extremes===
*Highest point: Doi Inthanon, , at 
*Lowest point: Gulf of Thailand, 0 metres - sea level

==Regions==
The National Research Council divides Thailand into six geographical regions, based on natural features including landforms and drainage, as well as human cultural patterns. They are: 

* The North Region
* The Northeast Region
* The Central Region
* The East Region
* The West Region 
* The South Region 

Although Bangkok geographically is part of the central plain, as the capital and largest city this metropolitan area may be considered in other respects a separate region. 

Each of the six geographical regions differs from the others in population, basic resources, natural features, and level of social and economic development. The diversity of the regions is in fact the most pronounced attribute of Thailand&#x27;s physical setting.

===Northern Thailand===
Northern Thailand is a mountainous area. Parallel mountain ranges extend from the Daen Lao Range (ทิวเขาแดนลาว), in the southern region of the Shan Hills, in a north-south direction, the Dawna Range (ทิวเขาดอยมอนกุจู) forming the western border of Thailand between Mae Hong Son and the Salween River, the Thanon Thong Chai Range (เทือกเขาถนนธงชัย), the Khun Tan Range (ดอยขุนตาน), the Phi Pan Nam Range (ทิวเขาผีปันน้ำ), as well as the western part of the Luang Prabang Range (ทิวเขาหลวงพระบาง).

These high mountains are incised by steep river valleys and upland areas that border the central plain. Most rivers, including the Nan, Ping, Wang, and Yom, unite in the lowlands of the lower-north region and the upper-central region. The Ping River and the Nan River unite to form the Chao Phraya River. The northeastern part is drained by rivers flowing into the Mekong basin, like the Kok and Ing.

Traditionally, these natural features made possible several different types of agriculture, including wet-rice farming in the valleys and shifting cultivation in the uplands. The forested mountains also promoted a spirit of regional independence. Forests, including stands of teak and other economically useful hardwoods that once dominated the north and parts of the northeast, had diminished by the 1980s to 130,000 km2. In 1961 they covered 56% of the country, but by the mid-1980s forestland had been reduced to less than 30% of Thailand&#x27;s total area.

===Northeastern Thailand===

The northeast, with its poor soils, also is not favoured agriculturally. However, sticky rice, the staple food of the region, which requires flooded, poorly drained paddy fields, thrives and where fields can be flooded from nearby streams, rivers and ponds, often two harvests are possible each year. Cash crops such as sugar cane and manioc are cultivated on a vast scale, and to a lesser extent, rubber. Silk production is an important cottage industry and contributes significantly to the economy.

The region consists mainly of the dry Khorat Plateau which in some parts is extremely flat, and a few low but rugged and rocky hills, the Phu Phan Mountains. The short monsoon season brings heavy flooding in the river valleys. Unlike the more fertile areas of Thailand, the northeast has a long dry season, and much of the land is covered by sparse grasses. Mountains ring the plateau on the west and the south, and the Mekong delineates much of the northern and eastern rim. Some varieties of traditional medicinal herbs, particularly of the Genus Curcuma, family Zingiberaceae, are indigenous to the region.

===Central Thailand===
The &quot;heartland&quot;, central Thailand, is a natural self-contained basin often termed &quot;the rice bowl of Asia&quot;. The complex irrigation system developed for wet-rice agriculture in this region provided the necessary economic support to sustain the development of the Thai state from the 13th century Sukhothai Kingdom to contemporary Bangkok. 

Here the rather flat unchanging landscape facilitated inland water and road transport. The fertile area was able to sustain a dense population, 422 people per square kilometre in 1987, compared with an average of 98 for the country as a whole. The terrain of the region is dominated by the Chao Phraya and its tributaries and by the cultivated paddy fields. 

Metropolitan Bangkok, the focal point of trade, transport, and industrial activity, is on the southern edge of the region at the head of the Gulf of Thailand and includes part of the Chao Phraya delta.

===Eastern Thailand===
Eastern Thailand lies between the Sankamphaeng Range, which forms the border of the northeastern plateau to the north, and the Gulf of Thailand to the south. The western end of the Cardamom Mountains, known in Thailand as &quot;Thio Khao Banthat&quot;, extends into eastern Thailand. The geography of the region is characterised by short mountain ranges alternating with small basins of short rivers which drain into the Gulf of Thailand.

Fruit is a major component of agriculture in the area, and tourism plays a strong part in the economy. The region&#x27;s coastal location has helped promote the Eastern Seaboard industrial development, a major factor in the economy of the region.

===Western Thailand===
Thailand&#x27;s long mountainous border with Myanmar continues south from the north into western Thailand with the Tenasserim Hills, known in Thailand as &quot;Thio Khao Tanaosi&quot; (เทือกเขาตะนาวศรี). The geography of the western region of Thailand, like the north, is characterised by high mountains and steep river valleys.

Western Thailand hosts much of Thailand&#x27;s less-disturbed forest areas. Water and minerals are also important natural resources. The region is home to many of the country&#x27;s major dams, and mining is an important industry in the area.

===Southern Thailand===
Southern Thailand, part of a narrow peninsula, is distinctive in climate, terrain, and resources. Its economy is based on tourism, and palm oil and rubber plantations. In Krabi Province, for example, palm plantations occupy 980,000 rai (1,568 km2), or 52% of the province&#x27;s farmland. Other sources of income include coconut plantations, tin mining. 

Rolling and mountainous terrain and the absence of large rivers are conspicuous features of the south. North-south mountain barriers and impenetrable tropical forest caused the early isolation and separate political development of this region. 

International access through the Andaman Sea and the Gulf of Thailand made the south a crossroads for both Theravada Buddhism, centered at Nakhon Si Thammarat, and Islam, especially in the former Pattani Kingdom on the border with Malaysia.

===Provinces===

Thailand&#x27;s regions are divided politically into a total of 76 provinces plus Bangkok, which is a special administrative area.

==Climate==


Thailand&#x27;s climate is influenced by seasonal monsoon winds (the southwest and northeast monsoons). 

Most of Thailand has a &quot;tropical wet and dry or savanna climate&quot; type (Köppen&#x27;s Tropical savanna climate). The majority of the south as well as the extreme east have a tropical monsoon climate. Parts of the south also have a tropical rainforest climate.

Thailand has three seasons:

* The rainy or southwest monsoon season (mid-May to mid-October) prevails over most of the country. Moist air moves from the Indian Ocean to Thailand, causing abundant rain over most of the country. August and September are the wettest period of the year. This can occasionally lead to floods. In addition to rainfall caused by the southwest monsoon, the Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) and tropical cyclones also contribute to producing heavy rainfall during the rainy season. Dry spells commonly occur for one to two weeks from June to early-July. This is due to the northward movement of the ITCZ to southern China. 

*The northeast monsoon, active from October till February, brings cold and dry air from China over most of Thailand. In southern Thailand, the northeast monsoon brings mild weather and abundant rainfall on the eastern coast of that region. However most of Thailand experiences dry weather and mild temperatures during this season. An exception is the southern part of Thailand which receives abundant rainfall, particularly during October to November. 

*Summer, or the pre–monsoon season, runs from mid-February until mid-May and brings warmer weather.

Due to their inland location and latitude, the north, northeast, central, and eastern parts of Thailand experience a long period of warm weather. During the hottest time of the year (March to May), temperatures usually reach up to or more, with the exception of coastal areas where sea breezes moderate afternoon temperatures. In contrast, outbreaks of cold air from China can bring colder temperatures; in some areas (particularly the north and northeast) close to or below . Southern Thailand has mild weather year-round, with less diurnal and seasonal variations in temperatures, due to maritime influences.

Most of the country receives a mean annual rainfall of . However, certain areas on the windward sides of mountains such as Ranong Province on the west coast of southern Thailand and eastern parts of Trat Province receive more than of rainfall per year. The driest areas are the leeward sides of the central valleys and the northernmost portion of south Thailand, where mean annual rainfall is less than . 

Most of Thailand (north, northeast, central, and east) has dry weather during the northeast monsoon and abundant rainfall during the southwest monsoon. In the southern parts of Thailand, abundant rainfall occurs in both the northeast and southwest monsoon seasons, with a peak in September for the western coast and a peak in November–January on the eastern coast.


==Resources and land use==

===Natural resources===
* Tin, rubber, natural gas, tungsten, tantalum, timber, lead, fish, gypsum, lignite, fluorite, arable land.

===Land use===

*Arable land: 30.7%
**Permanent crops: 8.8%
**Other: 60.5% (2011)

===Land ownership===
Pattamawadee Pochanukul, a lecturer from the Faculty of Economics at Thammasat University, estimates that about 59% of all arable land in Thailand belongs to the state. the Treasury Department owned 176,467 plots of land, consisting of about 9.9 million rai (15,769.6 km2). The Ministry of Defence owns about 2.6 million rai (4,230 km2) or about 21.2% of total public land. Information from the Office of the National Anti-Corruption Commission (NACC) shows that members of the house of representatives in 2013 owned a total of 35,786 rai of land (about 57.3 km2).

===Irrigated land===
*Total: 64,150 km² (2007)

===Total renewable water resources===
*Total: 438.6 km3 (2011)

==Environmental concerns==

* Natural hazards: Land subsidence in Bangkok, resulting from the depletion of the water table; droughts (see also 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and 2011 Thai floods). Thailand is highly exposed to the effects of climate change such as the rising sea levels and extreme weather events.
*Drought: Droughts are a persistent feature of Thailand&#x27;s climate. Droughts appear to be worsening: the drought of 2020 is expected to be the worst in four decades, according to the Thai Meteorological Department. and drought hazard mapping.
*Air pollution 
*Water pollution from organic and factory wastes
*Deforestation
*Soil erosion
*Wildlife populations threatened by illegal hunting

===International environmental agreements===
*Party to: biodiversity, climate change, climate change-Kyoto Protocol, desertification, endangered species, hazardous wastes, marine life conservation, Ozone layer protection, tropical timber 83, tropical timber 94, wetlands
*Signed, but not ratified: Law of the Sea

==Territorial disputes==

===History===
Thailand shares boundaries with Cambodia, Laos, Malaysia, and Myanmar. Although neither China nor Vietnam border Thailand, their territories lie within around 100 km of Thai territory.

Many parts of Thailand&#x27;s boundaries follow natural features, such as the Mekong river. Most borders were stabilized and demarcated in the late 19th and early 20th centuries in accordance with treaties forced on Thailand and its neighbors by Britain and France. In some areas, however, exact boundaries, especially along Thailand&#x27;s eastern borders with Laos and Cambodia, are still disputed.

Adding to general border tensions were the activities of communist-led insurgents, whose operations were of paramount concern to the Thai government and its security forces for several decades. The problem of communist insurgency was compounded by the activity of what the Thai government labelled &quot;antistate elements&quot;. Often the real source of border problems was ordinary criminals or local merchants involved in illegal mining, logging, smuggling, and narcotics production and trade.

===Cambodia===

Cambodia&#x27;s disputes with Thailand after 1951 arose in part from ill-defined boundaries and changes in France&#x27;s colonial fortunes. Recently, the most notable case has been a dispute over Prasat Preah Vihear submitted to the International Court of Justice, which ruled in favor of Cambodia in 1962. During the years that the Cambodian capital, Phnom Penh, was controlled by the Khmer Rouge regime of Pol Pot (1975 to 1979), the border disputes continued.

===Laos===

Demarcation is complete except for certain Mekong islets. The border is marked by the Mekong: at high water during the rainy season, the centre line of the current is the border, while during low water periods, all islands, mudbanks, sandbanks, and rocks that are revealed belong to Laos.

===Malaysia===

In contrast to dealings with Cambodia, which attracted international attention, boundary disputes with Malaysia are usually handled more cooperatively. Continuing mineral exploration and fishing, however, are sources of potential conflict. One segment at the mouth of the Golok River remained in dispute with Malaysia as of 2023, along with a section of the continental shelf in the Gulf of Thailand.

===Myanmar===
Sovereignty over three Andaman Sea islands remains disputed. The standing agreement, negotiated in February 1982, left undetermined the status of Ginga Island (Ko Lam), Ko Kham, and Ko Ki Nok at the mouth of the Kraburi River (Pakchan River). Subsequent negotiations in 1985, 1989, and 1990 made no progress. The two parties have designated the islands as &quot;no man&#x27;s land&quot;. Ongoing tensions in the area resulted in minor clashes in 1998, 2003, and 2013.

==See also==
* Isan
* List of islands of Thailand
* List of mountains in Thailand

==References==

==External links==
* Thailand Weather
* Atlas of Thailand</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1546292" start="0" end="8" title="Geography of Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="38" end="52" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="146" end="153" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="155" end="163" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="165" end="169" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="174" end="182" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="318" end="322" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="326" end="334" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="339" end="348" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q85760050" start="360" end="383" title="Exclusive economic zone of Thailand" label="exclusive economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="438" end="446" title="Tropics" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709187" start="612" end="621" title="Thai highlands" label="highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q874816" start="652" end="666" title="Khorat Plateau" label="Khorat Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q201705" start="855" end="867" title="Khmer Empire" label="Khmer Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="949" end="966" title="Ayutthaya Kingdom" label="Ayutthaya Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q201028" start="1184" end="1189" title="Khmer people" label="Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q503963" start="1194" end="1201" title="Bamar" label="Burmese"/>
<link wikidata="Q131217" start="1249" end="1265" title="Gulf of Thailand" label="Gulf of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q47632" start="1274" end="1285" title="Andaman Sea" label="Andaman Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q28135622" start="1323" end="1362" title="European colonisation of Southeast Asia" label="European colonisation of Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="1430" end="1438" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q43467" start="1581" end="1590" title="Indochina" label="Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q383946" start="1720" end="1723" title="Lao people" label="Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q740417" start="1727" end="1731" title="Shan people" label="Shan"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="1845" end="1852" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="1855" end="1863" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="1866" end="1870" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="1873" end="1881" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q85760050" start="1952" end="1975" title="Exclusive economic zone of Thailand" label="Exclusive economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q322356" start="2282" end="2293" title="Kra Isthmus" label="Kra Isthmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18758" start="2302" end="2317" title="Malay Peninsula" label="Malay Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q118850" start="2370" end="2387" title="Chao Phraya River" label="Chao Phraya River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035613" start="2396" end="2407" title="Tributaries of the Chao Phraya River" label="tributaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359524" start="2498" end="2512" title="Bay of Bangkok" label="Bay of Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q874816" start="2636" end="2650" title="Khorat Plateau" label="Khorat Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q41179" start="2724" end="2736" title="Mekong River" label="Mekong River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455933" start="2745" end="2754" title="Mun River" label="Mun River"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="2791" end="2806" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3577963" start="2903" end="2939" title="agriculture in Thailand" label="Thailand&amp;#x27;s agricultural economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q124333785" start="3467" end="3470" title="rai (unit)" label="rai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="3567" end="3582" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="3631" end="3637" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="3704" end="3710" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="3831" end="3836" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q475958" start="3926" end="3942" title="Amphoe Mae Sai" label="Mae Sai District"/>
<link wikidata="Q236419" start="3944" end="3963" title="Chiang Rai Province" label="Chiang Rai Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q475274" start="4008" end="4023" title="Amphoe Betong" label="Betong District"/>
<link wikidata="Q242977" start="4025" end="4038" title="Yala Province" label="Yala Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q475744" start="4077" end="4097" title="Amphoe Khong Chiam" label="Khong Chiam District"/>
<link wikidata="Q629024" start="4099" end="4124" title="Ubon Ratchathani Province" label="Ubon Ratchathani Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q475960" start="4166" end="4186" title="Amphoe Mae Sariang" label="Mae Sariang District"/>
<link wikidata="Q269270" start="4188" end="4209" title="Mae Hong Son Province" label="Mae Hong Son Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140075" start="4257" end="4269" title="Doi Inthanon" label="Doi Inthanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131217" start="4292" end="4308" title="Gulf of Thailand" label="Gulf of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q750014" start="5114" end="5131" title="Northern Thailand" label="Northern Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q8502" start="5137" end="5148" title="mountainous" label="mountainous"/>
<link wikidata="Q5208260" start="5196" end="5210" title="Daen Lao Range" label="Daen Lao Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q13420030" start="5257" end="5267" title="Shan Hills" label="Shan Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242578" start="5301" end="5312" title="Dawna Range" label="Dawna Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q743005" start="5379" end="5391" title="Mae Hong Son" label="Mae Hong Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q26422" start="5400" end="5413" title="Salween River" label="Salween River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7710615" start="5419" end="5442" title="Thanon Thong Chai Range" label="Thanon Thong Chai Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q6402981" start="5467" end="5481" title="Khun Tan Range" label="Khun Tan Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181554" start="5499" end="5516" title="Phi Pan Nam Range" label="Phi Pan Nam Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646490" start="5570" end="5589" title="Luang Prabang Range" label="Luang Prabang Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153522" start="5742" end="5745" title="Nan River" label="Nan"/>
<link wikidata="Q592383" start="5747" end="5751" title="Ping River" label="Ping"/>
<link wikidata="Q666031" start="5753" end="5757" title="Wang River" label="Wang"/>
<link wikidata="Q586733" start="5763" end="5766" title="Yom River" label="Yom"/>
<link wikidata="Q118850" start="5897" end="5914" title="Chao Phraya River" label="Chao Phraya River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266640" start="5999" end="6002" title="Kok River" label="Kok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329928" start="6007" end="6010" title="Ing River" label="Ing"/>
<link wikidata="Q83124" start="6939" end="6945" title="manioc" label="manioc"/>
<link wikidata="Q37681" start="7010" end="7014" title="Silk" label="Silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q874816" start="7144" end="7158" title="Khorat Plateau" label="Khorat Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380299" start="7244" end="7262" title="Phu Phan Mountains" label="Phu Phan Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q33551" start="7655" end="7662" title="Curcuma" label="Curcuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q37021" start="7671" end="7684" title="Zingiberaceae" label="Zingiberaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q190829" start="7767" end="7783" title="central Thailand" label="central Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q863279" start="8054" end="8071" title="Sukhothai Kingdom" label="Sukhothai Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045682" start="8685" end="8701" title="Eastern Thailand" label="Eastern Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7418629" start="8719" end="8737" title="Sankamphaeng Range" label="Sankamphaeng Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089661" start="8866" end="8884" title="Cardamom Mountains" label="Cardamom Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q14214542" start="9286" end="9302" title="Eastern Seaboard of Thailand" label="Eastern Seaboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045913" start="9485" end="9501" title="western Thailand" label="western Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374803" start="9511" end="9527" title="Tenasserim Hills" label="Tenasserim Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069853" start="9994" end="10011" title="Southern Thailand" label="Southern Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q236769" start="10165" end="10179" title="Krabi Province" label="Krabi Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q124333785" start="10226" end="10229" title="rai (area)" label="rai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807842" start="10336" end="10346" title="tin mining" label="tin mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q47632" start="10629" end="10640" title="Andaman Sea" label="Andaman Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="10703" end="10721" title="Theravada Buddhism" label="Theravada Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012424" start="10735" end="10754" title="Nakhon Si Thammarat" label="Nakhon Si Thammarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="10760" end="10765" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q584435" start="10792" end="10807" title="Pattani Kingdom" label="Pattani Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q50198" start="10919" end="10931" title="Provinces of Thailand" label="76 provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="11051" end="11058" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="11188" end="11194" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q113562" start="11202" end="11226" title="Tropical savanna climate" label="Tropical savanna climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q863882" start="11290" end="11314" title="tropical monsoon climate" label="tropical monsoon climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q209531" start="11347" end="11374" title="tropical rainforest climate" label="tropical rainforest climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q753858" start="11761" end="11791" title="Intertropical Convergence Zone" label="Intertropical Convergence Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q79602" start="11812" end="11820" title="cyclones" label="cyclones"/>
<link wikidata="Q236802" start="13323" end="13338" title="Ranong Province" label="Ranong Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q241884" start="13399" end="13412" title="Trat Province" label="Trat Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="14028" end="14031" title="Tin" label="Tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q131877" start="14033" end="14039" title="rubber" label="rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="14041" end="14052" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q743" start="14054" end="14062" title="tungsten" label="tungsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123" start="14064" end="14072" title="tantalum" label="tantalum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="14074" end="14080" title="timber" label="timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="14082" end="14086" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="14088" end="14092" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q82658" start="14094" end="14100" title="gypsum" label="gypsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q156267" start="14102" end="14109" title="lignite" label="lignite"/>
<link wikidata="Q102151" start="14111" end="14119" title="fluorite" label="fluorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209733" start="14308" end="14328" title="Thammasat University" label="Thammasat University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416522" start="14412" end="14431" title="Ministry of Finance (Thailand)" label="Treasury Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q851907" start="14517" end="14536" title="Ministry of Defence (Thailand)" label="Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14983" end="14990" title="Bangkok#Topography" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q130754" start="15060" end="15088" title="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake" label="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q181481" start="15093" end="15109" title="2011 Thai floods" label="2011 Thai floods"/>
<link wikidata="Q58734" start="15482" end="15491" title="pollution" label="pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251690" start="15543" end="15556" title="Deforestation in Thailand" label="Deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q889503" start="15558" end="15570" title="Soil erosion" label="Soil erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q36963" start="15615" end="15622" title="hunting" label="hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="15680" end="15692" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="15694" end="15708" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q47359" start="15725" end="15739" title="Kyoto Protocol" label="Kyoto Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q183481" start="15741" end="15756" title="desertification" label="desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q79995" start="15822" end="15833" title="Ozone layer" label="Ozone layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="16066" end="16071" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="16076" end="16083" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q45949" start="17276" end="17295" title="Prasat Preah Vihear" label="Prasat Preah Vihear"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801" start="17313" end="17343" title="International Court of Justice" label="International Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850" start="17432" end="17442" title="Phnom Penh" label="Phnom Penh"/>
<link wikidata="Q191764" start="17466" end="17477" title="Khmer Rouge" label="Khmer Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q39464" start="17488" end="17495" title="Pol Pot" label="Pol Pot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320130" start="18134" end="18145" title="Golok River" label="Golok River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359708" start="18490" end="18503" title="Kraburi River" label="Kraburi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q381897" start="18762" end="18766" title="Isan" label="Isan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863009" start="18769" end="18796" title="List of islands of Thailand" label="List of islands of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724572" start="18799" end="18828" title="List of mountains in Thailand" label="List of mountains in Thailand"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30131" wikidata="Q2461493" url="?curid=30131" title="Demographics of Thailand">
<text>The demographics of Thailand paint a statistical portrait of the national population. Demography includes such measures as population density and distribution, ethnicity, educational levels, public health metrics, fertility, economic status, religious affiliation, and other characteristics of the populace.

== Population size and structure ==

===Population===
The population of Thailand is approximately 69.7 million people, with an annual growth rate of about 0.3 percent. In addition to Thais, it includes ethnic Chinese, Malay, Lao, Burmese, Cambodians, and Indians, among others. The 2010 decennial census revealed a population of 65,981,600 (up from 60,916,441 in 2000). Post-census adjustments are being made to lower reporting errors.

Thailand&#x27;s population is mostly rural. It is concentrated in the rice growing areas of the central, northeastern, and northern regions. Its urban population—principally in greater Bangkok—was 45.7 percent of the total population in 2010 according to National Economic and Social Development Board (NESDB). Accurate statistics are difficult to arrive at, as millions of Thai migrate from rural areas to cities, then return to their place of origin to help with seasonal field work. Officially they have rural residency, but spend most of the year in urban areas.

Thailand&#x27;s successful government-sponsored family planning program has resulted in a decline in population growth from 3.1 percent in 1960 to around 0.4 percent in 2015. The World Bank forecasts a contraction of the working-age population of about 10 percent between 2010 and 2040. In 1970, an average of 5.7 people lived in a Thai household. At the time of the 2010 census, the figure was down to 3.2. Even though Thailand has one of the better social security systems in Asia, the increasing population of elderly people is a challenge for the country.

Life expectancy has risen, a reflection of Thailand&#x27;s efforts to implement effective public health policies. The Thai AIDS epidemic had a major impact on the Thai population. In 2022, over 500,000 Thai were HIV or AIDS positive, approximately 1.1% of adult men and 0.9% of adult women. Every year, 30,000–50,000 Thai die from HIV or AIDS-related illnesses. Ninety percent of them are ages 20–24, the youngest range of the workforce. An aggressive public education campaign begun in the early-1990s reduced the number of new HIV infections from 150,000 to under 10,000 annually.
The leading cause of death among the age cohort under 15 years of age: drowning. A study by the Child Safety Promotion and Injury Prevention Centre of Ramathibodi Hospital revealed that more than 1,400 youths under 15 years old died from drowning each year, or an average four deaths a day, becoming the top cause of deaths of children, even exceeding that of motorbike deaths. Thailand&#x27;s Disease Control Department estimates that only 23 percent of Thai children under 15 can swim. The Public Health Ministry said that from 2006 to 2015, 10,923 children drowned. Of the 8.3 million children aged 5–14 nationwide, only two million can swim, according to the Public Health Ministry.

The United Nations classifies Thailand as an &quot;aging society&quot; (one-tenth of the population above 60), on track to become an &quot;aged society&quot; (one-fifth of the population above 60) by 2025. The Fiscal Policy Office projects that the number of Thais aged 60-plus will increase from 14 percent in 2016 to 17.5 percent in 2020, 21.2 percent in 2025, and 25.2 percent in 2030. it is estimated that there are 94,000 employees aged 60 years or more in the workforce.


===Age structure===



==Vital statistics==
===Registered births and deaths===
Although the UN classifies the birth and death registration of the National Statistics Office as incomplete the figures below clearly show the decreasing fertility in Thailand since the end of the 1950s. As of 2024 natural growth in Thailand is negative, which means that the number of deaths exceeds the number of births.
===Current vital statistics===


===UN estimates===

1 . Sources:&lt;br&gt;
Figures highlighted in yellow are projections.

=== Life expectancy at birth ===
Average life expectancy at birth of the total population.

===Demographic and Health Surveys===
Total fertility rate (TFR) in Thailand by region and year:

Total fertility rate (TFR) in Thailand by province as of 2010:
== Ethnic groups ==

Thailand&#x27;s ethnic origins are diverse and continue to evolve. The nation&#x27;s ethnic makeup is obscured by the pressures of Thaification, Thai nationalism, and social pressure, which is intertwined with a caste-like mentality assigning some groups higher social status than others. In its report to the United Nations for the &quot;International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination&quot;, the Thai government officially recognized 62 ethnic communities.&lt;ref name=&quot;CERD/C/THA/1-3&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Twenty million Central Thai (together with approximately 650,000 Khorat Thai) make up approximately 20,650,000 million (34.1 percent) of the nation&#x27;s population of 60,544,937 at the time of completion of the Mahidol University &quot;Ethnolinguistic Maps of Thailand&quot; data (1997).

Thailand&#x27;s report to the UN provided population numbers for mountain peoples and ethnic communities in the northeast. Thus, though over 3.288 million people in the northeast alone could not be categorised, the population and percentages of other ethnic communities c. 1997 are known and constitute minimum populations. In descending order, the largest (equal to or greater than 400,000) are:
# Lao (15,080,000, 24.9%) consisting of the Thai Lao (14 million) and other smaller Lao groups, namely the Thai Loei (400–500,000), Lao Lom (350,000), Lao Wiang/Klang (200,000), Lao Khrang (90,000), Lao Ngaew (30,000), and Lao Ti (10,000)
# 6 million Khon Muang (9.9%, also called Northern Thais)
# 4.5 million Pak Tai (7.5%, also called Southern Thais)
# 1.4 million Khmer Leu (2.3%, also called Northern Khmer)
# 900,000 Malay (1.5%)
# 500,000 Nyaw (0.8%)
# 470,000 Phu Thai (0.8%)
# 400,000 Kuy/Kuay (also known as Suay) (0.7%)
# 350,000 Karen (0.6%).

Thailand&#x27;s Ministry of Social Development and Human Security&#x27;s 2015 &quot;Master Plan for the Development of Ethnic Groups in Thailand 2015–2017&quot; omitted the larger, ethnoregional ethnic communities, including the Central Thai majority; it therefore covers only 9.7% of the population.

There is a significant number of Thai-Chinese in Thailand. However, Chinese origins as evidenced by surname were erased in the 1920s by royal decree, about one-sixth of Thais may have Chinese origins. One scholar estimated that the Sino-Thai population, itself around 14 per cent of the total, was composed of around 56 percent Teochew, 16 percent Hakka, 12 percent Hainanese, 7 percent Hokkien, 7 percent Cantonese and 2 percent other. Significant intermixing has taken place such that there are few pure ethnic Chinese, and those of partially mixed Chinese ancestry account for as much as a third to a half of the Thai population. Those assigned Thai ethnicity in the census process made up the vast majority of the population in 2010 (95.9 percent); two percent were Burmese, 1.3 percent other, and 0.9 percent unspecified. Thus, the ethnosocial and genetic makeup situation is very different from that which is reported or self-claimed.

The vast majority of the Isan people, one-third of Thailand&#x27;s population, are of ethnic Lao with some belonging to the Khmer minority. They speak the Isan language. Additionally there have been more recent waves of immigration from Vietnam and Cambodia across porous borders due to wars and subsequent poverty over the last few decades, whose immigrants have tried to keep a low profile and blend in.

In more recent years the Isan people began mixing with the rest of the nation as urbanization and mobility increase. Myanmar&#x27;s numerous ethnic wars between the army and tribes who speak more than 40 languages and control large fiefdoms or states, has led to waves of immigrants seeking refuge or work in Thailand. The makeup of Myanmar nationals is complex and includes, for example, people of Nepali ethnicity who escaped Nepal, entered Myanmar, and then emigrated to Thailand.

Following the 2014 Thai coup d&#x27;état, Thailand&#x27;s Department of Employment released figures showing that 408,507 legal workers from Myanmar, Laos, and Cambodia worked in Thailand. An additional 1,630,279 Myanmar nationals of all ethnicities, 40,546 Laotians, and 153,683 Cambodians were without legal work authorization, but also worked and resided in Thailand. Some 180,000 Cambodians were said to have left Thailand post-coup due to crackdown rumors, indicating government figures were an under count. These statistics are merely a single snapshot and hardly authoritative as there is constant movement and much eluding of authority.

The language of the central Thai population is the educational and administrative language. Other dialects of Thai exist, most notably the Southern Thai language. Several other small Tai (not Thai) groups include the Shan, Lue, and Phu Thai.

Malay- and Yawi-speaking Muslims of the south are another significant minority group (2.3 percent), yet there are a substantial number of ethnic Malays who speak only Thai. Other groups include the Khmer; the Mon, who are substantially assimilated with the Thai, and the Vietnamese.

Smaller mountain-dwelling tribes, such as the Hmong and Mien, as well as the Karen, number about 788,024. Some 300,000 Hmong were to have received citizenship in 2010.

Thailand is also home to more than 200,000 foreigners—retirees, extended tourists, and workers from, for example, Europe, North America, and elsewhere.

== Languages ==

Thailand is dominated by languages of the Southwestern Tai family. Karen languages are spoken along the border with Burma, Khmer is spoken near Cambodia (and previously throughout central Thailand), and Malay in the south near Malaysia.

The Thai hill tribes speak numerous small languages, many Chinese retain varieties of Chinese, and there are half a dozen sign languages. Thailand has 73 living languages.

The following table shows first languages in Thailand with 400,000 or more speakers according to the Royal Thai Government&#x27;s 2011 Country Report to the Committee Responsible for the &quot;International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination&quot;.
The following table employs 2010 census data. Caution should be exercised with Thai census data on first language. In Thai censuses, the four largest Tai-Kadai languages of Thailand (in order, Central Thai, Isan (majority Lao), Kam Mueang, Pak Tai) are not provided as options for language or ethnic group. People declaring one of these as a first language, including Lao, are assigned to &quot;Thai&quot;. This explains the disparity between the two tables. For instance, self-reporting as Lao has been prohibited, due to the prohibition of the Lao ethnonym in the context of describing Thai citizens for approximately one hundred years. This was due to the promotion of &quot;Thai&quot; national identity to cement Siamese claims over the Lao city-states of what is now northern and northeast Thailand following the 1893 Franco-Siamese crisis and subsequent threats posed by French Indochina to the Lao tributary states of Siam. The birth of a homogenizing Thai ethnocentric national identity sufficient to begin transforming Siam from an absolute monarchy into a modern nation-state was achieved by assimilating the Lao with this Thai &quot;identity&quot;, equivalent to what is now known as the Tai–Kadai languages, under a &quot;Greater Thai Empire&quot;, and can be traced back to at least 1902. This homogenization began affecting the Thai census from 1904 onwards. The 2011 UN report data is therefore more comprehensive and better differentiates between the large Tai-Kadai languages of Thailand. As a country submission to a UN convention ratified by Thailand, it is also arguably more authoritative.
==Religion==

Theravada Buddhism is the official religion of Thailand. 93.5 percent are estimated to be Buddhist; 5.4 percent Muslim; 1.1 percent Christian; and 0.1 percent other or have no religion.

In addition to Malay and Yawi speaking Thai and other southerners who are Muslim, the Muslim Cham of Cambodia in recent years began a large scale influx into Thailand. The government permits religious diversity, and other major religions are represented, though there is much social tension, especially in the Muslim south. Spirit worship and animism are widely practiced.

==Migration==
===Immigration===
The largest foreign community are the Burmese, followed by the Cambodians and Laotians.

, Thai government data showed that over 770,900 Cambodian migrants, meaning five percent of the total population of Cambodia, currently live in Thailand. Some NGOs estimate that the actual number may be up to one million.

Laotians are particularly numerous considering the small size of Laos&#x27; population, about seven million, due to the lack of a language barrier. The Chinese expatriate employee population in Thailand, mostly Bangkok, has doubled from 2011 to 2016, making it the largest foreign community in Thailand not originating in a neighbouring country. Chinese hold 13.3 percent of all work permits issued in Thailand, an increase of almost one-fifth since 2015. Japanese expats are on the decline, and now rank sixth, behind Chinese and British. One in every four foreigners working in Thailand formerly were Japanese, and the figure has now dropped slightly to 22.8 percent of the foreign workforce as of late-2016.

Foreign residents in Thailand, according to the 2010 Census. It was found that there were 2,581,141 of foreign origins, composing around 3.87 percent of Thailand&#x27;s population. Migrants from Cambodia, Laos and Myanmar, the most prevalent, accounted for 1.8 million foreigners.

Research by Kasikorn Bank estimated that in 2016, there were 68,300 foreigners over 50 years old—the minimum age for a retirement visa—holding long-stay visas living in Thailand, a 9% increase over the preceding two years. In 2018, Thailand issued almost 80,000 retirement visas, an increase of 30% from 2014, with Britons accounting for the majority of the new visas.

In 2010 there were 27,357 Westerners living in the northeastern region, 90 percent living with Thai spouses, according to research by the College of Population Studies at Chulalongkorn University in 2017.

As of 2016, up to 145,000 Taiwanese expatriates live in Thailand.

== References ==
==External links==
* World Bank: Thailand</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="20" end="28" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="86" end="96" title="Demography" label="Demography"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="123" end="141" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="160" end="169" title="Ethnic group" label="ethnicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6640015" start="1001" end="1047" title="National Economic and Social Development Board" label="National Economic and Social Development Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280670" start="1362" end="1377" title="family planning" label="family planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="1493" end="1503" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="1875" end="1890" title="Life expectancy" label="Life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="1998" end="2002" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673161" start="2609" end="2629" title="Ramathibodi Hospital" label="Ramathibodi Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970641" start="2950" end="2972" title="Ministry of Public Health (Thailand)" label="Public Health Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="3150" end="3164" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3356" end="3376" title="Ministry of Finance (Thailand)#Dependent departments" label="Fiscal Policy Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="4192" end="4216" title="life expectancy at birth" label="life expectancy at birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="4280" end="4300" title="Total fertility rate" label="Total fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="4340" end="4360" title="Total fertility rate" label="Total fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q50198" start="4382" end="4390" title="provinces of Thailand" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="4424" end="4432" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849805" start="4555" end="4567" title="Thaification" label="Thaification"/>
<link wikidata="Q56707181" start="4569" end="4585" title="Thai nationalism" label="Thai nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q484416" start="4636" end="4641" title="caste" label="caste"/>
<link wikidata="Q743306" start="4763" end="4844" title="International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination" label="International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q842823" start="5037" end="5048" title="Khorat Thai" label="Khorat Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q820410" start="5328" end="5344" title="Hill tribe (Thailand)" label="mountain peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959575" start="6846" end="6853" title="Teochew people" label="Teochew"/>
<link wikidata="Q660947" start="6866" end="6871" title="Hakka" label="Hakka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639387" start="6884" end="6893" title="Hainan people" label="Hainanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624231" start="6905" end="6912" title="Hokkien" label="Hokkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q9186" start="6924" end="6933" title="Cantonese" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q381897" start="7485" end="7489" title="Isan" label="Isan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7553" end="7556" title="Lao people#Lao in Thailand" label="Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q201705" start="7584" end="7589" title="Khmer Empire" label="Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q33417" start="7615" end="7628" title="Isan language" label="Isan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q188063" start="8099" end="8106" title="fiefdom" label="fiefdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365392" start="8200" end="8217" title="Demographics of Myanmar" label="Myanmar nationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q16914766" start="8366" end="8392" title="2014 Thai coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="2014 Thai coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q56508" start="9136" end="9158" title="Southern Thai language" label="Southern Thai language"/>
<link wikidata="Q703353" start="9180" end="9183" title="Tai peoples" label="Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q472834" start="9189" end="9193" title="Thai people" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q740417" start="9214" end="9218" title="Shan people" label="Shan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519741" start="9220" end="9223" title="Lu people" label="Lue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3626597" start="9229" end="9237" title="Phu Thai language" label="Phu Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q201028" start="9438" end="9443" title="Khmer people" label="Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q637909" start="9449" end="9452" title="Mon (ethnic group)" label="Mon"/>
<link wikidata="Q216151" start="9511" end="9521" title="Vietnamese people" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q820410" start="9532" end="9556" title="Hill tribe (Thailand)" label="mountain-dwelling tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q219205" start="9570" end="9575" title="Hmong people" label="Hmong"/>
<link wikidata="Q370868" start="9580" end="9584" title="Mien people" label="Mien"/>
<link wikidata="Q271790" start="9601" end="9606" title="Karen people" label="Karen"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="9863" end="9871" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q10889250" start="9905" end="9921" title="Southwestern Tai languages" label="Southwestern Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364815" start="9930" end="9945" title="Karen languages" label="Karen languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q9205" start="9986" end="9991" title="Khmer language" label="Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="10066" end="10071" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q820410" start="10105" end="10121" title="Thai hill tribes" label="Thai hill tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q34228" start="10223" end="10236" title="sign language" label="sign language"/>
<link wikidata="Q743306" start="10467" end="10548" title="International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination" label="International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q9217" start="10749" end="10761" title="Thai language" label="Central Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q33417" start="10763" end="10767" title="Isan language" label="Isan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9211" start="10778" end="10781" title="Lao language" label="Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q565110" start="10784" end="10794" title="Northern Thai language" label="Kam Mueang"/>
<link wikidata="Q56508" start="10796" end="10803" title="Southern Thai language" label="Pak Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359846" start="11374" end="11400" title="1893 Franco-Siamese crisis" label="1893 Franco-Siamese crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q34171" start="11755" end="11774" title="Tai-Kadai language family" label="Tai–Kadai languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="12181" end="12199" title="Theravada Buddhism" label="Theravada Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q383256" start="12461" end="12465" title="Cham (Asia)" label="Cham"/>
<link wikidata="Q43004" start="12692" end="12706" title="Spirit worship" label="Spirit worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q43004" start="12711" end="12718" title="animism" label="animism"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="13993" end="14001" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="14003" end="14007" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="14012" end="14019" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q276557" start="14092" end="14105" title="Kasikorn Bank" label="Kasikorn Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q855730" start="14621" end="14645" title="Chulalongkorn University" label="Chulalongkorn University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30132" wikidata="Q1154151" url="?curid=30132" title="Politics of Thailand">
<text>The politics of Thailand are conducted within the framework of a constitutional monarchy, whereby the prime minister is the head of government and a hereditary monarch is head of state. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislative branches.

Following the coup d&#x27;état of 22 May 2014 revoking the 2007 constitution, a military organization called National Council for Peace and Order (NCPO) had taken over administration. The chief of NCPO abolished the national assembly and assumed the responsibilities of the legislative branch. Under the martial law enforced throughout the kingdom, military courts have been tasked to be responsible for some cases that are normally under the civilian courts. However, the court system, including the Constitutional Court, still remains in existence, even without the constitution. The NCPO was formally dissolved following the swearing-in of the new cabinet on 16 July 2019.

The Kingdom of Siam (now known as Thailand) was ruled as an absolute monarchy. After the Siamese revolution in 1932, led by westernized bureaucrats and a tradition-oriented military, Siam officially became a constitutional monarchy with a prime minister as the head of government. The first written constitution was issued. Politics became the arena of fighting factions between old and new elites, bureaucrats, and generals. Coups occurred from time to time, often bringing the country under the rule of military juntas. To date, Thailand has had 20 charters and constitutions, reflecting a high degree of political instability. After successful coups, military regimes have abrogated existing constitutions and promulgated interim charters. Negotiations between politicians, bureaucrats, influence peddlers, corporate leaders and army officers have become a driving force in the restoration of temporary political stability.

== Politics of constitutions ==

Before the 1932 revolution, the kingdom had no written constitution. The monarch was the originator of all laws and the head of the government. In 1932 the first written constitution was issued, expected to be the most important guideline of the kingdom. Constitutions have traditionally been considered to be the &quot;symbol of democracy&quot; in Thailand, despite their many abrogations and changes. However, when political disputes took place among the elites, the first military coup occurred in 1933 and the first official constitution was removed, to be replaced by a new one.

All of Thailand&#x27;s charters and constitutions have recognized a unified kingdom with a constitutional monarchy, but with widely differing balances of power between the branches of government. Most Thai governments have stipulated parliamentary systems. Several, however, also called for dictatorships, e.g., the 1959 constitution. Both unicameral and bicameral parliaments have been used, and members of parliament have been both elected and appointed. The direct powers of the monarch have also varied considerably.

Thailand&#x27;s &quot;popular constitution&quot;, called the &quot;people&#x27;s constitution&quot; was successfully promulgated in 1997 after the 1992 Bloody May incident. Publicly, constitutional devices have often charged as the root of political turmoil. The 1997 constitution was considered a landmark for the degree of public participation involved in its drafting, as well as the democratic nature of its articles. It prescribed a bicameral legislature, both houses of which are elected. Many civil rights were explicitly acknowledged, and measures were established to increase the stability of elected governments. New organs supervising administrative power such as the Constitutional Court, the Administrative Court, and the Ombudsman also emerged for the first time. These organs later became a threat to politicians, particularly when the financial dealings of Thaksin Shinawatra, one of the most popular politicians in Thai history, became an issue.

Following an army-led coup on 19 September 2006, the 1997 constitution was abrogated. The junta ruled the country by martial law and executive decree for weeks, until it published an interim constitution on 1 October 2006. The interim constitution allowed the junta to appoint a prime minister, a legislature, and a committee to draft a permanent constitution. Local and municipal elections were held as usual. In 2007 the new constitution was eventually issued, said to be a &quot;junta supported constitution&quot; by many critics. The 2007 constitution was again abolished in another military takeover on 22 May 2014. According to the 2017 constitution, Thailand&#x27;s entire political system is under the control of the army, through the appointed Senate but also via an array of military-dominated oversight bodies

The King of Thailand has little direct power under the constitution, but is a symbol of national identity and unity. King Bhumibol—on the throne from 1946 to 2016—commanded enormous popular respect and moral authority, which he used on occasion to resolve political crises that threatened national stability.

==Democracy post-1932==
Thailand was a kingdom under an absolute monarch for over seven centuries before 1932.

As a result of imperialism, the kings began minor reforms. The king was the president of the government, consulted with his councillors, mainly his relatives. Though significant reforms had occurred in Rama V&#x27;s reign, the kingdom still had no national assembly. Men of royal blood held positions in the government as ministers. The situation became tense after the World War I. An economic crisis bedeviled the country. A young generation of students and intellectuals studying in Europe began criticizing the crown&#x27;s government as backward, corrupt, and ineffective. On 24 June 1932, troops in Bangkok seized government buildings and some key ministers. The 1932 revolution took place. Its leaders were both bureaucrats and young military officers, urging national reforms, including the first written constitution. After negotiation with the king, Rama VII, and the kingdom&#x27;s elite, changes took place, ending absolute rule by the king. The king remained the titular head of state, but the constitutional government ruled the country with the prime minister at its head. A general election was held for the creation of the first national assembly. The election was the first in which women were permitted to vote.

Despite the efforts of many democrats in the past including Pridi Banomyong, Western, democratic-style of government was alien to the kingdom. It was claimed that Siam had insufficient time to educate its population in preparation for Western political, industrial, and economic changes.

Since becoming a Western-style constitutional democratic monarchy in 1932, most of the time the country has been ruled by military governments. The disputes and struggles among the elites old and new, civilians, politicians, and military have occurred regularly since 1932. The first military coup staged by the 1932 revolutionary, military wing itself, occurred in 1933. The military became a tool for political stability. Political freedom, freedom of speech, and basic human rights were strongly compromised in the first three-quarters of the 20th century.

Due to the pressure of outside events during the Vietnam War, the politics of the kingdom became even more tense. The military government, with the support of the US, tightened its control over the country&#x27;s politics, while intellectuals and leftist students strongly opposed the junta.

The Communist Party of Thailand staged armed struggle in the countryside in the 1960s. Communist and radical ideas attracted a handful of intellectuals. The communist movement was seen as congruent with the independence movements in other Indochinese countries, waging war against the US. In response, the military junta tightened its grip.

Student-led uprisings in October 1973 led to a new vision of liberating the country from military government for a short period. The media received more freedom to criticize politicians and governments, while revolutionary and socialist movements became more apparent. The new civilian government officially shut US bases amid the fear of communist victory in the Indochinese countries in 1975. In 1976, Admiral Sa-ngad Chaloryu, the armed forces commander, staged a massacre and coup that brought hard-line anti-communists to power and reversed these reforms.

At the end of the Indochina War, investment by foreign businesses helped alleviate poor infrastructure and social problems. The middle classes constituted only 10 per cent of the 60 million inhabitants. They enjoyed wealth and increasing freedom, leaving the majority poor in the rural areas and slums.

The system of rule fluctuated between unstable civilian governments and interludes of military takeover. During democratic periods, the middle class in the cities ignored the poor in the rural areas. The media accepted bribes. To corrupt bureaucrats and politicians became well-accepted business practice.

Every time a coup was staged, scapegoats or excuses were found to justify it. Eventually, the ensuing junta government would hand the government back to elected officials. As a result, there have been 18 coups and 18 constitutions in the history of Thai politics.

From 1932, bureaucrats, generals, and businessmen have run most of the political parties. While the grassroots are always the target of the political parties, no grassroots party has ever led the country. Money seems to be the major factor in gaining power in the country.

The Black May uprising, in 1992, lead to more reform when promulgating the 1997 constitution aiming to create checks and balance of powers between strengthened government, separately elected senators, and anti-corruption agencies. Administrative courts, constitutional courts, and election-control committees were established to strengthen the checks and balance of politics.

The 2007 constitution, following Thaksin&#x27;s ousting, was particularly designed to be tighter in its control of corruptions and conflicts of interests while reducing the authority of the government. It was repealed in the 22 May 2014 coup d&#x27;état.

== Government ==
Thailand categorizes itself as a constitutional monarchy, the king has little direct power under the constitution and exercises power through the National Assembly, the Council of Ministers, and the Courts in accordance with the 2017 constitution. The king, as the head of state, is the symbol of national identity and unity.

The head of government is the prime minister. The Prime Minister is elected by both houses of the National Assembly. Under section 151 of the constitution, members of the House of Representative constituting at least one-fifth of the existing total Members of the house have the right to submit a vote of no-confidence of a single Minister or the Council of Ministers en masse.

The National Assembly of Thailand, as the bicameral legislative branch of the government, consists of the House of Representatives and the Senate. The House of Representatives is the lower house of the National Assembly and consists of 500 members sitting for four years; 350 members are elected from a constituency basis and 150 members are elected from a party-list proportional representation. The Senate consists of 250 senators that hold a five-year term. Under section 107 of the 2017 constitution, senators are selected from professional and social groups, having the knowledge, expertise, and experience in various areas of society.

== Corruption ==
Corruption has plagued Thailand for much of its modern history, with both the private and government sectors partaking in various forms of corruption. Corruption is embedded within Thai society due to its history and culture, where patronage plays a huge role and those with connections thrive. Research shows that the cost of bureaucratic corruption alone in 2018 amounted up to a 100 billion Thai baht, with state officials at various levels embezzling funds from large and small governmental projects. As of 2018, Corruption Perception Index by Transparency International has ranked Thailand as the 99th least corrupt.

A year after the 2014 Thai coup d&#x27;état, the National Council for Peace and Order (NCPO) declared a war on corruption, a common mission by all military dictatorships following the numerous coup in Thailand&#x27;s history. However, the junta was also entangled with various embarrassing corruption scandals itself.

== Foreign relations ==
Thailand is an active participant in international and regional organizations, and maintains a particularly close and longstanding security relationship with the United States. Thailand&#x27;s foreign policy includes support for ASEAN and it has developed increasingly close ties with the organisation&#x27;s other members, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Brunei, Laos, Cambodia, Burma, and Vietnam. Thailand also attends the annual meetings held by the foreign and economic ministers of the ASEAN nations, including the inaugural East Asia Summit that was held in Kuala Lumpur in December 2005.

Regional cooperation is progressing for Thailand in economic, trade, banking, political, and cultural matters. In 2003, Thailand served as an APEC host and formulated the meeting&#x27;s theme: &quot;A World of Differences: Partnership for the Future&quot;. Supachai Panitchpakdi, the former Deputy Prime Minister of Thailand, served as Director-General of the World Trade Organization (WTO) between 2002 and 2005.

==Political parties and elections==
=== Voting Rights ===

The issue of voting rights in Thailand is addressed under Section 95 of the 2017 constitution.
A person must have the following qualifications in order to vote:
# Must be of Thai nationality, those that have acquired citizenship through naturalisation must hold the Thai nationality for at least 5 years.
# Must not be less than 18 years of age on the day of election.
# Must have their name listed in the household register in the constituency for at least 90 days on the date of election.

=== Results of 2019 Thai General Election ===

The 2019 General Election was held on 24 March 2019; it was the first election held in accordance with the new 2017 constitution and also the first election held since the 2014 coup. The election selected 500 members of the House of Representatives, in which 350 were elected from a constituency basis and 150 were elected from a party-list proportional representation. The National Assembly convened on 5 June to elect the new prime minister, in which the incumbent prime minister and coup leader Prayut Chan-o-cha won.
==Political history of the democratic era==

===Transition to democracy after 1932===

Following the Siamese revolution of 1932, which imposed constitutional limits on the monarchy, Thai politics were dominated for around fifty years by a military and bureaucratic elite, with the support of businessmen and entrepreneurs. Changes of government were affected primarily by a long series of mostly bloodless coups.

The popular uprising of 14 October 1973 resulted in the end of the ruling military dictatorship of anti-communist Thanom Kittikachorn. Notably, it highlighted the growing influence of Thai university students in politics. Only three years later, left-wing movements were cracked down by the extremely violent suppression from right wings and ultra royalists in the 6 October 1976 massacre event, following by a coup to strengthen the monarchy and military status in the Cold War period, including increase of lèse-majesté law jail terms.

Beginning with a brief experiment in democracy during the mid-1980s, led by Prem Tinsulanonda, civilian democratic political institutions slowly gained greater authority, culminating in 1988 when Chatichai Choonhavan,leader of the Chart Thai Party, assumed office as the country&#x27;s first democratically elected prime minister in more than a decade. Three years later, another bloodless coup, 1991 Thai coup d&#x27;état ended his term and the military junta National Peace Keeping Council was formed.

Shortly thereafter, the royally appointed Anand Panyarachun, a businessman and former diplomat, headed a largely civilian interim government and promised to hold elections in the near future. However, following inconclusive March 1992 Thai general election, former army commander Suchinda Kraprayoon was appointed prime minister. Thais, more than 200,000 people led by Chamlong Srimuang reacted to the appointment by demanding an end to military influence in government, but demonstrations were violently suppressed by the military in Black May events. An estimated 52 to 100 protesters were killed, 696 were injured, and 175 had &quot;disappeared&quot;, it had not been concluded until today. Shortly, Suchinda regime received sweeping amnesty, signed by Bhumibol Adulyadej.

Domestic and international reactions to the violence forced Suchinda to resign, and the nation once again turned to Anand, who was appointed interim prime minister until new elections were held in September 1992. In the September 1992 elections, political parties that had opposed the military in May 1992 won by a narrow majority and Chuan Leekpai, a leader of the Democrat Party, became prime minister at the head of a five-party coalition.

Following the defection of a coalition partner, Chuan dissolved parliament in May 1995, and the Chart Thai Party won the largest number of parliamentary seats in the subsequent election. Party leader Banharn Silpa-archa became prime minister, but held the office for little more than a year. Following elections held in November 1996, Chavalit Youngchaiyudh formed a coalition government and became prime minister. However, the onset of the Asian financial crisis caused a loss of confidence in the Chavalit government and forced him to hand over power to Chuan Leekpai in November 1997.

Chuan formed a coalition government based on the themes of economic crisis management. The 1997 constitution was introduced as the first constitution to be drafted by a popularly elected Constitutional Drafting Assembly, hence was popularly called the &quot;People&#x27;s Constitution&quot;. The 1997 constitution created a bicameral legislature. For the first time in Thai history, both houses were directly elected.

===2001–2006, Thaksin Shinawatra===
In the January 2001 elections, telecommunications multimillionaire Thaksin Shinawatra, who had relations with the 1990s junta, and his Thai Rak Thai Party (TRT) won an overwhelming victory on a populist platform of economic growth and development.

Thaksin also marginally escaped (8:7) a guilty verdict in the Constitutional Court, where he was charged by the Board of Anti-Corruption of hiding shares worth hundreds of millions of baht. A decade later, a Supreme Court ruling in another case accepted the possibility of bribery in the Constitutional Court case.

After absorbing several smaller parties, TRT gained an absolute majority in the lower house of parliament, controlling 296 of 500 seats. In a cabinet reshuffle of October 2002, the Thaksin administration further put its stamp on the government. A package of bureaucratic reform legislation created six new ministries in an effort to streamline the bureaucratic process and increase efficiency and accountability.

The general election held on 6 February 2005 resulted in another landslide victory for Thaksin and TRT, which controlled 374 seats in parliament&#x27;s lower house. Thaksin&#x27;s populist policies found great favour in rural areas. Thaksin introduced government programs which greatly benefited rural areas of the country. These programs included debt relief for farmers still reeling from the Asian financial crisis and a new healthcare program that brought coverage to all Thais for 30 baht per visit (equivalent to about US$1). During the 2013–2014 Thai political crisis older residents of the Baan Dong Yaang village in Udon Thani Province stated: &quot;Before Thaksin, no politicians came here. Thaksin understood our situation and helped us.&quot;

Despite the majority and surging popularity among rural Thais, Thaksin came under severe questioning for selling telecommunication shares to Temasek, a Singapore investor, for about 70,000 million baht without paying any tax. More complex and high-level corruption and conspiracies were discovered and exposed by Sonthi Limthongkul, Manager Media Group owner, who reached the middle class in the capital and the cities through the only small satellite and internet media channel, ASTV.

Thaksin refused to publicly answer the questions of the People&#x27;s Alliance for Democracy (PAD), a large group of middle class Thais and a coalition of anti-Thaksin protesters led by Sonthi Limthongkul. Due to an inability to clear himself of the corruption allegations, Thaksin&#x27;s regime fell apart during public protests led by PAD, which led to widespread calls for his resignation and impeachment.

PAD gathered in Bangkok and demanded that Thaksin resign as prime minister so that the king could directly appoint someone else. Thaksin refused and protests continued for weeks. Thaksin consequently dissolved parliament on 24 February 2006 and called a snap election for 2 April 2006. The election was boycotted by the opposition parties, leading to unopposed TRT candidates for 38 seats failing to obtain the necessary quorum of 20 per cent of eligible votes. As the Thai constitution requires all seats to be filled from the beginning of parliament, this produced a constitutional crisis. After floating several suggestions on 4 April 2006, Thaksin announced that he would step down as prime minister as soon as parliament had selected a successor. In a televised speech to senior judges, King Bhumibol requested that they execute their duty justly.

Criminal charges and allegations of administrative abuse cases were brought against the Election Committee. The courts voided the election results, jailed the committee for abuse of power, and ordered a new round of elections for 15 October 2006. Thaksin continued to work as caretaker prime minister.

Civil movements in Thailand were active in the 2000s, with some groups perceiving the Thaksin government as authoritarian, citing extrajudicial killings in his war on drugs, special security laws passed by the administration, and the government&#x27;s increasingly hardline responses to the insurgency in the southern provinces. Thaksin&#x27;s government was facing mounting opposition from the urban middle classes, while continuing to remain popular in the predominantly poor and rural north and northeastern regions. However, the most severe critic of Thaksin seemed to be Sondhi Limthongkul, a media tycoon and former colleague.

===2006 coup===
While Thaksin was in New York City to make a speech at UN Headquarters, the military seized power on 19 September 2006.

The Council for Democratic Reform under Constitutional Monarchy (CDRM) led by General Sonthi Boonyaratglin was formed. Political activities were banned by the junta after the coup on 19 September 2006. The 1997 constitution was abrogated, although most of the institutions of government remained intact. A new constitution was drafted and promulgated in late-2007.

A month after the coup, an interim civilian government was formed, including an appointed House of Representatives from a variety of professions and an appointed Constitutional Court. Freedom of speech was restored.

During 2006 and 2007, organized underground terrorist activities took place, including the burning numerous schools in rural areas of the north and the northeast of Thailand and the planting of bombs in ten locations in Bangkok, the latter of which killed and injured several people on New Year&#x27;s Eve in 2006.

A national referendum for the 2007 constitution was called by the military and the 2007 constitution was accepted by the majority of the voters. The junta promised a democratic general election, which was finally held on 23 December 2007, 16 months after the coup.

The Constitutional Court unanimously dissolved the populist Thai Rak Thai Party following punishment according to the 1997 constitution, banning 111 TRT members from politics for five years.

The military drafted a controversial new constitution following allegations of Thaksin&#x27;s corruption and abuse of power. This constitution was particularly designed to increase control of corruption and of conflicts of interests of politicians while decreasing the previously strengthened authority of the government. A national referendum accepted the 2007 constitution, although there was significant disapproval in Thaksin&#x27;s stronghold, the north and northeast.

On 23 December 2007, a national parliamentary election was held, based on the new constitution, and the People&#x27;s Power Party (Thai Rak Thai&#x27;s and Thaksin&#x27;s proxy party), led by former Bangkok governor Samak Sundaravej, seized the reins of government. Thailand&#x27;s new parliament convened on 21 January 2008.

The People&#x27;s Power Party (PPP), or Thaksin&#x27;s proxy party, gained the majority, with just under half of the total seats in parliament, and won the general election by a solid margin after five minor parties joined it to form a coalition government.

A complaint was filed against PPP in the Thai Supreme Court, charging PPP of being the TRT nominee party. Moreover, in 2008, one of its leading members was charged with electoral fraud. The Election Committee also proposed that the PPP should be dissolved due to the violation of the constitution.

====Red shirts, yellow shirts====
The so-called &quot;Red Shirts&quot; got their start as supporters of deposed former Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra. Red shirts transferred their support to Thailand&#x27;s ruling Pheu Thai party led by his sister, Yingluck Shinawatra. In general, red shirts see attempts by the urban and military elite to control Thai politics as a threat to democracy. The &quot;yellow shirts&quot; represent those opposed to Thaksin. They were the force behind the street protests that led to the 2006 coup. The yellow shirts are a loose grouping of royalists, ultra-nationalists, and the urban middle class opposed to Thaksin and overarching democratic rule by a rural majority.

===2008 political crisis===
In 2008, Thailand saw increasing political turmoil, with the PPP government facing pressure to step down amid mounting civil disobedience and unrest led by PAD. The conflict centred on the constitution. The PPP supported the amendment of the 2007 constitution, while anti-government protesters considered it to be a political amnesty for Thaksin and his followers.

The anti-government protesters were, said, mostly better educated, more affluent, urban Thais criticizing a Western-style electoral system corrupted by rich politicians. Thaksin was accused of buying votes, bureaucrats, policemen, military officers, and even political factions. Thaksin became the example of the businessman autocrat, launching so-called populist projects, some of which were controversial, such as the war on drugs. Hundreds of killings and murder cases noted by the police were said by them to be merely fighting among the drug traffickers, but no further investigation ever occurred. The judicial process was seen as useless; instead, decisive justice was seen to be in the hands of the police.

As the anti-government movement had criticized Thaksin as an example of a corrupt politician, it discredited the election system, suggesting at once a system in which part of the representatives in the national assembly would be chosen by certain professions or social groups.

Anti-Thaksin protesters were vastly outnumbered by Thaksin&#x27;s supporters in the rural majority, who delivered to his party two resounding election victories. Their loyalty was rewarded by generous social and economic welfare programs. The anti-government forces were well-organized, and criticized the behind-the-scenes support of the military, the country&#x27;s most influential institution, seeing Thaksin supported by anti-royalists, former revolutionaries, and ex-communists aiming at regime change.

Samak Sundaravej was elected prime minister of the first government under the 2007 constitution.

Samak Sundaravej, an articulate politician, acknowledged being the &quot;nominee&quot; of fugitive Thaksin Shinawatra. Samak Sundaravej&#x27;s position in power, however, did not put an end to the conflict. People claimed that Thaksin still influenced Thai politics even though he was in exile.

In 1973, he ran a prominent month-long propaganda campaign, accusing democratic student movements of being communist rebels, traitors and spies. The event ended in a massacre of hundreds of students at Thammasat University on 14 October 1973, and a further military coup was conducted, giving him the interior minister position in the junta. In 1976 there was another massacre at the university. Thai military personnel, police and others, were seen shooting at protesters at the university. Many were killed and many survivors were abused.

Prime Minister Samak held daily national state television broadcasts with his own political messages. These were not well received by PAD. NBT, the National Broadcasting Television, the state-owned media enterprise, was openly used to counter the PAD&#x27;s message, which emphasizes the overturning of the current democratic system.

Former PM Thaksin had welcomed offers to come back to Thailand in February 2008 to face corruption charges and to get close control of the PPP, successor of his Thai Rak Thai Party.

The opposition forced a no-confidence vote on a constitutional amendment which may have resulted in the reinstatement of Thaksin&#x27;s reputation. The failure to address dramatically rising food and energy prices, and a temple dispute with Cambodia damaged the coalition government&#x27;s reputation.

Street protests led by PAD, the major opposition movement, began in late-May after the ruling party agreed to amend the constitution. Their main objective was to block any constitutional amendment aimed chiefly at reinstating Thaksin&#x27;s reputation and saving the PPP from dissolution after one of its leaders was charged with electoral fraud.

Another of PAD&#x27;s objectives was to support the courts and the judicial system in hearing Thaksin&#x27;s cases. While PM Samak has been successful in controlling the police and civil service, various courts remain independent and issued several independent verdicts.

The Constitutional Court concluded that PPP&#x27;s second-in-command, Yongyuth Tiyapairat, who pressured local officers to support his party in the previous election, would subject the party to dissolution. The Administrative Court also ruled that his government seriously violated the constitution and might have prejudiced national sovereignty in negotiating over the sovereignty of territory immediately adjacent to the Preah Vihear Temple with Cambodia. The case brought the resignation of his first foreign minister, Nopadon Patama. Several other ministers found wrongfully informing the Anti-corruption Board or Election Governing Board of important information, were discharged when this was discovered.

Previously Thaksin and Pojaman&#x27;s three lawyers were caught red-handed attempting to bribe Supreme Court judges and were given jail sentences. That was an ominous sign for Thaksin. Later a criminal court returned a verdict of tax evasion against Pojaman. He was to be jailed for three years. Days later, Thaksin and Pojaman jumped bail and issued a statement from London announcing through Thai TV his decision to seek political asylum in the UK in an attempt to avoid what he called &quot;biased&quot; treatment under Thailand&#x27;s current judicial system.

Thaksin and his family fled to Great Britain on 11 August 2008, to apply for political asylum after his wife was convicted of tax evasion.

PM Samak Sundaravej, through his parliament, was able to complete budget bills for mega-projects which cost so much that the King of Thailand spoke out in protest and to thank the head of the Bank of Thailand (under threats from the government) for warning that the country was on the brink of disaster because of high expenditures.

On 26 August 2008, 30,000 protesters, led by PAD, occupied Sundaravej&#x27;s Government House compound in central Bangkok, forcing he and his advisers to work at Don Mueang International Airport. Riot police entered the occupied compound and delivered a court order for the eviction of the PAD protesters. Chamlong Srimuang, a leader of PAD, ordered 45 PAD guards to break into the main government building on Saturday. Three regional airports were closed for a short period and 35 trains between Bangkok and the provinces were canceled. Protesters raided the Phuket International Airport tarmac on the resort island of Phuket Province resulting to 118 flights canceled or diverted, affecting 15,000 passengers.

Protesters also blocked the entrances of the airports in Krabi and Hat Yai (which were later re-opened). Police issued arrest warrants for Sondhi Limthongkul and eight other PAD leaders on charges of insurrection, conspiracy, unlawful assembly and refusing orders to disperse. Meanwhile, General Anupong Paochinda stated: &quot;The army will not stage a coup. The political crisis should be resolved by political means&quot;. Samak and the ruling coalition called for an urgent parliamentary debate and session for 31 August.

PM Samak Sundaravej tried using legal means involving civil charges, criminal charges, and police action to remove PAD protesters from government offices on 29 August.
However, PAD managed to get temporary relief from the courts enabling them to legally continue the siege of the government office.

One person died and 40 people were wounded in a clash which occurred when the DAAD (NohPohKoh) protesters, supported by Thaksin and the PPP moved toward PAD at about 03:00, 2 September without adequate police intervention.

By the second half of September 2008, PM Samak Sundaravej was the subject of several court cases for his past actions. He faced an appeals court judgement of slander and a pending ruling from the Constitutional Court as to whether he had a conflict of interest by being a private employee while holding the premiership. The Anti-Corruption Board contemplated bringing a charge of abuse of power in the Preah Vihear case to the Constitutional Court. These legal difficulties ended PM Samak&#x27;s political role. Ex-PM Thaksin and Pojaman also faced verdicts from the Supreme Court.

People Power Party&#x27;s deputy spokesman Kuthep Suthin Klangsang, on 12 September 2008 announced: &quot;Samak has accepted his nomination for prime minister. Samak said he is confident that parliament will find him fit for office, and that he is happy to accept the post. A majority of party members voted on Thursday to reappoint Samak. Samak is the leader of our party so he is the best choice.&quot; Despite objections from its five coalition partners, the PPP, in an urgent meeting, unanimously decided to renominate Samak Sundaravej. Five coalition parties, namely Chart Thai, Matchima Thipataya, Pracharaj, Puea Pandin, and Ruam Jai Thai Chart Pattana, unanimously agreed to support the PPP to set up the new government and vote for the person who should be nominated as the new prime minister. Chart Thai deputy leader Somsak Prissananantakul and Ruam Jai Thai Chart Pattana leader Chettha Thanajaro said the next prime minister was nominated. Caretaker prime minister Somchai Wongsawat said PPP secretary-general Surapong Suebwonglee would notify the five parties who the PPP nominated, to take office again. Some lawmakers, however, said they would propose an alternate candidate. Meanwhile, Thailand&#x27;s army chief General Anupong Paochinda said he backed the creation of a national unity government that would include all the country&#x27;s parties, and he also asked for the lifting of a state of emergency that Samak imposed on 2 September.

Embattled Samak Sundaravej abandoned his bid to regain the premiership, and he also resigned from the PPP&#x27;s leadership. Meanwhile, PPP&#x27;s chief party spokesmen, Kudeb Saikrachang and Kan Thiankaew, announced on 13 September that caretaker prime minister Somchai Wongsawat, caretaker justice minister Sompong Amornwiwat, and PPP Secretary-General Surapong Suebwonglee were PPP&#x27;s candidates for premiership. However, Suriyasai Katasila of People&#x27;s Alliance for Democracy (a group of royalist businessmen, academics and activists) vowed to continue its occupation of Government House if a PPP candidate were nominated: &quot;We would accept anyone as prime minister, as long as he is not from the People&#x27;s Power Party.&quot;

On 14 September the state of emergency was lifted. The ruling People Power Party, on 15 September 2008, named Somchai Wongsawat, candidate for prime minister to succeed Samak Sundaravej. The PPP will endorse Somchai, and his nomination will be set for a parliamentary vote on Wednesday. Meanwhile, the Supreme Court ruled on Wednesday in a corruption case against Thaksin and his wife, to be promulgated after the parliament vote for the new prime minister.

On 4 October 2008, Chamlong Srimuang and rally organiser Chaiwat Sinsuwongse of the People&#x27;s Alliance for Democracy were detained by the Thai police led by Col. Sarathon Pradit, by virtue of 27 August arrest warrant for insurrection, conspiracy, illegal assembly, and refusing orders to disperse (treason) against him and eight other protest leaders. At Government House, Sondhi Limthongkul, however, stated demonstrations would continue: &quot;I am warning you, the government and police, that you are putting fuel on the fire. Once you arrest me, thousands of people will tear you apart.&quot; Srimuang&#x27;s wife, Ying Siriluck visited him at the Border Patrol Police Region 1, Pathum Thani. Other PAD members still wanted by police included Sondhi, activist MP Somkiat Pongpaibul, and PAD leaders Somsak Kosaisuk and Pibhop Dhongchai.

On 7 October 2008, Deputy Prime Minister Chavalit Yongchaiyudh resigned and admitted partial responsibility for violence due to police tear gas clearance of the blockade of the parliament, causing injuries to 116 protesters, 21 seriously. His resignation letter stated: &quot;Since this action did not achieve what I planned, I want to show my responsibility for this operation.&quot; After being dispersed, 5,000 demonstrators returned and blocked all four entries to the parliament building.

The protesters attempted to hold 320 MPs and senators as hostages inside the parliament building, cutting off the power supply, and forcing Somchai Wongsawat to escape by jumping a back fence after his policy address. But other trapped MPs failed to leave and flee from the mob. The siege on the area beside the near prime minister&#x27;s office forced the government to transfer its activities to Don Mueang Airport.

On 26 November 2008, the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) issued a statement saying that the current crisis was a watershed moment for democracy and rule of law in Thailand. It contains harsh critique of PAD and the criminal justice system of Thailand.

===2009–2010 protests and crackdowns===
Abhisit&#x27;s rise to power was controversial and opposed from the beginning. In April 2009, anti-government protesters, known as &quot;red shirts&quot;, began a demonstration aimed at the resignation of the prime minister and fresh elections. The major site of the demonstration was Bangkok. From 8 April, the demonstrators spread their activities to significant locations such as major intersections. Streets were blocked and barricaded. The demonstration took place at the same time as the ASEAN summit in Pattaya. Demonstrators moved there to protest, aiming at disrupting the summit. Protesters stormed the site of the summit, causing its cancellation.

In Bangkok, the protest became fiercer because of the arrest of the leaders of the Pattaya protest. Protesters blocked the entrances of the Criminal Court, calling for the release of their leaders. Prime Minister Abhisit, at The Ministry of Interior, declared a state of emergency. Protesters blocked the entrance of the ministry, to seize the premier and other ministers. However, the premier escaped. The government began to deploy anti-riot troops. Armored vehicles were deployed in downtown Bangkok. Anti-riot actions took place in the early morning of the next day. Anti-riot troops, armed with shields, batons, and M-16s with live ammo, started dispersing and shooting protesters on Bangkok&#x27;s streets.

Protesters charged that the government was killing protesters. The government denied the charge. Although two bodies were found, the government found no evidence that it was involved in the killings. On major avenues and streets, burning buses were seen, as well as wounded people were carried to the hospitals, but the government reported no serious cases.

By the afternoon of 14 April, the military controlled all main streets. The leaders of the protest decided to suspend their activities. Thai politics after the pro-Thaksin protest has so far been the stage of the two opposing factions: the Democrat Party-led government allied with their coalition partners, who also have the tacit support of the PAD, the military, and the police, against the Thaksin loyalists, the United Front for Democracy Against Dictatorship (UDD). Both sides have claimed the fighting as the struggle for democracy and the nation.

====Resolution to conflict====
On 3 May the Thai Prime Minister announced he was willing to hold elections on 14 November should the opposition red shirts accept the offer. The following day red shirt leaders accepted the proposal to leave the occupied parts of Bangkok in return for an election on the scheduled date.

However, one week later, 10 May, protesters had yet to disband despite accepting the road map proposed by the prime minister for early elections. They placed new demands upon the prime minister that Deputy Prime Minister Suthep Thaugsuban, who was in charge of security operations during the clash of 10 April, must first turn himself in for prosecution before they dispersed.

On 11 May, Suthep presented himself to the Department of Special Investigation. The red shirt protesters, however, were not satisfied and demanded Suthep be formally charged instead by police. The red shirts failure to disperse was taken as a decline of the conciliatory road map and Prime Minister Abhisit&#x27;s proposal of early parliamentary elections were withdrawn. This was followed by a warning issued from the prime minister that protesters must disperse or face imminent military action. The red shirts led another protest on 19 May. The army killed over 90 protesters in the ensuing military crackdown. Army tactics were heavily criticised for failing to abide by international standards and using lethal force on unarmed protesters. At least six people including nurses and medics were shot by snipers inside a Buddhist temple set up as a safe area.

Between 2001 and 2011, Isan&#x27;s GDP per capita more than doubled to US$1,475. Over the same period, GDP in the Bangkok area soared from US$7,900 to nearly US$13,000.

===2013 political crisis===

Following the announcement of a proposed amnesty bill by the Yingluck government, protests resurfaced in October 2013. The bill would allow former prime minister Thaksin to re-enter Thailand. Protesters perceived the Yingluck administration as corrupt, illegitimate, and a proxy for her brother. The protest movement was led by Suthep Thaugsuban and was supported by the People&#x27;s Democratic Reform Committee (PDRC).

Prime Minister Yingluck dissolved the Thai parliament following the recommencement of protests and announced a new election in accordance with the Thai constitution. The constitution states that elections must be held 45 to 60 days from the date that parliament is dissolved. The protest movement opposed the election announcement and the PDRC stated that it would boycott the process, with Suthep calling for the appointment of an unelected council to lead the country until reforms can be implemented. Protesters marched to the Thai-Japanese sports stadium, the venue of the registration process, on 22 December 2013 to block the work of the Election Commission (EC).

Protesters at the Thai-Japanese sports stadium clashed with police on 26 December 2013, resulting in two fatalities (one police officer was killed by a live bullet fired by a protester). Protesters armed themselves with sling shots and wore gas masks to fight with police, and around 200 people were injured. Due to the escalation in violence, the EC released a statement in which it urged the government to consider postponing the elections. The government explained that it was unable to change the date of the election, but remained open to discussions with protesters.

In his response to the media on 27 December 2013, Thailand&#x27;s army chief General Prayut Chan-o-cha did not rule out the possibility of a military coup, stating, &quot;Whether it is going to happen, time will tell. We don&#x27;t want to overstep the bounds of our authority. We don&#x27;t want to use force. We try to use peaceful means, talks and meetings to solve the problem.&quot; During the same period, an arrest warrant was issued for Suthep by authorities who cited insurrection as the reason, but police did not act on the order for fear of further provocation.

Following the announcement of a 60-day emergency decree on 21 January 2014, Yingluck met with the EC on 27 January to discuss the possibility of postponing the election due to the latter&#x27;s fear of violence on the day of the election. However, following a three-hour meeting, caretaker Deputy Prime Minister Pongthep Thepkanchana informed media that the polling date remained unchanged. Election commissioner Somchai Srisuthiyakorn stated that the EC would organise the 2 February vote to the best of its ability, including the enactment of measures to prevent violence and the staging of a second round of elections to accommodate voters hindered during the inaugural voting stage. During the meeting at the Army Club, an anti-government protester sustained a gunshot wound; the gunman was arrested.

The smooth completion of the 2 February election did not resolve Thailand&#x27;s political situation, as issues of continuing relevancy remained of concern to the caretaker government: firstly, due to protester blockades, 28 constituencies failed to register candidates; secondly, the constitution required at least 475 filled seats, or 95 per cent of the total number of seats, and the problems caused by protesters meant that this target was not reached—the EC, which believes that the final result will fall three seats short, explained that it would be necessary to hold by-elections over several months in problematic constituencies until all 500 members of the parliament&#x27;s lower house were selected. In the 2011 elections, a 75 per cent voter turnout rate was registered.

On 29 January, the Thai Army announced its support of the CMPO operation to protect the election. Deputy army spokesman Winthai Suvari provided details of the deployment of additional military personnel in areas of particular concern and a joint operation with the CMPO to ensure the safety of state officials and others. The army&#x27;s other key responsibilities will involve providing medical aid in areas close to protest sites, as well as traffic co-ordination duties in such areas. Assistant national police chief Amnart Unartngarm stated that its 200,000 police officers, plus 1,450 rapid-deployment units, would guard 93,535 polling stations in 76 provinces and Bangkok.

===2014 Coup===
On 22 May 2014, the military staged a coup. Prayut Chan-o-cha quickly cracked down on dissent. He put in place controls on the media, imposed Internet censorship, declared a nationwide curfew, banned gatherings of five or more persons and arrested politicians and anti-coup activists, some of whom were charged with sedition and tried in military courts. On 26 May, King Bhumibol Adulyadej endorsed the coup, formally appointing Prayut to &quot;take charge of public administration&quot; as of 24 May. On 22 July 2014, Prayut issued an interim constitution granting himself an amnesty for leading the coup and new sweeping powers. The junta legislature unanimously voted Prayut, the sole candidate, as the new prime minister. The formal appointment was made on 24 August 2014, in which King Bhumibol Adulyadej officially endorsed Prayut as prime minister. Prayut activated Article 44 of the interim constitution. It authorises Prayut to issue &quot;any order to suppress&quot; any act that &quot;undermines public peace and order or national security, the monarchy&quot;. Political rights had been a free fall since Prayut took control. On 13 October 2016, Bhumibol passed away, King Vajiralongkorn became the new monarch. On 16 July 2017, Prayut and military junta legislator issued the Crown Property law, making King Vajiralongkorn in control of the world&#x27;s biggest royal fortune.

=== 2017 military junta constitution ===
Under the 2017 constitution, the senate was appointed by the NCPO and would select the prime minister alongside the House of Representatives. Political parties were able to nominate anyone as their prime minister candidate, including non-party members, which led commentators to believe that Prayut planned to be selected as prime minister with votes from 250 senators and MPs from pro-junta parties, namely the Phalang Pracharat Party, which has close ties to the junta and is led by Prayut&#x27;s cabinet ministers,

After the 2019 election, Prayut Chan-o-cha became prime minister, defeating Thanathorn Juangroongruangkit of the anti-junta Future Forward Party 500 votes to 244, in which 249 of 500 votes came from a near-unanimous body of senators appointed by the junta (NCPO).

===2020–2021 protests===

The protests began in early 2020 with demonstrations against the government of Prime Minister Prayut Chan-o-cha. They later expanded to include the unprecedented demands for reform of the Thai monarchy. The protests were initially triggered by the dissolution of the Future Forward Party (FFP) in late February 2020 which was critical of Prayut, the changes to the Thai constitution in 2017 and the country&#x27;s political landscape that it gave rise to.

In November 2021, The Constitutional Court ruled that demands for reform of the Thai monarchy have abused of the rights and freedoms and harmed the state&#x27;s security and ordered an end to all movements, declaring unconstitutional. It has been likened to judicial coup.

=== Since 2022 ===

In September 2022, Thailand&#x27;s Constitutional Court ruled that Prime Minister Prayuth Chan-ocha can stay in office. The opposition had challenged him, because the new constitution limits the term for prime minister as a total period of eight years in office. The Constitutional Court&#x27;s ruling was that his term in office began in April 2017, simultaneously with the new constitution, although General Prayuth had ruled as the leader of the government since the 2014 military coup.

In May 2023, Thailand&#x27;s reformist opposition, the progressive Move Forward Party (MFP) and the populist Pheu Thai Party, won the general election, meaning the royalist-military parties that supported Prime Minister Prayuth Chan-ocha lost power. On 22 August 2023, Srettha Thavisin of the populist Pheu Thai party, became Thailand&#x27;s new prime minister, while the Pheu Thai party&#x27;s billionaire figurehead Thaksin Shinawatra returned to Thailand after years in self-imposed exile.

==Ideas of power==

According to Sopranzetti, who studied Thai ideas of power, in politics, power is seen in terms of moral authority (&quot;barami&quot;) and amoral power (&quot;amnat&quot;).

===Barami===

&quot;Barami&quot; is a form of power in moral people. It comes from karmic merit.

&quot;Barami&quot; can be loosely translated as &quot;charismatic power&quot; too. Despite its cosmological roots, barami is important in politics. Since a person&#x27;s possession of &quot;barami&quot; could be the basis for their claim to power, their lack of it could be the rallying point for a person&#x27;s enemies to dispose of them.

Throughout the Bangkok period (1783-present), the representation and maintenance of one&#x27;s &quot;barami&quot; is a crucial means by which political and social power is maintained or seized, according to Veal.

Political power in Thailand is often strongly associated with the charismatic power of &quot;barami&quot;.

This has implications for business and political institutions, one being the notion that &quot;the truth is only accessible to spiritually powerful people&quot;. For example, in 2011, a newspaper wrote that a Lieutenant said that only those with enough merit (&quot;bun&quot;) should have the privilege of reading top-secret documents. Since there is an association, in political institutions, between &quot;barami&quot;, truth, and political participation; in the 1970s, unpopular politicians were compared with animals low on the biological hierarchy—such as monitor lizards and water buffalo—to portray them as having less of and residing farther away from &quot;barami&quot;.

As moral authority, barami is based &quot;in the spiritual world of Buddhism&quot;, the consequence of the merit of previous lives and earned through good deeds. &quot;Barami&quot; can be lost (&quot;sia barami&quot;) when holders of &quot;barami&quot; don&#x27;t live up to their demands of their character.

For example, Phibun&#x27;s political regime had moral legitimacy (and &quot;barami&quot;) because Phibun had the reputation of duty to the nation; Sarit&#x27;s regime had &quot;barami&quot; because Sarit had the reputation of defence of the monarchy and promotion of national development; Prem&#x27;s regime had legitimacy because Prem had the reputation of trusted service and discourse on &quot;good people&quot;; and Thaksin&#x27;s political regime had &quot;barami&quot; because Thaksin had the reputation of popular support.

===Amnat===

&quot;Amnat&quot; is a form of authority that comes from a formal position, according to Sopranzetti. It is not intrinsic. Amnat can also be translated as &quot;power,&quot; raw amoral power used for either good or evil, Chachavalpongpun said.

As raw power, amnat is &quot;temporal&quot;, through reaching a position of power. Amnat is the power of superiors over subordinates. &quot;Amnat&quot; can be lost (&quot;sia amnat&quot;) when used without a form of moral legitimacy, or the support of &quot;barami&quot;. Fear, in this context, can be contested.

For example, &quot;amnat&quot; was used in politics in order to enact policy, to promote moral precepts in a top-down way, to eliminate opponents, to not be constrained by constitution, and to promote and demote subordinates in an arbitrary manner.

==See also==
* Thailand
* History of Thailand
* Media in Thailand
* Constitution of Thailand

==References==
==External links==
* In depth – Thailand – Political turmoil in the streets of Bangkok, CBC News, 21 May 2010.
* Thailand Calls State of Emergency, BBC News, accessed 2006-09-19.
* Thaiswatch.com
* Live Blog
* Blog
* Asian Human Rights Commission – Thailand homepage
* Rule of Lords Weekly column on human rights &amp; the rule of law in Thailand and Burma
* Southern Thailand insurgency news Page archiving daily news about the violence in southern Thailand
* Extrajudicial Killings
* Cns.go.th
* Interview with Thaksin Shinawattra by Radio France Internationale/France 24 in English April 2009
* Interview with Red Shirt leader Jakkraphob Bhenkair by Radio France Internationale in English April 2009
* Aceproject.org</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1154151" start="4" end="24" title="Politics of Thailand" label="politics of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="65" end="88" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12376089" start="102" end="116" title="Prime Minister of Thailand" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="124" end="142" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q849242" start="149" end="167" title="Hereditary monarchy" label="hereditary monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="171" end="184" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="190" end="199" title="judiciary" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q16914766" start="273" end="308" title="2014 Thai coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="the coup d&amp;#x27;état of 22 May 2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q16919521" start="372" end="408" title="National Council for Peace and Order" label="National Council for Peace and Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q715625" start="567" end="578" title="martial law" label="martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q593273" start="764" end="784" title="Constitutional Court of Thailand" label="Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="1000" end="1017" title="absolute monarchy" label="absolute monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120252" start="1029" end="1047" title="Siamese revolution of 1932" label="Siamese revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="1148" end="1171" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25424534" start="1445" end="1459" title="military junta" label="military junta"/>
<link wikidata="Q49896" start="1594" end="1610" title="Military dictatorship" label="military regimes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2071" end="2083" title="Constitution of Thailand#1932 constitution" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2798" end="2819" title="Constitution of Thailand#1959 charter" label="the 1959 constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037676" start="3160" end="3170" title="Black May (1992)" label="Bloody May"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3271" end="3288" title="Constitution of Thailand#1997 constitution" label="1997 constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q593273" start="3687" end="3707" title="Constitutional Court of Thailand" label="Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641572" start="3713" end="3733" title="Administrative Court" label="Administrative Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q169180" start="3743" end="3752" title="Ombudsman" label="Ombudsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q164373" start="3881" end="3899" title="Thaksin Shinawatra" label="Thaksin Shinawatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663787" start="4798" end="4814" title="King of Thailand" label="King of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921854" start="4849" end="4861" title="Constitution of Thailand" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q855252" start="4911" end="4924" title="Bhumibol Adulyadej" label="King Bhumibol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909090" start="4996" end="5011" title="moral authority" label="moral authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q158861" start="5418" end="5424" title="Rama V" label="Rama V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="5821" end="5828" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120252" start="5885" end="5900" title="Siamese revolution of 1932" label="1932 revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q313124" start="6076" end="6084" title="Rama VII" label="Rama VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q714934" start="6508" end="6523" title="Pridi Banomyong" label="Pridi Banomyong"/>
<link wikidata="Q217564" start="7203" end="7221" title="human rights in Thailand" label="basic human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="7347" end="7358" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359816" start="7595" end="7622" title="Communist Party of Thailand" label="Communist Party of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q43467" start="7830" end="7841" title="Indochinese" label="Indochinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q467346" start="8345" end="8361" title="Sa-ngad Chaloryu" label="Sa-ngad Chaloryu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907348" start="8400" end="8417" title="6 October 1976 Massacre" label="massacre and coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q748780" start="8513" end="8526" title="First Indochina War" label="Indochina War"/>
<link wikidata="Q929651" start="9471" end="9481" title="grassroots" label="grassroots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037676" start="9649" end="9658" title="Black May (1992)" label="Black May"/>
<link wikidata="Q4592321" start="9720" end="9737" title="1997 constitution of Thailand" label="1997 constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929104" start="10026" end="10043" title="2007 Constitution of Thailand" label="2007 constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q164373" start="10055" end="10069" title="Thaksin Shinawatra" label="Thaksin&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q889791" start="10357" end="10361" title="List of Thai monarchs" label="king"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755" start="10396" end="10408" title="constitution" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="10626" end="10644" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147625" start="10652" end="10666" title="List of Prime Ministers of Thailand" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368318" start="11005" end="11034" title="National Assembly of Thailand" label="National Assembly of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q914226" start="11152" end="11176" title="House of Representatives (Thailand)" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699171" start="11402" end="11408" title="Senate of Thailand" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q18349000" start="11660" end="11670" title="Corruption in Thailand" label="Corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q16914766" start="12300" end="12326" title="2014 Thai coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="2014 Thai coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="12803" end="12811" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="12855" end="12860" title="ASEAN" label="ASEAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q542549" start="13174" end="13190" title="East Asia Summit" label="East Asia Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q473046" start="13497" end="13518" title="Supachai Panitchpakdi" label="Supachai Panitchpakdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="13600" end="13624" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108126" start="14751" end="14768" title="Prayut Chan-o-cha" label="Prayut Chan-o-cha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120252" start="14875" end="14901" title="Siamese revolution of 1932" label="Siamese revolution of 1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908516" start="15082" end="15094" title="entrepreneur" label="entrepreneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575745" start="15192" end="15208" title="1973 Thai popular uprising" label="popular uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q49896" start="15262" end="15283" title="military dictatorship" label="military dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q439990" start="15302" end="15321" title="Thanom Kittikachorn" label="Thanom Kittikachorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907348" start="15553" end="15576" title="6 October 1976 massacre" label="6 October 1976 massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663787" start="15622" end="15630" title="Monarchy of Thailand" label="monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="15658" end="15666" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714218" start="15697" end="15709" title="Lèse-majesté in Thailand" label="lèse-majesté"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="15764" end="15773" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q379827" start="15803" end="15820" title="Prem Tinsulanonda" label="Prem Tinsulanonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q701841" start="15923" end="15943" title="Chatichai Choonhavan" label="Chatichai Choonhavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067749" start="15958" end="15974" title="Chart Thai Party" label="Chart Thai Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147625" start="16042" end="16056" title="List of Prime Ministers of Thailand" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q6585266" start="16123" end="16149" title="1991 Thai coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1991 Thai coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q6528193" start="16188" end="16218" title="National Peace Keeping Council" label="National Peace Keeping Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q485702" start="16274" end="16291" title="Anand Panyarachun" label="Anand Panyarachun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6507896" start="16456" end="16488" title="March 1992 Thai general election" label="March 1992 Thai general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q959614" start="16512" end="16531" title="Suchinda Kraprayoon" label="Suchinda Kraprayoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060894" start="16601" end="16618" title="Chamlong Srimuang" label="Chamlong Srimuang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037676" start="16767" end="16783" title="Black May (1992)" label="Black May events"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354526" start="16969" end="16976" title="Amnesty law" label="amnesty"/>
<link wikidata="Q855252" start="16988" end="17006" title="Bhumibol Adulyadej" label="Bhumibol Adulyadej"/>
<link wikidata="Q464301" start="17344" end="17357" title="Chuan Leekpai" label="Chuan Leekpai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186248" start="17375" end="17389" title="Democrat Party (Thailand)" label="Democrat Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067749" start="17549" end="17565" title="Chart Thai Party" label="Chart Thai Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q111980" start="17653" end="17672" title="Banharn Silpa-archa" label="Banharn Silpa-archa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068511" start="17788" end="17810" title="Chavalit Youngchaiyudh" label="Chavalit Youngchaiyudh"/>
<link wikidata="Q80880" start="17894" end="17916" title="1997 Asian financial crisis" label="Asian financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4592321" start="18133" end="18150" title="1997 constitution of Thailand" label="1997 constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="18366" end="18387" title="bicameral legislature" label="bicameral legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196727" start="18442" end="18458" title="directly elected" label="directly elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q6507931" start="18504" end="18526" title="2001 Thailand legislative election" label="January 2001 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q164373" start="18564" end="18582" title="Thaksin Shinawatra" label="Thaksin Shinawatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542181" start="18632" end="18651" title="Thai Rak Thai Party" label="Thai Rak Thai Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911548" start="19480" end="19520" title="2005 Thailand legislative election" label="general election held on 6 February 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q80880" start="19871" end="19893" title="1997 Asian financial crisis" label="Asian financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15243731" start="20019" end="20050" title="2013–2014 Thai political crisis" label="2013–2014 Thai political crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q380752" start="20101" end="20120" title="Udon Thani Province" label="Udon Thani Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q13021882" start="20712" end="20716" title="ASTV (Thailand)" label="ASTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103943" start="20775" end="20811" title="People&amp;#x27;s Alliance for Democracy" label="People&amp;#x27;s Alliance for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q717617" start="20905" end="20923" title="Sonthi Limthongkul" label="Sonthi Limthongkul"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918562" start="21033" end="21048" title="Thailand political crisis 2005-2006" label="public protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q480498" start="21115" end="21126" title="impeachment" label="impeachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q741182" start="21329" end="21349" title="Dissolution of parliament" label="dissolved parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333366" start="21383" end="21396" title="snap election" label="snap election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6507902" start="21415" end="21427" title="April 2006 Thailand legislative election" label="The election"/>
<link wikidata="Q179366" start="21432" end="21439" title="boycott" label="boycott"/>
<link wikidata="Q526999" start="21550" end="21556" title="quorum" label="quorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368318" start="21670" end="21680" title="National Assembly of Thailand" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q380552" start="21698" end="21719" title="constitutional crisis" label="constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6507909" start="22184" end="22228" title="October 2006 Thailand legislative election" label="a new round of elections for 15 October 2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717573" start="22416" end="22437" title="extrajudicial killing" label="extrajudicial killing"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="22957" end="22970" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4192601" start="23061" end="23120" title="Council for Democratic Reform under Constitutional Monarchy" label="Council for Democratic Reform under Constitutional Monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q334722" start="23143" end="23163" title="Sonthi Boonyaratglin" label="Sonthi Boonyaratglin"/>
<link wikidata="Q860423" start="23232" end="23257" title="2006 Thailand coup" label="coup on 19 September 2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q4592321" start="23263" end="23280" title="1997 constitution of Thailand" label="1997 constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929104" start="24437" end="24467" title="2007 Constitution of Thailand" label="controversial new constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q112051" start="24993" end="25018" title="People&amp;#x27;s Power Party (Thailand)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Power Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q243623" start="25105" end="25121" title="Samak Sundaravej" label="Samak Sundaravej"/>
<link wikidata="Q112051" start="25220" end="25245" title="People&amp;#x27;s Power Party (Thailand)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Power Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q48968147" start="25828" end="25838" title="Red Shirts (Thailand)" label="Red Shirts"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="26516" end="26524" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q47217" start="26626" end="26644" title="civil disobedience" label="civil disobedience"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897387" start="26649" end="26655" title="unrest" label="unrest"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27293" end="27305" title="Premiership of Thaksin Shinawatra#Anti-drug policies" label="war on drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q243623" start="28377" end="28393" title="Samak Sundaravej" label="Samak Sundaravej"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929104" start="28455" end="28472" title="2007 Constitution of Thailand" label="2007 constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209733" start="28973" end="28993" title="Thammasat University" label="Thammasat University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30824" end="30843" title="Yongyuth Tiyapairat" label="Yongyuth Tiyapairat"/>
<link wikidata="Q45949" start="31177" end="31196" title="Preah Vihear Temple" label="Preah Vihear Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q806706" start="32363" end="32379" title="Bank of Thailand" label="Bank of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="32619" end="32626" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046755" start="32667" end="32699" title="Don Mueang International Airport" label="Don Mueang International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060894" start="32811" end="32828" title="Chamlong Srimuang" label="Chamlong Srimuang"/>
<link wikidata="Q240694" start="33065" end="33093" title="Phuket International Airport" label="Phuket International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q573970" start="33094" end="33100" title="Airport apron" label="tarmac"/>
<link wikidata="Q182565" start="33125" end="33140" title="Phuket Province" label="Phuket Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000353" start="33275" end="33280" title="Krabi" label="Krabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q651286" start="33285" end="33292" title="Hat Yai" label="Hat Yai"/>
<link wikidata="Q584041" start="33337" end="33351" title="arrest warrant" label="arrest warrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q717617" start="33357" end="33375" title="Sondhi Limthongkul" label="Sondhi Limthongkul"/>
<link wikidata="Q124734" start="33418" end="33430" title="insurrection" label="insurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q18074156" start="33432" end="33442" title="Conspiracy (political)" label="conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897005" start="33444" end="33461" title="unlawful assembly" label="unlawful assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322759" start="34123" end="34127" title="United Front for Democracy Against Dictatorship" label="DAAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q112051" start="34852" end="34870" title="People Power Party (Thailand)" label="People Power Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q243623" start="35375" end="35391" title="Samak Sundaravej" label="Samak Sundaravej"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067749" start="35424" end="35434" title="Chart Thai" label="Chart Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q298088" start="35830" end="35847" title="Somchai Wongsawat" label="Somchai Wongsawat"/>
<link wikidata="Q612569" start="36090" end="36107" title="Anupong Paochinda" label="Anupong Paochinda"/>
<link wikidata="Q243623" start="36322" end="36338" title="Samak Sundaravej" label="Samak Sundaravej"/>
<link wikidata="Q298088" start="36575" end="36592" title="Somchai Wongsawat" label="Somchai Wongsawat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103943" start="36763" end="36799" title="People&amp;#x27;s Alliance for Democracy" label="People&amp;#x27;s Alliance for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q112051" start="37121" end="37139" title="People Power Party (Thailand)" label="People Power Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q298088" start="37169" end="37186" title="Somchai Wongsawat" label="Somchai Wongsawat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060894" start="37537" end="37554" title="Chamlong Srimuang" label="Chamlong Srimuang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103943" start="37602" end="37638" title="People&amp;#x27;s Alliance for Democracy" label="People&amp;#x27;s Alliance for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q124734" start="37743" end="37755" title="insurrection" label="insurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="37820" end="37827" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q717617" start="37895" end="37913" title="Sondhi Limthongkul" label="Sondhi Limthongkul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365723" start="38205" end="38217" title="Pathum Thani" label="Pathum Thani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068511" start="38405" end="38426" title="Chavalit Yongchaiyudh" label="Chavalit Yongchaiyudh"/>
<link wikidata="Q298088" start="38999" end="39016" title="Somchai Wongsawat" label="Somchai Wongsawat"/>
<link wikidata="Q188055" start="39142" end="39147" title="siege" label="siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q451867" start="39303" end="39332" title="Asian Human Rights Commission" label="Asian Human Rights Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="40070" end="40075" title="ASEAN" label="ASEAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q170919" start="40086" end="40093" title="Pattaya" label="Pattaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q216227" start="40498" end="40516" title="state of emergency" label="state of emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186248" start="41549" end="41563" title="Democrat Party (Thailand)" label="Democrat Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322759" start="41726" end="41773" title="United Front for Democracy Against Dictatorship" label="United Front for Democracy Against Dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369912" start="42406" end="42423" title="Suthep Thaugsuban" label="Suthep Thaugsuban"/>
<link wikidata="Q381897" start="43449" end="43453" title="Isan" label="Isan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="43461" end="43464" title="Gross domestic product" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q15915674" start="43996" end="44037" title="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Reform Committee" label="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Reform Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108126" start="45377" end="45394" title="Prayut Chan-o-cha" label="Prayut Chan-o-cha"/>
<link wikidata="Q16914766" start="48192" end="48196" title="2014 Thai coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108126" start="48198" end="48215" title="Prayut Chan-o-cha" label="Prayut Chan-o-cha"/>
<link wikidata="Q22696" start="48296" end="48315" title="Internet censorship" label="Internet censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q223625" start="48339" end="48345" title="curfew" label="curfew"/>
<link wikidata="Q544394" start="48470" end="48478" title="sedition" label="sedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q752080" start="48492" end="48507" title="military courts" label="military courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q855252" start="48525" end="48543" title="Bhumibol Adulyadej" label="Bhumibol Adulyadej"/>
<link wikidata="Q17399600" start="48690" end="48710" title="2014 interim constitution of Thailand" label="interim constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q855252" start="48945" end="48963" title="Bhumibol Adulyadej" label="Bhumibol Adulyadej"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49027" end="49037" title="2014 interim constitution of Thailand#Section 44" label="Article 44"/>
<link wikidata="Q258307" start="49187" end="49204" title="national security" label="national security"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663787" start="49210" end="49218" title="Monarchy of Thailand" label="monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q855252" start="49311" end="49319" title="Bhumibol" label="Bhumibol"/>
<link wikidata="Q548733" start="49333" end="49352" title="King Vajiralongkorn" label="King Vajiralongkorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q25352284" start="49405" end="49430" title="National Legislative Assembly of Thailand (2014)" label="military junta legislator"/>
<link wikidata="Q548733" start="49469" end="49488" title="King Vajiralongkorn" label="King Vajiralongkorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q751825" start="49528" end="49541" title="Crown Property Bureau" label="royal fortune"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49595" end="49612" title="Constitution of Thailand#2017 constitution" label="2017 constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699171" start="49618" end="49624" title="Senate of Thailand" label="senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16919521" start="49646" end="49650" title="National Council for Peace and Order" label="NCPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q914226" start="49701" end="49725" title="House of Representatives (Thailand)" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q55077745" start="49997" end="50020" title="Phalang Pracharat Party" label="Phalang Pracharat Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16937892" start="50114" end="50127" title="2019 Thai general election" label="2019 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108126" start="50129" end="50146" title="Prayut Chan-o-cha" label="Prayut Chan-o-cha"/>
<link wikidata="Q55439404" start="50180" end="50209" title="Thanathorn Juangroongruangkit" label="Thanathorn Juangroongruangkit"/>
<link wikidata="Q50549434" start="50228" end="50248" title="Future Forward Party" label="Future Forward Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108126" start="50489" end="50506" title="Prayut Chan-o-cha" label="Prayut Chan-o-cha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663787" start="50583" end="50596" title="Monarchy of Thailand" label="Thai monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q50549434" start="50662" end="50682" title="Future Forward Party" label="Future Forward Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921854" start="50760" end="50777" title="Constitution of Thailand" label="Thai constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q593273" start="50874" end="50894" title="Constitutional Court of Thailand" label="Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663787" start="50932" end="50945" title="Monarchy of Thailand" label="Thai monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164288" start="51110" end="51123" title="Constitutional Coup" label="judicial coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q87647572" start="51704" end="51722" title="Move Forward Party" label="Move Forward Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142913" start="51746" end="51761" title="Pheu Thai Party" label="Pheu Thai Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q84081085" start="51771" end="51787" title="2023 Thai general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q118213697" start="51906" end="51922" title="Srettha Thavisin" label="Srettha Thavisin"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="55446" end="55454" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q379391" start="55457" end="55476" title="History of Thailand" label="History of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805942" start="55479" end="55496" title="Media in Thailand" label="Media in Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921854" start="55499" end="55523" title="Constitution of Thailand" label="Constitution of Thailand"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30133" wikidata="Q1901218" url="?curid=30133" title="Economy of Thailand">
<text>The economy of Thailand is dependent on exports, which accounted in 2021 for about 58 percent of the country&#x27;s gross domestic product (GDP). Thailand itself is a newly industrialized country, with a GDP of 17.922 trillion baht (US$514.8 billion) in 2023, the 9th largest economy in Asia. As of 2018, Thailand has an average inflation of 1.06% and an account surplus of 7.5% of the country&#x27;s GDP. Its currency, the baht, is ranked as the tenth most frequently used world payment currency in 2017.

The industrial and service sectors are the main sectors in the Thai gross domestic product, with the former accounting for 39.2 percent of GDP. Thailand&#x27;s agricultural sector produces 8.4 percent of GDP—lower than the trade and logistics and communication sectors, which account for 13.4 percent and 9.8 percent of GDP respectively. The construction and mining sector adds 4.3 percent to the country&#x27;s gross domestic product. Other service sectors (including the financial, education, and hotel and restaurant sectors) account for 24.9 percent of the country&#x27;s GDP. Telecommunications and trade in services are emerging as centers of industrial expansion and economic competitiveness.

Thailand is the second-largest economy in Southeast Asia, after Indonesia. Its per capita GDP 255,362 baht (US$7,336) in 2023 ranks fourth in Southeast Asian per capita GDP, after Singapore, Brunei, and Malaysia. In July 2018, Thailand held US$237.5 billion in international reserves, the second-largest in Southeast Asia (after Singapore). Its surplus in the current account balance ranks tenth of the world, made US$37.898 billion to the country in 2018. Thailand ranks second in Southeast Asia in external trade volume, after Singapore.

The nation is recognized by the World Bank as &quot;one of the great development success stories&quot; in social and development indicators. Despite a per capita gross national income (GNI) of US$7,090 and ranking 66th in the Human Development Index (HDI), the percentage of people below the national poverty line decreased from 65.26 percent in 1988 to 8.61 percent in 2016, according to the Office of the National Economic and Social Development Council&#x27;s (NESDC) new poverty baseline.

Thailand is one of the countries with the lowest unemployment rates in the world, reported as one percent for the first quarter of 2014. This is due to a large proportion of the population working in subsistence agriculture or on other vulnerable employment (own-account work and unpaid family work).

==Kingdom of Thailand budget==
The Kingdom of Thailand&#x27;s FY2017 budget was 2.733 trillion baht.

In May 2018, the Thai Cabinet approved a FY2019 budget of three trillion baht, up 3.4 percent—100 billion baht—from FY2018. Annual revenue is projected to reach 2.55 trillion baht, up 4.1 percent, or 100 billion baht. Overall, the national budget will face a deficit of 450 billion baht. The cabinet also approved a budget deficit until 2022 in order to drive the economy to a growth of 3.5–4.5 percent a year.

==History==

===Before 1945===
Thailand, formerly known as Siam, opened to foreign contact in the pre-industrial era. Despite the scarcity of resources in Siam, coastal ports and cities and those at the river mouth were early economic centers which welcomed merchants from Persia, the Arab countries, India, and China. The rise of Ayutthaya during the 14th century was connected to renewed Chinese commercial activity, and the kingdom became one of the most prosperous trade centers in Asia.

When the capital of the kingdom moved to Bangkok during the 19th century, foreign trade (particularly with China) became the focus of the government. Chinese merchants came to trade; some settled in the country and received official positions. A number of Chinese merchants and migrants became high dignitaries in the court.

From the mid-19th century onward, European merchants were increasingly active. The Bowring Treaty, signed in 1855, guaranteed the privileges of British traders. The Harris Treaty of 1856, which updated the Roberts Treaty of 1833, extended the same guarantees to American traders.

The domestic market developed slowly, with serfdom a possible cause of domestic stagnation. Most of the male population in Siam was in the service of court officials, while their wives and daughters may have traded on a small scale in local markets. Those who were heavily indebted might sell themselves as slaves. King Rama V abolished serfdom and slavery in 1901 and 1905, respectively.

From the early 20th century to the end of World War II, Siam&#x27;s economy gradually became globalized. Major entrepreneurs were ethnic Chinese who became Siamese nationals. Exports of agricultural products (especially rice) were very important and Thailand has been among the top rice exporters in the world. The Siamese economy suffered greatly from the Great Depression, a cause of the Siamese revolution of 1932.

Significant investment in education in the 1930s (and again in the 1950s) laid the basis for economic growth, as did a liberal approach to trade and investment.

===After 1945===

====1945–1955====
Postwar domestic and international politics played significant roles in Thai economic development for most of the Cold War era. From 1945 to 1947 (when the Cold War had not yet begun), the Thai economy suffered because of the Second World War. During the war, the Thai government (led by Field Marshal Luang Phibulsongkram) allied with Japan and declared war against the Allies. After the war, Thailand had to supply 1.5 million tons of rice to Western countries without charge, a burden on the country&#x27;s economic recovery. The government tried to solve the problem by establishing a rice office to oversee the rice trade. During this period, a multiple-exchange-rate system was introduced amid fiscal problems, and the kingdom experienced a shortage of consumer goods.

In November 1947, a brief democratic period was ended by a military coup and the Thai economy regained its momentum. In his dissertation, Somsak Nilnopkoon considers the period from 1947 to 1951 one of prosperity. By April 1948, Phibulsongkram, the wartime prime minister, returned to his previous office. However, he was caught in a power struggle between his subordinates. To preserve his power, Phibulsongkram began an anti-communist campaign to seek support from the United States. As a result, from 1950 onward, Thailand received military and economic aid from the US. The Phibulsongkram government established many state enterprises, which were seen as economic nationalism. The state (and its bureaucrats) dominated capital allocation in the kingdom. Ammar Siamwalla, one of Thailand&#x27;s most prominent economists, calls it the period of &quot;bureaucratic capitalism&quot;.

====1955–1985====
In 1955, Thailand began to see a change in its economy fueled by domestic and international politics. The power struggle between the two main factions of the Phibul regime—led by Police General Phao Sriyanond and General (later, Field Marshal) Sarit Thanarat—increased, causing Sriyanonda to unsuccessfully seek support from the US for a coup against Phibulsongkram regime. Luang Phibulsongkram attempted to democratize his regime, seeking popular support by developing the economy. He again turned to the US, asking for economic rather than military aid. The US responded with unprecedented economic aid to the kingdom from 1955 to 1959. The Phibulsongkram government also made important changes to the country&#x27;s fiscal policies, including scrapping the multiple-exchange-rate system in favor of a fixed, unified system which was in use until 1984. The government also neutralized trade and conducted secret diplomacy with the People&#x27;s Republic of China, displeasing the United States.

Despite his attempts to maintain power, Luang Phibulsongkram was deposed (with Field Marshal Phin Choonhavan and Police General Phao Sriyanond) on 16 September 1957 in a coup led by Field Marshal Sarit Thanarat. The Thanarat regime (in power from 1957 to 1973) maintained the course set by the Phibulsongkram regime with US support after severing all ties with the People&#x27;s Republic of China and supporting US operations in Indochina. It developed the country&#x27;s infrastructure and privatized state enterprises unrelated to that infrastructure. During this period, a number of economic institutions were established, including the Bureau of Budget, the NESDC, and the Thailand Board of Investment (BOI). The National Economic and Social Development Plan was implemented in 1961. During this period, the market-oriented Import-Substituting Industrialization (ISI) led to economic expansion in the kingdom during the 1960s. According to former President Richard M. Nixon&#x27;s 1967 &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot; article, Thailand entered a period of rapid growth in 1958 (with an average growth rate of seven percent a year).

From the 1970s to 1984, Thailand suffered from many economic problems: decreasing US investment, budget deficits, oil-price spikes, and inflation. Domestic politics were also unstable. With the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia on 25 December 1978, Thailand became the front-line state in the struggle against communism, surrounded by two communist countries and a socialist Burma under General Ne Win. Successive governments tried to solve the economic problems by promoting exports and tourism, still important for the Thai economy.

One of the best-known measures to deal with the economic problems of that time was implemented under General Prem Tinsulanonda&#x27;s government, in power from 1980 to 1988. Between 1981 and 1984, the government devalued the national currency, the Thai baht (THB), three times. On 12 May 1981, it was devalued by 1.07 percent, from THB20.775/US$ to THB21/US$. On 15 July 1981, it was again devalued, this time by 8.7 percent (from THB21/US$ to THB23/US$). The third devaluation, on 5 November 1984, was the most significant: 15 percent, from THB23/US$ to THB27/US$. The government also replaced the country&#x27;s fixed exchange rate (where it was pegged to the US dollar) with a &quot;multiple currency basket peg system&quot; in which the US dollar bore 80 percent of the weight. Calculated from the IMF&#x27;s World Economic Outlook Database, in the period 1980–1984, the Thai economy had an average GDP growth rate of 5.4 percent.

====1985–1997====
Concurrent with the third devaluation of the Thai baht, on 22 September 1985, Japan, the US, the United Kingdom, France, and West Germany signed the Plaza Accord to depreciate the US dollar in relation to the yen and the Deutsche Mark. Since the dollar accounted for 80 percent of the Thai currency basket, the baht was depreciated further, making Thailand&#x27;s exports more competitive and the country more attractive to foreign direct investment (FDI) (especially from Japan, whose currency had appreciated since 1985). In 1988, Prem Tinsulanonda resigned and was succeeded by Chatichai Choonhavan, the first democratically elected prime minister of Thailand since 1976. The Cambodian-Vietnamese War was ending; Vietnam gradually retreated from Cambodia by 1989, enhancing Thai economic development.

After the 1984 baht devaluation and the 1985 Plaza Accord, although the public sector struggled due to fiscal constraints, the private sector grew. The country&#x27;s improved foreign trade and an influx of foreign direct investment (mainly from Japan) triggered an economic boom from 1987 to 1996. Although Thailand had previously promoted its exports, during this period the country shifted from import-substitution (ISI) to export-oriented industrialization (EOI). During this decade the Thai GDP (calculated from the IMF World Economic Outlook database) had an average growth rate of 9.5 percent per year, with a peak of 13.3 percent in 1988. In the same period, the volume of Thai exports of goods and services had an average growth rate of 14.8 percent, with a peak of 26.1 percent in 1988.

Economic problems persisted. From 1987 to 1996, Thailand experienced a current account deficit averaging −5.4 percent of GDP per year, and the deficit continued to increase. In 1996, the current account deficit accounted for −7.887 percent of GDP (US$14.351 billion). A shortage of capital was another problem. The first Chuan Leekpai government, in office from September 1992 to May 1995, tried to solve this problem by granting Bangkok International Banking Facility (BIBF) licenses to Thai banks in 1993. This allowed BIBF banks to benefit from Thailand&#x27;s high-interest rate by borrowing from foreign financial institutions at low interest and loaning to Thai businesses. By 1997, foreign debt had risen to US$109,276 billion (65% of which was short-term debt), while Thailand had US$38,700 billion in international reserves. Many loans were backed by real estate, creating an economic bubble. By late 1996, there was a loss of confidence in the country&#x27;s financial institutions; the government closed 18 trust companies and three commercial banks. The following year, 56 financial institutions were closed by the government.

Another problem was foreign speculation. Aware of Thailand&#x27;s economic problems and its currency basket exchange rate, foreign speculators (including hedge funds) were certain that the government would again devalue the baht, under pressure on both the spot and forward markets. In the spot market, to force devaluation, speculators took out loans in baht and made loans in dollars. In the forward market, speculators (believing that the baht would soon be devalued) bet against the currency by contracting with dealers who would give dollars in return for an agreement to repay a specific amount of baht several months in the future.
In the government, there was a call from Virapong Ramangkul (one of Prime Minister Chavalit Yongchaiyudh&#x27;s economic advisers) to devalue the baht, which was supported by former Prime Minister Prem Tinsulanonda. Yongchaiyudh ignored them, relying on the Bank of Thailand (led by Governor Rerngchai Marakanond, who spent as much as US$24,000 billion – about two-thirds of Thailand&#x27;s international reserves) to protect the baht. On 2 July 1997, Thailand had US$2,850 billion remaining in international reserves, and could no longer protect the baht. That day Marakanond decided to float the baht, triggering the 1997 Asian Financial Crisis.

====1997–2000====

The Thai economy collapsed as a result of the 1997 Asian financial crisis. Within a few months, the value of the baht floated from THB25/US$ (its lowest point) to THB56/US$. The Stock Exchange of Thailand (SET) dropped from a peak of 1,753.73 in 1994 to a low of 207.31 in 1998. The country&#x27;s GDP dropped from THB3.115  trillion at the end of 1996 to THB2.749  trillion at the end of 1998. In dollar terms, it took Thailand as long as 10 years to regain its 1996 GDP. The unemployment rate went up nearly threefold: from 1.5 percent of the labor force in 1996 to 4.4 percent in 1998.

A sharp decrease in the value of the baht abruptly increased foreign debt, undermining financial institutions. Many were sold, in part, to foreign investors while others went bankrupt. Due to low international reserves from the Bank of Thailand&#x27;s currency-protection measures, the government had to accept a loan from the International Monetary Fund (IMF). Overall, Thailand received US$17.2 billion in aid.

The crisis impacted Thai politics. One direct effect was that Prime Minister Chavalit Yongchaiyudh resigned under pressure on 6 November 1997, succeeded by opposition leader Chuan Leekpai. The second Leekpai government, in office from November 1997 to February 2001, tried to implement economic reforms based on IMF-guided neo-liberal capitalism. It pursued strict fiscal policies (keeping interest rates high and cutting government spending), enacting 11 laws it called &quot;bitter medicine&quot; and critics called &quot;the 11 nation-selling laws&quot;. The Thai government and its supporters maintained that with these measures, the Thai economy improved.

In 1999, Thailand had a positive GDP growth rate for the first time since the crisis. Many critics, however, mistrusted the IMF and maintained that government-spending cuts harmed the recovery. Unlike economic problems in Latin America and Africa, they asserted, the Asian financial crisis was born in the private sector and the IMF measures were inappropriate. The positive growth rate in 1999 was because the country&#x27;s GDP had gone down for two consecutive years, as much as −10.5 percent in 1998 alone. In terms of the baht, it was not until 2002 (in dollar terms, not until 2006) that Thailand would regain its 1996 GDP. An additional 1999 loan from the Miyazawa Plan made the question of whether (or to what extent) the Leekpai government helped the Thai economy controversial.

===Recent economic history (2001–present)===
An indirect effect of the financial crisis on Thai politics was the rise of Thaksin Shinawatra. In reaction to the government&#x27;s economic policies, Thaksin Shinawatra&#x27;s Thai Rak Thai Party won a landslide victory over Leekpai&#x27;s Democrat Party in the 2001 general election and took office in February 2001. Although weak export demand held the GDP growth rate to 2.2 percent in the first year of his administration, the first Thaksin Shinawatra government performed well from 2002 to 2004 with growth rates of 5.3, 7.1 and 6.3 percent respectively. His policy was later called Thaksinomics. During Thaksin&#x27;s first term, Thailand&#x27;s economy regained momentum and the country paid its IMF debt by July 2003 (two years ahead of schedule). Despite criticism of Thaksinomics, Thaksin&#x27;s party won another landslide victory over the Democrat Party in the 2005 general election. The official economic data related to Thaksinomics reveals that between 2001 and 2011, Isan&#x27;s GDP per capita more than doubled to US$1,475, while, over the same period, GDP in the Bangkok area rose from US$7,900 to nearly US$13,000.

Thaksin&#x27;s second term was less successful. On 26 December 2004, the Indian Ocean tsunami occurred. In addition to the human toll, it impacted the first-quarter Thai GDP in 2005. The Yellow Shirts, a coalition of protesters against Thaksin, also emerged in 2005. In 2006, Thaksin dissolved the parliament and called for a general election. The April 2006 general election was boycotted by the main opposition parties. Thaksin&#x27;s party won again, but the election was declared invalid by the Constitutional Court. Another general election, scheduled for October 2006, was cancelled. On 19 September a group of soldiers calling themselves the Council for Democratic Reform under the Constitutional Monarchy and led by Sonthi Boonyaratglin organized a coup, ousting Thaksin while he was in New York preparing for a speech at the United Nations General Assembly. During the last year of the second Thaksin government, the Thai GDP grew by 5.1 percent. Under his government, Thailand&#x27;s overall ranking in the IMD Global Competitiveness Scoreboard rose from 31st in 2002 to 25th in 2005 before falling to 29th in 2006.

After the coup, Thailand&#x27;s economy again suffered. From the last quarter of 2006 through 2007, the country was ruled by a military junta led by General Surayud Chulanont, who was appointed prime minister in October 2006. The 2006 GDP growth rate slowed from 6.1, 5.1 and 4.8 percent year-over-year in the first three-quarters to 4.4 percent (YoY) in Q4. Thailand&#x27;s ranking on the IMD Global Competitiveness Scoreboard fell from 26th in 2005 to 29th in 2006 and 33rd in 2007. Thaksin&#x27;s plan for massive infrastructure investments was unmentioned until 2011, when his younger sister Yingluck Shinawatra entered office. In 2007, the Thai economy grew by 5 percent. On 23 December 2007, the military government held a general election. The pro-Thaksin People&#x27;s Power Party, led by Samak Sundaravej, won a landslide victory over Abhisit Vejjajiva&#x27;s Democrat Party.

Under the People&#x27;s Power Party-led government the country fell into political turmoil. This, combined with the financial crisis of 2007–2008 cut the 2008 Thai GDP growth rate to 2.5%. Before the People&#x27;s Alliance for Democracy (PAD) and the Yellow Shirts reconvened in March 2008, the GDP grew by 6.5 percent (YoY) in the first quarter of the year. Thailand&#x27;s ranking on the IMD World Competitiveness Scoreboard rose from 33rd in 2007 to 27th in 2008. The Yellow Shirts occupied the Government House of Thailand in August 2008, and on 9 September the Constitutional Court delivered a decision removing Samak Sundaravej from the prime ministership.

Somchai Wongsawat, Thaksin&#x27;s brother-in-law, succeeded Samak Sundaravej as prime minister on 18 September. In the US the financial crisis reached its peak while the Yellow Shirts were still in Government House, impeding government operations. GDP growth dropped from 5.2 percent (YoY) in Q2 2008 to 3.1 percent (YoY) and −4.1 percent (YoY) in Q3 and Q4. From 25 November to 3 December 2008 the Yellow Shirts, protesting Somchai Wongsawat&#x27;s prime ministership, seized the two Bangkok airports, (Suvarnabhumi and Don Mueang), and damaged Thailand&#x27;s image and economy. On 2 December the Thai Constitutional Court issued a decision dissolving the People&#x27;s Power Party, ousting Somchai Wongsawat as prime minister.

By the end of 2008, a coalition government led by Abhisit Vejjajiva&#x27;s Democrat Party was formed: &quot;[The] legitimacy of the Abhisit government has been questioned since the first day that the Democrat party took the office in 2008 as it was allegedly formed by the military in a military camp&quot;. The government was under pressure from the US financial crisis and the Red Shirts, who refused to acknowledge Abhisit Vejjajiva&#x27;s prime ministry and called for new elections as soon as possible. However, Abhisit rejected the call until he dissolved the parliament for a new election in May 2011. In 2009, his first year in office, Thailand experienced a negative growth rate for the first time since the 1997 financial crisis: a GDP of −2.3 percent.

In 2010, the country&#x27;s growth rate increased to 7.8 percent. However, with the instability surrounding the major 2010 protests, the GDP growth of Thailand settled at around 4–5 percent from highs of 5–7 percent under the previous civilian administration—political uncertainty was identified as the primary cause of a decline in investor and consumer confidence. The IMF predicted that the Thai economy would rebound strongly from the low 0.1 percent GDP growth in 2011, to 5.5 percent in 2012 and then 7.5 percent in 2013, due to the accommodating monetary policy of the Bank of Thailand, as well as a package of fiscal stimulus measures introduced by the incumbent Yingluck Shinawatra government.

In the first two-quarters of 2011, when the political situation was relatively calm, the Thai GDP grew by 3.2 and 2.7 percent (YoY). Under Abhisit&#x27;s administration, Thailand&#x27;s ranking fell from 26 in 2009, to 27 in 2010 and 2011, and the country&#x27;s infrastructure declined since 2009.

In the 2011 general election, the pro-Thaksin Pheu Thai Party again won a decisive victory over the Democrat Party, and Thaksin&#x27;s youngest sister, Yingluck Shinawatra, succeeded Abhisit as prime minister. Elected in July, the Pheu Thai Party-led government began its administration in late-August, and when Yingluck entered office, the 2011 Thailand floods threatened the country—from 25 July 2011 to 16 January 2012, flood waters covered 65 of the country&#x27;s 76 provinces. The World Bank assessed the total damage in December 2011 and reported a cost of THB1.425 trillion (about US$45.7 billion).

The 2011 GDP growth rate fell to 0.1 percent, with a contraction of 8.9 percent (YoY) in Q4 alone.&lt;ref name=&quot;Gross Domestic Product: Q2/2012&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The country&#x27;s overall competitiveness ranking, according to the IMD World Competitiveness Scoreboard, fell from 27 in 2011 to 30 in 2012.

In 2012, Thailand was recovering from the previous year&#x27;s severe flood. The Yingluck government planned to develop the country&#x27;s infrastructure, ranging from a long-term water-management system to logistics. The Eurozone crisis reportedly harmed Thailand&#x27;s economic growth in 2012, directly and indirectly affecting the country&#x27;s exports. Thailand&#x27;s GDP grew by 6.5 percent, with a headline inflation rate of 3.02 percent, and a current account surplus of 0.7 percent of the country&#x27;s GDP.

On 23 December 2013, the Thai baht dropped to a three-year low due to the political unrest during the preceding months. According to &quot;Bloomberg&quot;, the Thai currency lost 4.6 percent over November and December, while the main stock index also dropped (9.1 percent).

Following the Thai military coup in May 2014, Agence France Presse (AFP) published an article claiming that the nation was on the &quot;verge of recession&quot;. Published on 17 June 2014, the article&#x27;s main subject is the departure of nearly 180,000 Cambodians from Thailand due to fears of an immigration &quot;clampdown&quot;, but concluded with information on the Thai economy&#x27;s contraction of 2.1 percent quarter-on-quarter, from January to the end of March 2014.

Since the cessation of the curfew that was enacted by the military in May 2014, the Federation of Thai Industries (FTI)&#x27;s chairman, Supant Mongkolsuthree, said that he projects growth of 2.5–3 percent for the Thai economy in 2014, as well as a revitalisation of the Thai tourist industry in the second half of 2014. Furthermore, Supant also cited the Board of Investment&#x27;s future consideration of a backlog of investment projects, estimated at 700 billion baht, as an economically beneficial process that would occur around October 2014.
Thailand&#x27;s flagging economic performance led, at the end of 2015, to increased criticism of the National Council for Peace and Order&#x27;s (NCPO) handling of the economy, both at home and in influential Western media. The country&#x27;s economic growth of 2.8% in the first quarter of 2019 was recorded to be the slowest since 2014.

The military government unveiled its newest economic initiative, &quot;Thailand 4.0&quot;, in 2016. Thailand 4.0 is the &quot;...master plan to free Thailand from the middle-income trap, making it a high-income nation in five years.&quot;

The government narrative describes Thailand 1.0 as the agrarian economy of Thailand decades ago. Thailand 1.0 gave way to Thailand 2.0, when the nation&#x27;s economy moved on to light industry, textiles, and food processing. Thailand 3.0 describes the present day, with heavy industry and energy accounting for up to 70 percent of the Thai GDP. Thailand 4.0 is described as an economy driven by high-tech industries and innovation that will lead to the production of value-added products and services. According to General Prayut Chan-o-cha, the prime minister, Thailand 4.0 is composed of three elements: 1. Make Thailand a high-income nation, 2. Make Thailand a more inclusive society, and 3. Focus on sustainable growth and development.

Critics of Thailand 4.0 point out that Thailand lacks the specialists and experts, especially in high-technology, needed to modernise the Thai industry. &quot;...the government will have to allow the import of foreign specialists to help bring forward Thailand 4.0,&quot; said Somchai Jitsuchon, research director for inclusive development at the Thailand Development Research Institute (TDRI). &quot;...that won&#x27;t be easy as local professional associations will oppose the idea as they want to reserve those professional careers for Thais only&quot;. He went on to point out that only 56 percent of Thailand&#x27;s population has access to the Internet, an obstacle to the creation of a high-tech workforce. A major thrust of Thailand 4.0 is encouraging a move to robotic manufacturing. But Thailand&#x27;s membership in the ASEAN Economic Community (AEC), makes cheap workers from neighbouring countries even more readily available, which will make it harder to make the economic case to switch to robots. Somchai also pointed out that the bureaucratic nature of the Thai government will make realisation of Thailand 4.0 difficult. Every action plan calls for results from several ministries, &quot;all of which are big, clumsily-run organisations&quot; slow to perform.

In September 2020, World Bank forecast that Thai economy would contract 8.9% by the end of the year due to COVID-19 pandemic. The Thai government cut jet fuel tax since February 2020.&lt;br&gt;&lt;br&gt;In August 2024, the dismissal of Thai Prime Minister Srettha Thavisin exacerbated Thailand&#x27;s economic difficulties, impeding the implementation of significant financial measures. This political upheaval intensified existing issues such as high household debt and economic stagnation, further undermining investor confidence and economic stability.

==Macroeconomic trends==
The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980–2021 (with IMF staff estimates in 2022–2027). Inflation under 5% is in green.
Over the past 32 years, the economy of Thailand has expanded. The GDP at current prices shows that from 1980 to 2012 the Thai economy has expanded nearly sixteen-fold when measured in baht, or nearly eleven-fold when measured in dollars. This makes Thailand the 32nd-biggest economy in the world, according to the IMF. With regard to GDP, Thailand has undergone five periods of economic growth. From 1980 to 1984, the economy has grown by an average of 5.4 percent per year. Regional businesses account for 70 percent of GDP, with Bangkok contributing 30 percent.

After the 1984 baht devaluation and the 1985 Plaza Accord, a significant amount of foreign direct investment (mainly from Japan) raised the average growth rate per year to 8.8 percent from 1985 to 1996 before slumping to −5.9 percent per year from 1997 to 1998. From 1999 to 2006, Thailand averaged a growth rate of 5.0 percent per year. Since 2007, the country has faced a number of challenges: a military coup in late 2006, political turmoil from 2008 to 2011, the US financial crisis reaching its peak from 2008 to 2009, floods in 2010 and 2011, and the 2012 Eurozone crisis. As a result, from 2007 to 2012 the average GDP growth rate was 3.25 percent per year.

Thailand suffers by comparison with neighboring countries in terms of GDP per capita. In 2011, China&#x27;s nominal GDP per capita surpassed Thailand&#x27;s, giving the latter the lowest nominal GDP per capita of its peers. According to the IMF, in 2012 Thailand ranked 92nd in the world in its nominal GDP per capita.

==Poverty and inequality==
The number of Thailand&#x27;s poor declined from 7.1 million people in 2014, 10.5 percent of the population, to 4.9 million people in 2015, or 7.2 percent of the population. Thailand&#x27;s 2014 poverty line was defined as an income of 2,647 baht per month. For 2015 it was 2,644 baht per month. According to the NESDC in a report entitled, &quot;Poverty and Inequality in Thailand&quot;, the country&#x27;s growth in 2014 was 0.8 percent and 2.8 percent in 2015. NESDC Secretary-General Porametee Vimolsiri said that the growth was due to the effect of governmental policies. The report also noted that 10 percent of the Thai population earned 35 percent of Thailand&#x27;s aggregate income and owned 61.5 percent of its land.

Thailand was ranked as the world&#x27;s third most unequal nation, behind Russia and India, in the Credit Suisse &quot;Global Wealth Databook 2016&quot; (companion volume to the &quot;Global Wealth Report 2016&quot;), with one percent of the Thai population estimated to own 58 percent of Thailand&#x27;s wealth.

==Industries==
===SMEs===
Virtually all of Thailand&#x27;s firms, 99.7 percent, or 2.7 million enterprises, are classified as small or medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). , SMEs account for 80.3 percent (13 million) of Thailand&#x27;s total employment. Despite the large number of SMEs, their contribution to the nation&#x27;s GDP decreased from 41.3 percent of GDP in 2002 to 37.4 percent in 2013. Their declining contribution is reflected in their turnover rate: seventy percent fail within &quot;...a few years&quot;.

===Agriculture, forestry and fishing===


Developments in agriculture since the 1960s have supported Thailand&#x27;s transition to an industrialised economy. As recently as 1980, agriculture supplied 70 percent of employment. In 2008, agriculture, forestry and fishing contributed 8.4 percent to GDP; in rural areas, farm jobs supply half of employment. Rice is the most important crop in the country and Thailand had long been the world&#x27;s number one exporter of rice, until recently falling behind both India and Vietnam. It is a major exporter of shrimp. Other crops include coconuts, corn, rubber, soybeans, sugarcane and tapioca.

Thailand is the world&#x27;s third-largest seafood exporter. Overall fish exports were worth around US$3 billion in 2014, according to the Thai Frozen Foods Association. Thailand&#x27;s fishing industry employs more than 300,000 persons.

In 1985, Thailand designated 25 percent of its land area for forest protection and 15 percent for timber production. Forests have been set aside for conservation and recreation, and timber forests are available for the forestry industry. Between 1992 and 2001, exports of logs and sawn timber increased from 50,000 to 2,000,000 cubic meters per year.

The regional avian-flu outbreak contracted Thailand&#x27;s agricultural sector in 2004, and the tsunami of 26 December devastated the Andaman Sea fishing industry. In 2005 and 2006, agricultural GDP was reported to have contracted by 10 percent.

Thailand is the world&#x27;s second-largest exporter of gypsum (after Canada), although government policy limits gypsum exports to support prices. In 2003 Thailand produced more than 40 different minerals, with an annual value of about US$740 million. In September 2003, to encourage foreign investment in mining the government relaxed its restrictions on mining by foreign companies and reduced mineral royalties owed to the state.

===Industry and manufacturing===
In 2007 industry contributed 43.9 percent of GDP, employing 14 percent of the workforce. Industry expanded at an average annual rate of 3.4 percent from 1995 to 2005. The most important sub-sector of industry is manufacturing, which accounted for 34.5 percent of GDP in 2004.

====Electrical and electronics====
Electrical and electronics (E&amp;E) equipment is Thailand&#x27;s largest export sector, amounting to about 15 percent of total exports. In 2014 Thailand&#x27;s E&amp;E exports totalled US$55 billion. The E&amp;E sector employed approximately 780,000 workers in 2015, representing 12.2 per cent of the total employment in manufacturing.

, Thailand is the largest exporter of computers and computer components in ASEAN. Thailand is the world&#x27;s second-biggest maker of hard disk drives (HDDs) after China, with Western Digital and Seagate Technology among the biggest producers. But problems may loom for Thailand&#x27;s high-tech sector. In January 2015, the country&#x27;s manufacturing index fell for the 22nd consecutive month, with production of goods like televisions and radios down 38 percent year-on-year. Manufacturers are relocating to nations where labour is cheaper than in Thailand. In April 2015, production will cease at an LG Electronics factory in Rayong Province. Production is being moved to Vietnam, where labour costs per day are US$6.35 versus US$9.14 in Thailand. Samsung Electronics Co. Ltd. will site two large smartphone factories in Vietnam. It made around US$11 billion worth of investment pledges to the Vietnamese economy in 2014. As technologies evolve, e.g., as HDDs are replaced by solid-state drives (SSDs), manufacturers are reexamining where best to produce these latest technologies. In addition, 74 percent of salaried workers in the sector face a high risk of being replaced by robots, as these positions consist of &quot;repetitive, non-cognitive tasks&quot;.

==== Automotive ====
Thailand is the ASEAN leader in automotive production and sales. The sector employed approximately 417,000 workers in 2015, representing 6.5 per cent of total employment across all manufacturing industries and accounting for roughly 10 percent of the country&#x27;s GDP. In 2014, Thailand exported US$25.8 billion in automotive goods. As many as 73 percent of automotive sector workers in Thailand face a high risk of job loss due to automation.

&quot;Source: Federation of Thai Industries&quot;

====Gems and jewelry====
Gem and jewelry exports are Thailand&#x27;s third-largest export category by value, trailing automotive and parts and computer components. In 2019, gem and jewelry exports, including gold, exceeded US$15.7 billion, up 30.3% from 2018 (486 billion baht, up 26.6%). Key export markets included ASEAN, India, the Middle East, and Hong Kong. The industry employs more than 700,000 workers according to the Gem and Jewelry Institute of Thailand (GIT).

===Energy===
Thailand&#x27;s 2004 energy consumption was estimated at 3.4 quadrillion British thermal units, representing about 0.7 percent of total world energy consumption. Thailand is a net importer of oil and natural gas; however, the government is promoting ethanol to reduce imports of petroleum and the gasoline additive methyl tertiary butyl ether.

In 2005 Thailand&#x27;s daily oil consumption of exceeded its production of . Thailand&#x27;s four oil refineries have a combined capacity of . The government is considering a regional oil-processing and transportation hub serving south-central China. In 2004, Thailand&#x27;s natural-gas consumption of exceeded its production of .

Thailand&#x27;s 2004 estimated coal consumption of 30.4 million short tons exceeded its production of 22.1 million. As of January 2007, proven oil reserves totaled and proven natural-gas reserves were . In 2003, recoverable coal reserves totalled 1,493 million short tons.

In 2005, Thailand used about 118 billion kilowatt hours of electricity. Consumption rose by 4.7 percent in 2006, to 133 billion kWh. According to the Electricity Generating Authority of Thailand (the national electricity utility), power consumption by residential users is increasing due to more favorable rates for residential customers than for the industry and business sectors. Thailand&#x27;s electric utility and petroleum companies (also state-controlled) are being restructured.

===Services===
In 2007 the service sector (which includes tourism, banking and finance), contributed 44.7 percent of GDP and employed 37 percent of the workforce. Thailand&#x27;s service industry is competitive, contributing to its export growth.

====Banking and finance====

Dangerous levels of non-performing assets at Thai banks helped trigger an attack on the baht by currency speculators which led to the Asian financial crisis in 1997–1998. By 2003, nonperforming assets had been cut in half (to about 30 percent).

Despite a return to profitability, Thailand&#x27;s banks continue to struggle with unrealized losses and inadequate capital. The government is considering reforms, including an integrated financial regulatory agency which would enable the Bank of Thailand to focus on monetary policy. In addition, the government is attempting to strengthen the financial sector through the consolidation of commercial, state- and foreign-owned institutions. The 2004 Financial Sector Reform Master Plan provides tax breaks to financial institutions engaging in mergers and acquisitions. The reform program has been deemed successful by outside experts. In 2007 there were three state-owned commercial banks, five state-owned specialized banks, fifteen Thai commercial banks, and seventeen foreign banks in Thailand.

The Bank of Thailand sought to stem the flow of foreign funds into the country in December 2006, leading to the largest one-day drop in stock prices on the Stock Exchange of Thailand since the 1997 Asian financial crisis. The sell-off by foreign investors amounted to more than US$708 million.

In 2019, the Bank of Thailand kept its benchmark interest rate unchanged for a fourth straight meeting, with the concerns of high household debt and financial stability risks.

====Retail====
Retail employs more than six million Thai workers. Most are employed by small businesses. Large multinational and national retail players (such as Tesco Lotus, 7-Eleven, Siam Makro, Big C, Villa Market, Central Group and Mall Group) are estimated to employ fewer than 400,000 workers. This accounts for less than seven percent of Thailand&#x27;s total employment in retail.

====Tourism====
In 2016, tourism revenue, 2.53 trillion baht, accounted for 17.7 percent of Thailand&#x27;s GDP, up from 16.7 percent in 2015. It is expected to generate 2.71 trillion baht in 2017. The global average for GDP contribution from tourism is nine percent.

Cryptocurrencies

Thailand&#x27;s Ministry of Finance approved four licensed brokers and dealers of cryptocurrencies in the country: Bx, Bitkub, Coins and Satang Pro. The country still did not elaborated regulation for ICOs, though it announced in late 2018 to loosen the rules.

==Labour==

Thailand&#x27;s labour force has been estimated at from 36.8 million employed (of 55.6 million adults of working age) to 38.3 million (1Q2016). About 49 percent were employed in agriculture, 37 percent in the service sector and 14 percent in industry. In 2005 women constituted 48 percent of the labour force, and held an increased share of professional jobs. Thailand&#x27;s unemployment rate was 0.9 percent as of 2014, down from two percent in 2004. A World Bank survey showed that 83.5 percent of the Thai workforce is unskilled.

A joint study by the Quality Learning Foundation (QLF), Dhurakij Pundit University (DPU), and the World Bank suggests that 12 million Thais may lose their jobs to automation over the next 20 years, wiping out one-third of the positions in the workforce. The World Bank estimates that Thai workers are two times and five times less productive than Malaysian and Singaporean workers respectively. The report assesses the average output of Thai workers at US$25,000 (879,200 baht) in 2014 compared to Malaysia&#x27;s US$50,000 and US$122,000 for Singapore. A 2016 report by the International Labor Office (ILO) estimates that over 70 percent of Thai workers are in danger of being displaced by automation. Factories in Thailand are estimated to be adding from 2,500–4,500 industrial robots per year.

In fiscal year 2015, 71,000 Thais worked abroad in foreign countries. Taiwan employed the most Thai employees overall with 59,220 persons, followed by South Korea at 24,228, Israel at 23,479, Singapore at 20,000, and the UAE at 14,000. Most employees work in metal production, agriculture, textile manufacturing, and electronic part manufacturing fields. As of 2020, Thai migrant labourers overseas generate remittances worth 140 billion baht.

The number of migrant workers in Thailand is unknown. The official number—1,339,834 registered migrant workers from Cambodia, Laos, and Myanmar—reported by the Office of Foreign Workers Administration under the Ministry of Labour, represents only legal migrant workers. Many more are presumed to be non-registered or illegal migrants. The Thailand Development Research Institute (TDRI) estimates that there may yet be more illegal migrant workers than legal ones in Thailand.

==Foreign trade==
China has replaced the United States as Thailand&#x27;s largest export market while the latter still holds its position as its second-largest supplier (after Japan). While Thailand&#x27;s traditional major markets have been North America, Japan, and Europe, economic recovery in Thailand&#x27;s regional trading partners has helped Thai export growth.

As of 2022, China is Thailand&#x27;s largest trading partner with 3.69 trillion baht ($106 billion) worth of trade, accounting for almost 20% of all Thai foreign trade. In 2022, China also became the largest foreign investor in Thailand, totaling 77.4 billion baht, more than Japan and USA.

Recovery from financial crisis depended heavily on increased exports to the rest of Asia and the United States. Since 2005 the increase in export of automobiles from Japanese manufacturers (particularly Toyota, Nissan and Isuzu) has helped improve the trade balance, with over one million cars produced annually since then. Thailand has joined the ranks of the world&#x27;s top ten automobile-exporting nations.

Machinery and parts, vehicles, integrated circuits, chemicals, crude oil, fuels, iron and steel are among Thailand&#x27;s principal imports. The increase in imports reflects a need to fuel production of high-tech items and vehicles.

Thailand is a member of the World Trade Organization (WTO), the Cairns Group of agricultural exporters and the ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA), and has pursued free-trade agreements. A China-Thailand Free Trade Agreement (FTA) began in October 2003. This agreement was limited to agricultural products, with a more comprehensive FTA planned to be signed by 2010. Thailand also has a limited free-trade agreement with India (since 2003) and a comprehensive Australia-Thailand Free Trade Agreement, which began on 1 January 2005.

Thailand began free trade negotiations with Japan in February 2004, and an in-principle agreement was agreed to in September 2005. Negotiations for a US-Thailand free trade agreement have been underway, with a fifth round of meetings held in November 2005.

Several industries are restricted to foreign investment by the 1999 Foreign Business Act. These industries include media, agriculture, distribution of land, professional services, tourism, hotels, and construction. Share ownership of companies engaged in these activities must be limited to a 49 percent minority stake. The 1966 US-Thailand Treaty of Amity and Economic Relations provides exemption of these restrictions for shareholders with United States citizenship.

The Bangkok area is one of the most prosperous parts of Thailand and heavily dominates the national economy, with the infertile northeast being the poorest. A concern of successive Thai governments, and a focus of the recently ousted Thaksin government, has been to reduce the regional disparities which have been exacerbated by rapid economic growth in Bangkok and financial crisis.

Although little economic investment reaches other parts of the country except for tourist zones, the government has stimulated provincial economic growth in the eastern seaboard and the Chiang Mai area. Despite talk of other regional development, these three regions and other tourist zones still dominate the national economy.

Although some US rights holders report good cooperation with Thai enforcement authorities (including the Royal Thai Police and Royal Thai Customs), Thailand remained on the priority watch list in 2012. The United States is encouraged that Thailand&#x27;s government has affirmed its commitment to improving IPR protection and enforcement, but more must be done for Thailand to be removed from the list.

Although the economy has grown moderately since 1999, future performance depends on continued reform of the financial sector, corporate-debt restructuring, attracting foreign investment and increasing exports. Telecommunications, roads, electricity generation and ports showed increasing strain during the period of sustained economic growth. Thailand is experiencing a growing shortage of engineers and skilled technical personnel.

=== Major Trade Partners ===
The following table shows the largest trading partners for Thailand in 2021 by total trade value in billions of USD.

== Regional economies ==

=== Isan ===

The economy of Isan is dominated by agriculture, although output is poor and this sector is decreasing in importance at the expense of trade and the service sector. Most of the population is poor and badly educated. Many labourers have been driven by poverty to seek work in other parts of Thailand or abroad.

Although Isan accounts for around a third of Thailand&#x27;s population and a third of its area, it produces only 8.9 percent of GDP. Its economy grew at 6.2 percent per annum during the 1990s.

In 1995, 28 percent of the population was classed as below the poverty line, compared to just 7 percent in central Thailand. In 2000, per capita income was 26,317 baht, compared to 208,434 in Bangkok. Even within Isan, there is a rural/urban divide. In 1995, all of Thailand&#x27;s ten poorest provinces were in Isan, the poorest being Sisaket. However, most wealth and investment is concentrated in the four major cities of Khorat, Ubon, Udon, and Khon Kaen. These four provinces account for 40 percent of the region&#x27;s population.

===Special Economic Zones (SEZ)===
In his televised national address on 23 January 2015 in the program &quot;Return Happiness to the People&quot;, Prime Minister Prayut Chan-o-cha addressed the government&#x27;s policy on the establishment of special economic zones.

He said that the policy would promote connectivity and regional economic development on a sustainable basis. There are currently 10 SEZs in Thailand, with trade and investment valued at almost 800 billion baht a year.

In 2014, the government launched a pilot project to set up six special economic zones in five provinces: Tak, Mukdahan, Sa Kaeo, Songkhla, and Trat. In the second phase, which is expected to begin in 2016, seven special economic zones will be established in another five provinces: Chiang Rai, Kanchanaburi, Nong Khai, Nakhon Phanom, and Narathiwat.

In early 2015, the government approved an infrastructure development plan in special economic zones. In 2015, the plan includes 45 projects, budgeted at 2.6 billion baht. Another 79 projects, worth 7.9 billion baht, will be carried out in 2016. Relying on a mix of government revenue, bond sales, and other funding, Prayut plans to spend US$83 billion over seven years on new railways, roads, and customs posts to establish cross-border trade routes. The idea is to link some 2.4 billion consumers in China and India with Asia&#x27;s newest economic grouping, the ASEAN Economic Community, of which Thailand is a member.

Critics of the SEZs maintain that free trade agreements and SEZs are incompatible with the principles of the late-King Bhumibol&#x27;s sufficiency economy, claimed by the government to be the inspiration for governmental economic and social policies.

==Shadow economy==
&quot;Thailand&#x27;s shadow economy ranks globally among the highest,&quot; according to Friedrich Schneider, an economist at Johannes Kepler University of Linz in Austria, author of &quot;Hiding in the Shadows: The Growth of the Underground Economy&quot;. He estimates Thailand&#x27;s shadow economy was 40.9 percent of real GDP in 2014, including gambling and small weapons, but largely excluding drugs. Schneider defines the &quot;shadow economy&quot; as including all market-based
legal production of goods and services that are deliberately concealed from public authorities for the following reasons: (1) to avoid payment of income, value added or other taxes, (2) to avoid payment of social security contributions, (3) to avoid having to meet certain legal labor market standards, such as minimum wages, maximum working hours, or safety standards, and (4) to avoid complying with certain administrative procedures, such as completing statistical questionnaires or other administrative forms. It does not deal with typical underground, economic (classical crime) activities, which are all illegal actions that fits the characteristics of classical crimes like burglary, robbery, or drug dealing. The shadow economy also includes loan sharking. According to estimates, there are about 200,000 &quot;informal lenders&quot; in the country, many of whom charge exorbitant interest rates, creating an often insurmountable burden for low-income borrowers.

==See also==
* Stock Exchange of Thailand
* Foreign aid to Thailand
* Thailand and the International Monetary Fund
* List of Thai provinces by GPP

==Further reading==
* The economic history of Siam from the 16th to the 19th century, together with factors affecting the economic outlook for the twentieth, are presented in 
*Porphant Ouyyanont. 2017. A Regional Economic History of Thailand. ISEAS–Yusof Ishak Institute.
*Pasuk Phongpaichit and Chris Baker. “A History of Thailand”. Cambridge University Press.
*Pasuk Phongpaichit and Chris Baker. “A History of Ayutthaya.”
*Sompop Manarungsan. “Economic Development of Thailand: 1850-1950”
*David Feeny. “Political Economy of Productivity”
*Tomas Larsson. “Land and Loyalty.”
*James Ingram. “Economic Change in Thailand: 1850-1970.”
*William Skinner. “Chinese Society in Thailand: An Analytical History.” Cornell University Press
*Jessica Vechbanyongratana and Thanyaporn Chankrajang: “A Brief Economic History of Land Rights in Thailand.”
*Panarat Anamwathana and Jessica Vechbanyongratana. 2021. &quot;The economic history of Thailand: Old debates, recent advances, and future prospects.&quot;
* 

== References ==

==External links==
*Thai Ministry of Commerce
*Thailand Business News
*World Bank Summary Trade Statistics Thailand
*Tariffs applied by Thailand as provided by ITC&#x27;s ITC Market Access Map, an online database of customs tariffs and market requirements</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1901218" start="4" end="23" title="Economy of Thailand" label="economy of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="116" end="138" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="146" end="154" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q376860" start="167" end="195" title="newly industrialized country" label="newly industrialized country"/>
<link wikidata="Q177882" start="227" end="231" title="Thai baht" label="baht"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="329" end="338" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="526" end="541" title="Tertiary sector of the economy" label="service sectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q55640" start="667" end="686" title="agricultural sector" label="agricultural sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598421" start="1111" end="1128" title="trade in services" label="trade in services"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="1250" end="1264" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="1272" end="1281" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="1388" end="1397" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="1399" end="1405" title="Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="1411" end="1419" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095372" start="1568" end="1591" title="List of countries by current account balance" label="current account balance"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="1975" end="1998" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q6640015" start="2142" end="2204" title="Office of the National Economic and Social Development Council" label="Office of the National Economic and Social Development Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763895" start="2266" end="2310" title="List of countries by unemployment rate" label="countries with the lowest unemployment rates"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="2580" end="2599" title="Kingdom of Thailand" label="Kingdom of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q191891" start="2607" end="2613" title="Fiscal year" label="FY2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q177882" start="2640" end="2644" title="Thai baht" label="baht"/>
<link wikidata="Q379391" start="3118" end="3122" title="History of Thailand" label="Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772521" start="3157" end="3171" title="Pre-industrial societies" label="pre-industrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q215536" start="3317" end="3325" title="merchant" label="merchant"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="3390" end="3399" title="Ayutthaya Kingdom" label="Ayutthaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q745728" start="3961" end="3975" title="Bowring Treaty" label="Bowring Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4043" end="4064" title="Townsend Harris#Harris Treaty of 1856 with Siam" label="Harris Treaty of 1856"/>
<link wikidata="Q7506740" start="4084" end="4098" title="Siamese-American Treaty of Amity and Commerce" label="Roberts Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q158861" start="4479" end="4485" title="Rama V" label="Rama V"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="4906" end="4922" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120252" start="4939" end="4965" title="Siamese revolution of 1932" label="Siamese revolution of 1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q152777" start="5468" end="5488" title="Plaek Phibunsongkhram" label="Luang Phibulsongkram"/>
<link wikidata="Q4747195" start="6700" end="6715" title="Ammar Siamwalla" label="Ammar Siamwalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084948" start="7040" end="7054" title="Phao Sriyanond" label="Phao Sriyanond"/>
<link wikidata="Q975621" start="7090" end="7104" title="Sarit Thanarat" label="Sarit Thanarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q556635" start="7937" end="7952" title="Phin Choonhavan" label="Phin Choonhavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709215" start="8521" end="8549" title="Thailand Board of Investment" label="Thailand Board of Investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q315522" start="9372" end="9378" title="Ne Win" label="Ne Win"/>
<link wikidata="Q379827" start="9622" end="9639" title="Prem Tinsulanonda" label="Prem Tinsulanonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="10564" end="10578" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="10580" end="10586" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q684265" start="10616" end="10628" title="Plaza Accord" label="Plaza Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q16068" start="10688" end="10701" title="Deutsche Mark" label="Deutsche Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q701841" start="11048" end="11068" title="Chatichai Choonhavan" label="Chatichai Choonhavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q635533" start="11146" end="11170" title="Cambodian-Vietnamese War" label="Cambodian-Vietnamese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660379" start="11670" end="11689" title="import substitution industrialization" label="import-substitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q495274" start="11699" end="11732" title="export-oriented industrialization" label="export-oriented industrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q746687" start="12141" end="12156" title="Current account (balance of payments)" label="current account"/>
<link wikidata="Q464301" start="12391" end="12404" title="Chuan Leekpai" label="Chuan Leekpai"/>
<link wikidata="Q207781" start="12955" end="12970" title="economic bubble" label="economic bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q8303885" start="13088" end="13103" title="Trust company" label="trust companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q848507" start="13114" end="13129" title="commercial bank" label="commercial bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304015" start="13302" end="13317" title="currency basket" label="currency basket"/>
<link wikidata="Q105611" start="13364" end="13374" title="hedge fund" label="hedge fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572221" start="13467" end="13471" title="Spot market" label="spot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473279" start="13476" end="13490" title="forward market" label="forward market"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068511" start="13932" end="13953" title="Chavalit Yongchaiyudh" label="Chavalit Yongchaiyudh"/>
<link wikidata="Q806706" start="14107" end="14123" title="Bank of Thailand" label="Bank of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q594063" start="14437" end="14442" title="Floating exchange rate" label="float"/>
<link wikidata="Q80880" start="14468" end="14495" title="1997 Asian Financial Crisis" label="1997 Asian Financial Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330208" start="14695" end="14727" title="Stock Exchange of Thailand (SET)" label="Stock Exchange of Thailand (SET)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="15434" end="15461" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827815" start="15515" end="15518" title="aid" label="aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068511" start="15598" end="15619" title="Chavalit Yongchaiyudh" label="Chavalit Yongchaiyudh"/>
<link wikidata="Q464301" start="15695" end="15708" title="Chuan Leekpai" label="Chuan Leekpai"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="15844" end="15866" title="Neoliberalism" label="neo-liberal capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q164373" start="17093" end="17111" title="Thaksin Shinawatra" label="Thaksin Shinawatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542181" start="17195" end="17214" title="Thai Rak Thai Party" label="Thai Rak Thai Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186248" start="17259" end="17273" title="Democrat Party (Thailand)" label="Democrat Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6507931" start="17281" end="17302" title="2001 Thai general election" label="2001 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4926362" start="17607" end="17619" title="Thaksinomics" label="Thaksinomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911548" start="17892" end="17913" title="2005 Thai general election" label="2005 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q130754" start="18227" end="18247" title="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami" label="Indian Ocean tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103943" start="18341" end="18354" title="People&amp;#x27;s Alliance for Democracy" label="Yellow Shirts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6507902" start="18502" end="18529" title="April 2006 Thai general election" label="April 2006 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6507909" start="18683" end="18699" title="October 2006 Thai general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4192601" start="18803" end="18866" title="Council for National Security" label="Council for Democratic Reform under the Constitutional Monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q334722" start="18878" end="18898" title="Sonthi Boonyaratglin" label="Sonthi Boonyaratglin"/>
<link wikidata="Q298079" start="19438" end="19455" title="Surayud Chulanont" label="Surayud Chulanont"/>
<link wikidata="Q57670" start="19877" end="19896" title="Yingluck Shinawatra" label="Yingluck Shinawatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232472" start="20010" end="20026" title="2007 Thai general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q112051" start="20044" end="20069" title="People&amp;#x27;s Power Party (Thailand)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Power Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q243623" start="20078" end="20094" title="Samak Sundaravej" label="Samak Sundaravej"/>
<link wikidata="Q174267" start="20125" end="20142" title="Abhisit Vejjajiva" label="Abhisit Vejjajiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="20283" end="20312" title="financial crisis of 2007–2008" label="financial crisis of 2007–2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103943" start="20367" end="20403" title="People&amp;#x27;s Alliance for Democracy" label="People&amp;#x27;s Alliance for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q298088" start="20831" end="20848" title="Somchai Wongsawat" label="Somchai Wongsawat"/>
<link wikidata="Q194316" start="21335" end="21347" title="Suvarnabhumi Airport" label="Suvarnabhumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046755" start="21352" end="21362" title="Don Mueang International Airport" label="Don Mueang"/>
<link wikidata="Q174267" start="21612" end="21629" title="Abhisit Vejjajiva" label="Abhisit Vejjajiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q48968147" start="21941" end="21951" title="Red Shirts (Thailand)" label="Red Shirts"/>
<link wikidata="Q57670" start="22997" end="23016" title="Yingluck Shinawatra" label="Yingluck Shinawatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q372334" start="23337" end="23358" title="2011 Thai general election" label="2011 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142913" start="23376" end="23391" title="Pheu Thai Party" label="Pheu Thai Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q57670" start="23482" end="23501" title="Yingluck Shinawatra" label="Yingluck Shinawatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q181481" start="23671" end="23691" title="2011 Thailand floods" label="2011 Thailand floods"/>
<link wikidata="Q50198" start="23802" end="23811" title="Provinces of Thailand" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q40464" start="25095" end="25115" title="Agence France Presse" label="Agence France Presse"/>
<link wikidata="Q16919521" start="26178" end="26214" title="National Council for Peace and Order" label="National Council for Peace and Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q82107" start="26584" end="26602" title="middle income trap" label="middle-income trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108126" start="27181" end="27198" title="Prayut Chan-o-cha" label="Prayut Chan-o-cha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633856" start="27746" end="27785" title="Thailand Development Research Institute" label="Thailand Development Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="28230" end="28254" title="ASEAN Economic Community" label="ASEAN Economic Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q83873566" start="28785" end="28802" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Thailand" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361665" start="28828" end="28840" title="jet fuel tax" label="jet fuel tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q19093" start="29663" end="29667" title="List of countries by GDP (nominal)" label="32nd"/>
<link wikidata="Q108977" start="30902" end="30906" title="List of countries by GDP (nominal) per capita" label="92nd"/>
<link wikidata="Q830082" start="31748" end="31773" title="list of sovereign states by wealth inequality" label="third most unequal nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q622439" start="32148" end="32181" title="Small and medium-sized enterprises" label="small or medium-sized enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505529" start="32895" end="32941" title="Rice production in Thailand" label="Rice is the most important crop in the country"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="33157" end="33166" title="sugarcane" label="sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="35271" end="35286" title="hard disk drive" label="hard disk drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q162345" start="35742" end="35756" title="LG Electronics" label="LG Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q335221" start="35768" end="35783" title="Rayong Province" label="Rayong Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q487343" start="36118" end="36135" title="solid-state drive" label="solid-state drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924184" start="36886" end="36915" title="Federation of Thai Industries" label="Federation of Thai Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="37240" end="37245" title="ASEAN" label="ASEAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853339" start="37545" end="37569" title="world energy consumption" label="world energy consumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164249" start="38224" end="38243" title="Proven reserves" label="proven oil reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q182098" start="38403" end="38416" title="kilowatt hour" label="kilowatt hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050569" start="38512" end="38556" title="Electricity Generating Authority of Thailand" label="Electricity Generating Authority of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q806706" start="39612" end="39628" title="Bank of Thailand" label="Bank of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330208" start="40330" end="40356" title="Stock Exchange of Thailand" label="Stock Exchange of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416522" start="41323" end="41358" title="Ministry of Finance (Thailand)" label="Thailand&amp;#x27;s Ministry of Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q109569123" start="41442" end="41448" title="Bitkub" label="Bitkub"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="42052" end="42062" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132082" start="42188" end="42214" title="Dhurakij Pundit University" label="Dhurakij Pundit University"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="42707" end="42733" title="International Labor Office" label="International Labor Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923085" start="43586" end="43604" title="Ministry of Labour (Thailand)" label="Ministry of Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633856" start="43714" end="43753" title="Thailand Development Research Institute" label="Thailand Development Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="44028" end="44033" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="44094" end="44107" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="44109" end="44114" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="44120" end="44126" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="44599" end="44603" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="44612" end="44625" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q53268" start="44718" end="44724" title="Toyota" label="Toyota"/>
<link wikidata="Q20165" start="44726" end="44732" title="Nissan" label="Nissan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42889" start="44949" end="44957" title="vehicles" label="vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q207652" start="44980" end="44989" title="Chemical industry" label="chemicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="44991" end="45000" title="crude oil" label="crude oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="45009" end="45013" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="45018" end="45023" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="45190" end="45214" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q297472" start="45273" end="45294" title="ASEAN Free Trade Area" label="ASEAN Free Trade Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="46421" end="46428" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q14214542" start="46963" end="46979" title="Eastern seaboard of Thailand" label="eastern seaboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q52028" start="46988" end="46998" title="Chiang Mai" label="Chiang Mai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574977" start="47304" end="47323" title="Office of the United States Trade Representative" label="priority watch list"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="47702" end="47720" title="foreign direct investment" label="foreign investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="47745" end="47763" title="Telecommunications" label="Telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725" start="47772" end="47783" title="electricity" label="electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="48110" end="48113" title="USD" label="USD"/>
<link wikidata="Q381897" start="48171" end="48175" title="Isan" label="Isan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="48192" end="48203" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q10294" start="48407" end="48414" title="poverty" label="poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="48596" end="48599" title="Gross domestic product" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q558635" start="48796" end="48806" title="per capita" label="per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527264" start="48807" end="48813" title="income" label="income"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="48854" end="48861" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q175185" start="48892" end="48897" title="rural" label="rural"/>
<link wikidata="Q702492" start="48898" end="48903" title="urban area" label="urban"/>
<link wikidata="Q380761" start="48998" end="49005" title="Sisaket province" label="Sisaket"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351664" start="49032" end="49042" title="investment (macroeconomics)" label="investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q271737" start="49087" end="49093" title="Nakhon Ratchasima Province" label="Khorat"/>
<link wikidata="Q132179" start="49095" end="49099" title="Ubon" label="Ubon"/>
<link wikidata="Q816331" start="49101" end="49105" title="Udon Thani" label="Udon"/>
<link wikidata="Q876526" start="49111" end="49120" title="Khon Kaen" label="Khon Kaen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108126" start="49362" end="49379" title="Prayut Chan-o-cha" label="Prayut Chan-o-cha"/>
<link wikidata="Q494978" start="49443" end="49464" title="special economic zone" label="special economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49600" end="49616" title="List of Special economic zones#Thailand" label="SEZs in Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q275758" start="49792" end="49795" title="Tak Province" label="Tak"/>
<link wikidata="Q335119" start="49797" end="49805" title="Mukdahan Province" label="Mukdahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q381889" start="49807" end="49814" title="Sa Kaeo Province" label="Sa Kaeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q235574" start="49816" end="49824" title="Songkhla Province" label="Songkhla"/>
<link wikidata="Q241884" start="49830" end="49834" title="Trat Province" label="Trat"/>
<link wikidata="Q236419" start="49969" end="49979" title="Chiang Rai Province" label="Chiang Rai"/>
<link wikidata="Q275740" start="49981" end="49993" title="Kanchanaburi Province" label="Kanchanaburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q327737" start="49995" end="50004" title="Nong Khai Province" label="Nong Khai"/>
<link wikidata="Q468547" start="50006" end="50019" title="Nakhon Phanom Province" label="Nakhon Phanom"/>
<link wikidata="Q271442" start="50025" end="50035" title="Narathiwat Province" label="Narathiwat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="50602" end="50626" title="ASEAN Economic Community" label="ASEAN Economic Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q855252" start="50779" end="50787" title="Bhumibol" label="Bhumibol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664601" start="50795" end="50814" title="sufficiency economy" label="sufficiency economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25101626" start="51281" end="51289" title="Gambling in Thailand" label="gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975715" start="52167" end="52177" title="loan shark" label="loan shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330208" start="52404" end="52430" title="Stock Exchange of Thailand" label="Stock Exchange of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468357" start="52433" end="52456" title="Foreign aid to Thailand" label="Foreign aid to Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324030" start="52459" end="52503" title="Thailand and the International Monetary Fund" label="Thailand and the International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q17061902" start="52506" end="52535" title="List of Thai provinces by GPP" label="List of Thai provinces by GPP"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30134" wikidata="Q7696041" url="?curid=30134" title="Telecommunications in Thailand">
<text>Modern [[telecommunications]] in [[Thailand]] began in 1875 with the deployment of the first telegraph service. Historically, the development of telecommunication networks in Thailand were in the hands of the public sector. Government organisations were established to provide telegraph, telephone, radio, and television services, and other government agencies, especially the military, still control a large estate of radio and television spectra. Private telecommunication operators initially acquired concession agreements with state enterprises. For mobile phone services, all the concessions have been amended by successive government to last 25 years have gradually ended in 2015. For other services, the concession terms and conditions vary, ranging from one to fifteen years. Nearly all of the concessions are build-operate-transfer (BTO) contracts. The private investor has to build all the required facilities and transfer them to the state before they can operate or offer services to public.

Liberalisation took place in the 1990s and 2000s. State enterprises, the Telephone Organization of Thailand, Communications Authority of Thailand, and Mass Communication Organization of Thailand, were corporatised in 2003 and 2004. The Constitution of 1997 prompted the institutional changes when it declared that all the spectrum is a &quot;national communication resource for public welfare&quot;. The 1997 Constitution further requires the establishment of &quot;an independent regulator&quot; who shall be authorized to allocate spectra and monitor and regulate communications in Thailand. In 1998, to comply with the constitutional mandate, the parliament passed a law establishing two independent regulators, the National Telecommunication Commission (NTC) and the National Broadcasting Commission (NBC). The regulatory practice began in Thailand when the NTC was appointed by the king through the complex nomination procedure in 2005. The inception of NTC automatically terminates and transfers all power and authority in telecommunication sector from the Post and Telegraph Department (PTD) to the newly established independent commission.

In September 2006, the military wrested control from a civilian government and merged the telecommunications and broadcasting regulators into a convergence regulator. The task had not been completed when a civilian government came into power and introduced the new bill. The new law dubbed the &quot;Act on Spectrum Allocation Authority, Regulatory &amp; Control over Radio &amp; TV Broadcast and Telecommunications of 2010&quot; (&quot;aka&quot; NRA Act of 2010), eliminated the NTC and created a new &quot;convergence regulator&quot; to manage both telecommunications and broadcast in Thailand. The new law also requires that the National Broadcasting and Telecommunications Commission which was established in 2010 as an independent regulator, must allocate all commercial spectrum licenses via auction. In 2012, in order to license the 3G spectrum and services, the Telecom Commission (TC) hosted a spectrum auction which resulted in three new licenses for 2.1 GHz to three incumbents (AIS, True, and DTAC). In 2013, the Broadcast Commission (BC) auctioned 42 new DTTV licenses. Both auctions together earned record sums for money paid to the public sector via auction. Later the record was beaten by another auction by sister agency, the Broadcast Commission who launched the DTTV auction in December 2013. The NBTC Act in force then allowed NBTC to keep the proceeds of the DTTV auction. But when the military took over the country, it amended the NBTC Act to require return of auction proceeds to the treasury.

On 22 May 2014 when the coup d&#x27;état took place, the military decided that it would scrutinize the regulatory practices of both sectors. The government, led by General Prayut Chan-o-cha, announced that his government would move Thailand into the &quot;digital economy&quot; and would transform the Ministry of Information and Telecommunications into a Digital Economy Ministry. NBTC reform would be a part of the plan. In June 2014, the junta issued two new orders demanding that a) all the proceeds from spectrum auctions must be returned to the public purse and, b) all community radio stations must comply with a new junta order which would require examination and investigation of compliance before offering programming to the public. Temporary licenses were issued in September 2014 to compliant radio stations that signed voluntary memoranda of understanding (MOU) as &quot;a condition precedent&quot; to be able to broadcast while awaiting more thorough vetting from BC before issuance of the &quot;de juré&quot; license. The time required to an investigation was ambiguous. New community radio licenses must be in compliance with a junta order that supersedes the Radio and Television Act of 2008.

The mobile network market is dominated by three large operators who have a market penetration rate of 100 percent. All main mobile operators now utilise GSM/3GPP family technologies including GSM, EDGE, UMTS, and LTE. Thailand has six analogue terrestrial television channels, and 24 commercial digital terrestrial channels began broadcasting in 2014.

Under the Trade Competition Act 2017, which became effective in October 2017, the trade competition authority relinquished its authority to regulate specific sectors including broadcasting and telecommunications businesses. In other words, since the Trade Competition Act 2017 became effective, the broadcasting and telecom sectors that used to be regulated by specific legislation on trade competition have been exempted from complying with general competition laws and are only subject to sectoral regulations on competition. However, although the Trade Competition Act (“TCA”) BE 2560 (2017), states that the TCA does not apply to sectors that have specific legislation (i.e.: Banking, Broadcasting and Telecom), the Telecommunications Business Act (“TBA”) B.E. 2544 (2001) – Section 21 states: “In the telecommunications business operation, &quot;other than being subject to the law on trade competition&quot;…”. Therefore, a merger in the telecom sector for example, would be under both acts and authorities, because the specific legislation (The Telecommunications Business Act) points back to the law on trade competition.

==Telephone==

===Fixed-line===
There are three fixed-line telephone operators in Thailand: state-owned TOT Public Company Limited (now known as National Telecom (NT)), True Corporation, and TT&amp;T (Currently name &quot;3BB&quot;). As of 2014, there were 5,687,038 fixed-line subscriptions. That number has been in decline since 2008.

The first fixed-line telephone system was installed in Thailand (Siam) under the Ministry of Defence in 1881, and later its operation was transferred to the Post and Telegraph Department. The Telephone Organization of Thailand (TOT) was established in 1954 to manage the telephone system.

The penetration of telephone remained relatively limited for most of the 20th century. In 1992, the ratio of telephone lines per population was 3.3 lines per 100 population. In 1991, two private corporations were given concessions to build and operate telephone lines: Telecom-Asia (later renamed True Corporation) for the Bangkok Metropolitan Region and Thai Telephone &amp; Telecommunications (TT&amp;T) for the provinces.

===Mobile networks===
As of 2014, there were 97.6 million mobile subscribers in Thailand, a penetration rate of 146 percent of the total population. The Thai market is predominantly prepaid with 84.8 million prepaid subscribers. More than 99 percent of the market share belongs to three large operators (including their subsidiaries): Advanced Info Service (AIS), 46.52 percent market share, DTAC, 28.50 percent market share, and Truemove, 24.26 percent. Other operators include the state enterprises TOT Public Company Limited (TOT) with 0.57 percent market share, and CAT Telecom with 0.15 percent market share and Mobile Virtual Network Operators (MVNOs).

In 1980s and 1990s, private mobile operators were given concessions from TOT and CAT. TOT and CAT were corporatised in 2002–2003, and the Thai telecommunications landscape transitioned towards spectrum allocation by independent regulator. The 2007 constitution and the &quot;Act on Organization to Assign Radio Frequency and to Regulate the Broadcasting and Telecommunications Services&quot; include the provisions that a national independent regulator is established and frequencies for commercial activities must be allocated via auction. The first successful spectrum auction by the National Broadcasting and Telecommunications Commission was organised in 2012, allocating 45 MHz of IMT (2100) frequency band to three mobile phone operators.

Legislation that governs the Mobile networks includes the Act on the Organisation to Assign Radio Frequency and to Regulate Broadcasting and Telecommunications Services 2010 (the NBTC Act) and the Telecommunications Business Act 2001 (the Telecommunications Business Act). Additionally, any operator wishing to issue telephone numbers shall obtain a separate licence from the NBTC, subject to a Telecommunications Numbering Plan issued by the NBTC.

In 2015 the NBTC arranged two rounds of auctions for 1800 MHz and 900Mhz. In November, Advance Info Service and True Corporation won the 1800 MHz license in the auction which takes nearly 33 hours to complete. In December, True Corporation and Jasmine International won the 900 MHz auction. The significance of this auction is the establishment of Jasmine International in the telecommunication business which didn&#x27;t have a new player for many years. There are many rumours following this auction questioning Jasmine International on its ability to pay the license fee to NBTC.

In 2017, the number of mobile subscribers has reached 121.53 million, and in 2018 has already reached 125.6 million. To purchase a SIM card in Thailand, it is necessary to present an ID to register.

At the end of 2021, the total number of mobile subscriptions in Thailand was 99.4 million, representing a mobile penetration rate of 150 percent of the total population. More than 96.5 percent of the total market share belongs to three large operators (including their subsidiaries): Advanced Info Service (AIS), 44.38 percent market share, Truemove, 32.44 percent and DTAC, 19.68 percent market share. Other operators include the state enterprises National Telecom (NT) with 3.45 percent market share, and mobile virtual network operators (MVNO) with 0.05 percent market share, resulting in a (HHI) of 3,421

On November 22, 2021, Telenor and Charoen Pokphand Group, officially announced they have agreed to explore a USD 8.6 billion merger plan between Thailand’s second and third largest telecom operators (by subscribers), True Corporation (TRUE) and Total Access Communication (DTAC) – The proposed merger is subject to regulatory approvals. The merger was &quot;acknowledged&quot; by the regulator NBTC at a meeting on October 20, 2022. The newly merged company still retain the True Corporation name, which was founded on March 1, 2023 and it was listed on the Stock Exchange of Thailand under the stock ticker symbol TRUE on March 3, 2023.

===Mobile Virtual Network Aggregator (MVNA) / Mobile Virtual Network Enabler (MVNE)===
The National Broadcasting and Telecommunications Commission (NBTC), has awarded a Type 1 Mobile Virtual Network Aggregator (MVNA) license to the MVNA and Mobile virtual network enabler (MVNE) company MVNO.SERVICE Co., Ltd.

===Numbering===

Fixed-line telephone numbers have nine digits, while mobile numbers have ten digits, both including the trunk prefix &quot;0&quot;.
==Radio==
*AM: 204
*FM: 334, shortwave 6 (1999)

There are 13.96 million radios in use (1997). But there were some cases like in this year (2015), expecting there will be more than 25 million radios are in use as of now.

==Television==
There are six free-to-air analogue terrestrial television stations in Thailand:

* Channel 3, operated by BEC World under concession from MCOT
* Channel 5, operated by the Royal Thai Army
* Channel 7, operated by BBTV, under concession from the Army
* Channel 9 MCOT HD, operated by the corporatised state-owned enterprise MCOT
* NBT, operated by the Thai government (Via The Government Public Relations Department, Office of the Prime Minister of Thailand)
* Thai PBS, a statutory public service broadcaster
* PPTV owned by Bangkok Media &amp; Broadcasting

The transition to digital terrestrial television began in 2014. The National Broadcasting and Telecommunications Commission arranged an auction for commercial television licenses in December 2013. The spectrum are allocated to four groups of commercial television services: seven high-definition general licenses, seven standard-definition general licenses, seven news station licenses, and four children-and-family licenses. In addition, spectrum are allocated for 12 national public services channels and 12 regional community channels. The commercial licensees began experimental broadcasts on 1 April 2014.

==Internet==
==Submarine cables==
There are five submarine cables used for communications landing in Thailand. Thailand has cable landing points in Satun, Petchaburi and Chonburi.

* SEA-ME-WE-3, SEA-ME-WE-4 linking South East Asia to the Middle East and Western Europe. SEA-ME-WE 4 was operational since 2006.
* Thailand-Indonesia-Singapore (TIS) operational since December 2003.
* APCN linking Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, Hong Kong, Philippines, Taiwan, Korea and Japan. The cable is operational since 1996.
* Thailand-Vietnam-Hong Kong (T-V-H) operational since February 1996.
* Flag Europe-Asia (FEA) operational since mid-1990s.

The Asia-America Gateway (AAG) is under construction and is in service since November 2009.

The Asia Pacific Gateway (APG), a new submarine cable, is under planning stage and is expected to be operational in Q3 2014.

==Satellite==

Thaicom is the name of a series of communications satellites operated out of Thailand and the name Thaicom Public Company Limited, which is the company that owns and operates the Thaicom satellite fleet and other telecommunication businesses in Thailand and throughout the Asia-Pacific.

The official name of satellite project known as THAICOM named by His Majesty the King Bhumibol Adulyadej, as a symbol of the linkage between Thailand and modern communications technology.

Thailand-based Shinawatra Computer and Communications Co. Ltd. (now InTouch Group) signed a US$100 million contract with Hughes Space and Communications Company Ltd. in 1991 to launch Thailand&#x27;s first satellite communications project. The first Thaicom satellite was launched on December 17, 1993. This satellite carried 12 C-band transponders covering a region from Japan to Singapore. Thaksin Shinawatra sold Shin Corporation, which owns 41% of Thaicom Public Company Limited.

==Telecommunications regulatory environment in Thailand==

National Broadcasting and Telecommunications Commission (NBTC)

The NRA Organization Act of 2010 established the new National Broadcasting and Telecommunications Commission (NBTC) in December 2010 as a single converged regulator for the telecoms and broadcasting sectors in Thailand.

The Telecommunications Business Act of 2001 laid down the rules for Thailand&#x27;s telecommunications industry by requiring telecoms operators to obtain a license from the National Broadcasting and Telecommunications Commission (NBTC). The Act classifies telecommunication licenses into three categories. 
* Type-one telecom license is for an operator without its own network. 
* Type-two telecom license is for an operator with or without its own network but provides services targeting a segment or even several segments of the public. 
* Type-three telecom license is for an operator with a network that provides services to the general public. 
The 2001 Act was amended in 2006 under the supervision of Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra to allow foreigners to own a larger holding in a Thai telecommunications business.

In 2001, foreigners were not permitted to apply for type-two or type-three licenses under Thailand&#x27;s Foreign Business Act (FBA).

The applicant applying for type two and type three licenses must be organizations where Thai nationals hold at least 75% shares and at least three quarters of the applicant&#x27;s firm directors and the person authorized to sign any binding commitments as a representation of the applicant firm must be Thai nationals.

The 2006 amendments repealed all the additional requirements of an applicant of type-two and type-three licenses, stating foreigners can now hold up to 49% in a telecommunications operator of type-two or type-three; no restrictions on the number of their foreign directors’ representation; and the authorized person signing binding commitments as a representation of the applicant firm can be a foreigner.

The telecoms license fee is composed of three types of fees - permission for license, renewal and an annual fee.

As of June 2013 the NBTC has granted 186 telecoms licensees, listed as follows: 
* 144 type-one licensees 
* 7 type-two licenses without own network 
* 10 type-two licenses with own network 
* 25 type-three licenses

As of December 2018 the National Broadcasting and Telecommunications Commission (NBTC) had issued 58 MVNO licenses, however only 9 had launched.

==See also==

*Media of Thailand
*Censorship in Thailand

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7696041" start="7" end="45" title="Telecommunications in Thailand" label="[[telecommunications]] in [[Thailand]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="93" end="102" title="telegraph" label="telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q11035" start="288" end="297" title="telephone" label="telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="299" end="304" title="radio broadcasting" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="310" end="320" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q327209" start="504" end="525" title="concession (contract)" label="concession agreements"/>
<link wikidata="Q831675" start="818" end="840" title="build-operate-transfer" label="build-operate-transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1590599" start="1078" end="1112" title="TOT Public Company Limited" label="Telephone Organization of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5008909" start="1114" end="1150" title="CAT Telecom" label="Communications Authority of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921537" start="1156" end="1199" title="MCOT" label="Mass Communication Organization of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4592321" start="1241" end="1261" title="Constitution of Thailand of 1997" label="Constitution of 1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696041" start="2601" end="2616" title="Telecommunications in Thailand" label="NRA Act of 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305838" start="2786" end="2841" title="National Broadcasting and Telecommunications Commission" label="National Broadcasting and Telecommunications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q79692" start="2994" end="2996" title="3G" label="3G"/>
<link wikidata="Q379592" start="3144" end="3147" title="Advanced Info Service" label="AIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268422" start="3149" end="3153" title="True Corporation" label="True"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155797" start="3159" end="3163" title="DTAC" label="DTAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083894" start="3222" end="3226" title="DTTV" label="DTTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108126" start="3845" end="3862" title="Prayut Chan-o-cha" label="Prayut Chan-o-cha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053964" start="4515" end="4541" title="memoranda of understanding" label="memoranda of understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="5037" end="5040" title="GSM" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q229804" start="5041" end="5045" title="3GPP" label="3GPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q204833" start="5081" end="5085" title="Enhanced Data Rates for GSM Evolution" label="EDGE"/>
<link wikidata="Q79686" start="5087" end="5091" title="Universal Mobile Telecommunications System" label="UMTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q79703" start="5097" end="5100" title="LTE (telecommunication)" label="LTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q258137" start="5119" end="5127" title="analogue television" label="analogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q175122" start="5128" end="5150" title="terrestrial television" label="terrestrial television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083894" start="5179" end="5186" title="digital terrestrial television" label="digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1590599" start="6472" end="6498" title="TOT Public Company Limited" label="TOT Public Company Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q97224322" start="6513" end="6534" title="National Telecom Public Company Limited" label="National Telecom (NT)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268422" start="6537" end="6553" title="True Corporation" label="True Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6559" end="6567" title="TT&amp;amp;T" label="TT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q738621" start="6716" end="6726" title="landline" label="fixed-line"/>
<link wikidata="Q851907" start="6787" end="6806" title="Ministry of Defence (Thailand)" label="Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268422" start="7293" end="7309" title="True Corporation" label="True Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q806484" start="7319" end="7346" title="Bangkok Metropolitan Region" label="Bangkok Metropolitan Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858140" start="7604" end="7611" title="Prepaid mobile phone" label="prepaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q379592" start="7757" end="7778" title="Advanced Info Service" label="Advanced Info Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155797" start="7814" end="7818" title="DTAC" label="DTAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q13015371" start="7852" end="7860" title="Truemove" label="Truemove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1590599" start="7923" end="7949" title="TOT Public Company Limited" label="TOT Public Company Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q5008909" start="7992" end="8003" title="CAT Telecom" label="CAT Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058891" start="8039" end="8071" title="mobile virtual network operator" label="Mobile Virtual Network Operators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929104" start="8325" end="8342" title="2007 Constitution of Thailand" label="2007 constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305838" start="8668" end="8723" title="National Broadcasting and Telecommunications Commission" label="National Broadcasting and Telecommunications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8768" end="8793" title="UMTS frequency bands#UMTS-FDD frequency bands and channel bandwidths" label="IMT (2100) frequency band"/>
<link wikidata="Q379592" start="10346" end="10367" title="Advanced Info Service" label="Advanced Info Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q13015371" start="10403" end="10411" title="Truemove" label="Truemove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155797" start="10431" end="10435" title="DTAC" label="DTAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q97224322" start="10511" end="10532" title="National Telecom Public Company Limited" label="National Telecom (NT)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058891" start="10569" end="10608" title="mobile virtual network operator" label="mobile virtual network operators (MVNO)"/>
<link wikidata="Q370089" start="10656" end="10661" title="Herfindahl–Hirschman index" label="(HHI)"/>
<link wikidata="Q845632" start="10694" end="10701" title="Telenor" label="Telenor"/>
<link wikidata="Q611064" start="10706" end="10728" title="Charoen Pokphand" label="Charoen Pokphand Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268422" start="10889" end="10905" title="True Corporation" label="True Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155797" start="10917" end="10943" title="Total Access Communication" label="Total Access Communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330208" start="11230" end="11256" title="Stock Exchange of Thailand" label="Stock Exchange of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502444" start="11552" end="11582" title="Mobile virtual network enabler" label="Mobile virtual network enabler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2516126" start="11743" end="11755" title="trunk prefix" label="trunk prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377707" start="11782" end="11784" title="AM radio" label="AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368380" start="11791" end="11793" title="FM broadcasting" label="FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q848981" start="12022" end="12033" title="free-to-air" label="free-to-air"/>
<link wikidata="Q258137" start="12034" end="12042" title="analogue television" label="analogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q175122" start="12043" end="12054" title="terrestrial television" label="terrestrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616075" start="12055" end="12073" title="television station" label="television station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571768" start="12091" end="12100" title="Channel 3 (Thailand)" label="Channel 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191009" start="12114" end="12123" title="BEC World" label="BEC World"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921537" start="12146" end="12150" title="MCOT" label="MCOT"/>
<link wikidata="Q357922" start="12153" end="12162" title="Royal Thai Army Radio and Television Channel 5" label="Channel 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749588" start="12180" end="12195" title="Royal Thai Army" label="Royal Thai Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q795641" start="12198" end="12207" title="Channel 7 (Thailand)" label="Channel 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087488" start="12260" end="12277" title="Channel 9 MCOT HD" label="Channel 9 MCOT HD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921537" start="12331" end="12335" title="MCOT" label="MCOT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044551" start="12338" end="12341" title="National Broadcasting Services of Thailand" label="NBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603792" start="12468" end="12476" title="Thai Public Broadcasting Service" label="Thai PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q16306127" start="12519" end="12523" title="PPTV (Thailand)" label="PPTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083894" start="12585" end="12615" title="digital terrestrial television" label="digital terrestrial television"/>
<link wikidata="Q133454" start="12847" end="12862" title="high-definition television" label="high-definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q243314" start="12887" end="12906" title="standard-definition television" label="standard-definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q530880" start="13362" end="13373" title="SEA-ME-WE 3 (cable system)" label="SEA-ME-WE-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q954903" start="13375" end="13386" title="SEA-ME-WE 4 (cable system)" label="SEA-ME-WE-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q16926958" start="13492" end="13526" title="TIS (cable system)" label="Thailand-Indonesia-Singapore (TIS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653250" start="13562" end="13566" title="APCN (cable system)" label="APCN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644297" start="13705" end="13739" title="T-V-H (cable system)" label="Thailand-Vietnam-Hong Kong (T-V-H)"/>
<link wikidata="Q641659" start="13775" end="13797" title="Fiber-Optic Link Around the Globe" label="Flag Europe-Asia (FEA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806238" start="13832" end="13858" title="AAG (cable system)" label="Asia-America Gateway (AAG)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806420" start="13925" end="13951" title="Asia Pacific Gateway" label="Asia Pacific Gateway (APG)"/>
<link wikidata="Q149918" start="14097" end="14121" title="communications satellite" label="communications satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="14139" end="14147" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6903407" start="14161" end="14191" title="Thaicom (Company)" label="Thaicom Public Company Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630246" start="14554" end="14592" title="Shin Corporation" label="Shinawatra Computer and Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630246" start="14607" end="14620" title="InTouch Group" label="InTouch Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q196253" start="14660" end="14666" title="Hughes Aircraft" label="Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344775" start="14868" end="14874" title="C band (IEEE)" label="C-band"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="14911" end="14916" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="14920" end="14929" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q164373" start="16091" end="16109" title="Thaksin Shinawatra" label="Thaksin Shinawatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805942" start="17548" end="17565" title="Media of Thailand" label="Media of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058937" start="17567" end="17589" title="Censorship in Thailand" label="Censorship in Thailand"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30135" wikidata="Q932952" url="?curid=30135" title="Transport in Thailand">
<text>Transport in Thailand is varied, with no one dominant means of transport. For long-distance travel, bus transport dominates. Low-speed rail travel has long been a rural long-distance transport mechanism, though plans are underway to expand services with high-speed rail lines extending to several major regions of Thailand. Road transportation is the primary form of freight transport across the country.

For short trips motorbikes are common. There are public motorcycle taxis in Bangkok, Pattaya, and other large cities. An overwhelming number of taxis can also be found in Bangkok. Since the country&#x27;s first rapid rail transit line opened in 1999 in Bangkok, daily ridership on Bangkok&#x27;s various transit lines has risen to over 800,000, with multiple additional lines either under construction or being proposed.

Private automobiles, whose rapid growth contributed to Bangkok&#x27;s notorious traffic congestion over the past two decades, have risen in popularity, especially among tourists, expats, the upper class, and the growing middle class. A motorway network across Thailand has been gradually implemented, with motorways completed in Bangkok and most of central Thailand.

Domestic air transport, which had been dominated by a select few air carriers, saw a surge in popularity since 2010 due in large part to the expanding services of low-cost carriers such as Thai Air Asia and Nok Air.

Areas with navigable waterways often have boats or boat service, and many innovative means of transport exist such as tuk-tuk, vanpool, songthaew, and even elephants in rural areas.

==Rail transport==


The State Railway of Thailand (SRT) operates all of Thailand&#x27;s national rail lines. Krung Thep Aphiwat Central Terminal is the main terminus of all routes, replacing the former main station, Bangkok Railway Station (Hua Lamphong Station), in 2023. Phahonyothin and ICD Lat Krabang are the main freight terminals.

 SRT had of track, all of it meter gauge except the Airport Link. Nearly all is single-track (2847.1 km), although some important sections around Bangkok are double () or triple-tracked () and there are plans to extend this. By comparison, Thailand has 390,000 km (242,335 miles) of highways.

The SRT has long been perceived by the public as inefficient and resistant to change. Trains are usually late, and most of its equipment is old and poorly maintained. The worst financially performing state enterprise, the SRT consistently operates at a loss despite being endowed with large amounts of property and receiving large government budgets; it reported a preliminary loss of 7.58 billion baht in 2010. Recurring government attempts at restructuring and/or privatization throughout the 2000s have always been strongly opposed by the union and have not made any progress.

There are two active rail links to adjacent countries. The line to Malaysia uses the same gauge, as does the line to Laos across the Mekong River on the First Thai-Lao Friendship Bridge. The line to Cambodia is currently disused and is being rebuilt, while the line to Myanmar is defunct (see Death Railway). A projected extension will rebuild the route and in 2011 a link was also proposed from Kanchanaburi to Port Dawei.

Rail transport in Bangkok includes long-distance services, and some daily commuter trains running from and to the outskirts of the city during the rush hour, but passenger numbers have remained low. There are also three rapid transit rail systems in the capital.

===Rail rapid transit systems===

====Bangkok Metropolitan Region====
Bangkok is served by four rail rapid transit systems:
* MRT, with four lines.
* Bangkok Skytrain or BTS, with three lines. 
* Suvarnabhumi Airport Link or ARL, with one line.
* SRT Red Lines, with two lines.

====Khon Kaen====

In March 2016, the Thai government approved the first LRT project in Khon Kaen province, to be built by the private sector. The first phase of the project will be a 26 km north–south route. Previously, this corridor was intended to be served by a bus rapid transit route. The Office of Transport and Traffic Policy (OTP) will fund an 8-month project study for Khon Kaen University with 38 million baht. The Khon-Kaenpattanmong or Khon Kaen Think Tank, a private company, will be the main investor in the project and responsible for the operation of the network. The Phase 1 budget is estimated at 1.5 billion baht.

As of 2020, construction has yet to start.

====Other Provinces====
Several other rapid transit systems have been proposed but have not been approved : Chiang Mai monorail, Pattaya LRT, Phuket LRT and Hat Yai monorail.

=== Tram ===

Thailand had two tramway systems, both of which are now defunct. Trams operated in Bangkok between 1888 and 1968 when it was closed to make way for road traffic. At its peak, a total of eleven tram lines operated in the city, with a cumulative total length of 53.5 km.

Another short-lived tramway system operated in Lopburi, which operated between 1955 and 1962. This system consisted of a single 6.5 km line.

===Automated people mover===

The Suvarnabhumi Airport Automated People Mover is an automated people mover in Suvarnabhumi Airport, first opened for service on 28 September 2023, running between the main terminal building and Satellite-1 terminal (SAT-1), with a distance of 1 kilometer. Currently, there is only one service in Suvarnabhumi Airport.

==Road transport==
Thailand has 390,000 km (242,335 miles) of highways. According to the BBC, Thailand has 462,133 roads and many multi-lane highways. Thailand had 37 million registered vehicles, 20 million of them two or three-wheeled motorbikes, and millions more that are unregistered. It also had one million &quot;heavy trucks&quot;, 158,000 buses, and 624,000 &quot;other&quot; vehicles. By mid-2019 the number of registered vehicles in Thailand had risen to 40,190,328. The majority—21,051,977—are motorbikes. Private automobiles with up to seven seats numbered 9,713,980.

===Road safety===
According to the World Health Organization&#x27;s, &quot;Global Status Report on Road Safety 2018&quot;, Thailand had an estimated traffic fatality rate (all vehicle types) of 32.7 persons per 100,000 population in 2016. The only nations exceeding Thailand&#x27;s death toll were Liberia; Saint Lucia (population: 178,000); Burundi; Zimbabwe; Dominican Republic; Democratic Republic of Congo; Venezuela; and the Central African Republic.

Thailand&#x27;s death rate for operators and passengers of motorized two- and three-wheeled motorbikes was the world&#x27;s highest in 2016 at 74.4 fatalities per 100,000 population.

Sixty-six persons die every day on Thai roads, one every 22 minutes, seven of them children. In 2015, Thailand&#x27;s roads were the second deadliest in the world in 2015. Among public transport options, passenger vans, with a monthly average of 19.5 accidents resulting in a monthly average of 9.4 deaths, rank as the most dangerous of all public transport services involved in road accidents. Regular tour buses on fixed routes were in second place with a total of 141 accidents, resulting in 56 deaths and 1,252 injuries. Third on the list were irregular tour buses, involved in 52 accidents, resulting in 47 deaths and 576 injuries. Taxis were fourth with 77 accidents, resulting in seven deaths and 84 injuries. Ordinary buses were involved in 48 accidents with 10 deaths and 75 injuries. , there were 156,089 legally registered public transport vehicles in Thailand, 42,202 of which were passenger vans, including 16,002 regular vans, 24,136 irregular vans, and 1,064 private vans.

From 2013 to 2017, an average of 17,634 children between the ages of 10–19 died on Thailand&#x27;s roads. Most of the fatalities involved motorbikes.

The two most dangerous travel periods in Thailand are at the New Year and at Songkran. Songkran 2016 (11-17 April) saw 442 deaths and 3,656 injuries. New Year 2017&#x27;s death toll for the seven-day period between 29 December 2016 and 4 January 2017 was 478 compared to the previous year&#x27;s record of 380. A total of 4,128 people were injured in road accidents during the period. The Centre for the Prevention and Reduction of Road Accidents said that the death toll in 2016 was the highest of the last ten years. Death toll records from road accidents for the last ten New Year periods are: 449 deaths in 2007, 401 in 2008, 357 in 2009, 347 in 2010, 358 in 2011, 321 in 2012, 365 in 2013, 366 in 2014, 341 in 2015, 380 in 2016. Lax enforcement of traffic laws appears to be a major contributor to traffic accidents: the World Health Organization&#x27;s Collaborating Centre for Injury Prevention and Safety Promotion found that only 20 percent of traffic violators on Thai roads are given tickets and only four percent of those cited pay their traffic fines.

Government attempts to reduce the toll of deaths and injuries have proven ineffectual. In 2011 the government declared the following ten years to be Thailand&#x27;s &quot;decade of action on road safety&quot;. It named 2012 as the year of 100 percent helmet use on motorbikes. In 2015, about 1.3 million school-age children in Thailand regularly traveled on the back of motorcycles each day but only seven percent wore helmets. In 2018, the WHO reported that motorcycle helmet use was 51 percent by operators and 20 percent by passengers. In 2015 the Interior Ministry&#x27;s Department of Disaster Prevention and Mitigation&#x27;s (DDPM) Road Safety Collaboration Centre announced a target of reducing road deaths by 80 percent. According to &quot;The New York Times&quot;, in 2015, Thailand vowed at a United Nations forum to halve traffic deaths by 2020. But DDPM&#x27;s published mandate makes no mention of road safety. Road safety falls under the purview of the Ministry of Interior&#x27;s DDPM. Responsibility for roads falls under the Ministry of Transport.

Thailand had no laws requiring child safety features or a rear seating position in vehicles, but, the government has announced that the use of child seat is mandatory and the violators will be fined since Sep 2022.

====National speed limits====
The maximum rural speed limit is 90 km/h. For motorways it is 120 km/h. The maximum urban speed limit is 80 km/h, far above the best practice limit of 50 km/h recommended by the WHO.

===Public bus service===
Buses are a major method of transportation for people, freight, and small parcels, and are the most popular means of long-distance travel. Tour and VIP class long-distance buses tend to be luxurious, while city- and other-class buses are often very colorful with paint schemes and advertising.

There are fundamentally two types of long-distance buses in Thailand:

* those run by The Transport Company, Ltd., (TCL), the state-owned bus company. Known to Thais by the initials บขส (pronounced &quot;baw-kaw-saw&quot;), this 80-year-old company was formed by the government to ensure that citizens in even the most far-flung localities had access to the capital city, Bangkok. TCL buses are easily identified by the large golden coat of arms appliqued to each side of the bus.
* those operated by private bus companies offer hundreds of routes in various service categories (express, VIP, local, air conditioned)

====Public bus service in Bangkok====
In Bangkok, the Bangkok Mass Transit Authority or BMTA, is the main operator of public transit buses within the Greater Bangkok area. The Bangkok Mass Transit Authority offers bus and van routes throughout the city and its suburban provinces. Many bus routes in Bangkok are served by several private companies, sometimes duplicating those from BMTA. Examples include orange minibuses, and cream-blue buses. The buses have the BMTA symbol on them, mostly seen below the driver&#x27;s side window. These often follow slightly different routings from the main big BMTA bus or do not run along the whole route.

BMTA currently operates bus routes in Bangkok and its metropolitan area namely Nonthaburi, Pathum Thani, Samut Prakan, Samut Sakhon and Nakhon Pathom.

Local buses and Bangkok city buses come in various sizes, types, and prices, from half size, full size, double length, open window, fan, and air conditioned.

=====Bus rapid transit system in Bangkok=====
The Bangkok BRT is a bus rapid transit system in Bangkok. Of five routes that were originally planned, only one line has been operating since 2010. The route has twelve stations in the centre of the road that give at-grade access to the right-hand side of the buses. Both terminals connect to the Silom Line of the BTS Skytrain; at Chong Nonsi (S3) and Talat Phlu (S10). The buses used are all Sunlong SLK6125CNG buses. The fare is currently on hold(free for 3 months till 30 November 2023) for reconsideration of the effectiveness of the project.

===Highway network===
The Thai highway network links every part of Thailand. Most highways are in good state of repair, greatly enhancing safety and speed. The four-lane highways often have overhead concrete pedestrian crossings interspersed about every 250 meters in populated areas. There are few on and off ramps on eight-lane highways, most highways are separated by medians with breakage for U-turns, except on major roads where ramp style U-turns predominate.

A number of undivided two-lane highways have been converted into divided four-lane highways. A Bangkok – Chon Buri motorway (Route 7) now links to the new airport and Eastern seaboard.

===Motorway network===

The Thai motorway network is small. Coupled with Bangkok&#x27;s extensive expressway network, the motorways provide a relief from regular traffic in Bangkok. The Thai Government is planning infrastructure investment in various &quot;megaprojects&quot;, including motorway expansion to approximately 6,877 kilometers.

===Expressway network===

Thailand uses the expressway term for the toll road or highway network. Most expressways are elevated with some sections at ground level. The current expressway network covers major parts of Bangkok and suburban areas. Expressways are used to avoid heavy traffic jams in Bangkok and reduce traffic time but are sometimes congested in rush hour.

===Utility cycling===
The Thai state has failed at promoting utility cycling as a mode of transport. Officials regard bicycles as toys, and cycling as a leisure activity, not as a means of transport that could help solve traffic and environmental problems. Their attitude was on display at Bangkok&#x27;s celebration of World Car-Free Day 2018, celebrated on 22 September. Bangkok&#x27;s Deputy Governor, Sakoltee Phattiyakul, who presided over the event, arrived in his official automobile, as did his entourage. He then mounted a bicycle for a ceremonial ride. Prior to the event, which encouraged the non-use of cars, the BMA announced there would be extensive free automobile parking spaces available for participants who were to ride bicycles in the parade.

In his first year office, Prime Minister Prayut Chan-o-cha launched a cycling initiative, encouraging members of the public to cycle. But state investment in cycling lanes ended up a being a waste as they quickly devolved into parking lanes for motorists. All Thai rail companies, whether commuter or long distance, make on-board transport of bicycles difficult or impractical. Without state intervention, direction, and education, the public lacks the impetus to adopt a mode of transport that remains ignored by urban development projects.

===Other public transport===

Other forms of road transport includes tuk-tuks, taxis—as of November 2018, Thailand has 80,647 registered taxis nationwide—vans (minibus), motorbike taxis, and songthaews.

There are 4,125 public vans operating on 114 routes from Bangkok to the provinces alone. They are classed as Category 2 public transport vehicles (routes within 300 kilometres). Until 2016, most operated from a Bangkok terminus at Victory Monument. They are being moved from there to the Department of Land Transport&#x27;s three Bangkok bus terminals.

Passenger vans have a disturbing safety record. The Safe Public Transport Travel Project of the Foundation for Consumers, reports that passenger vans in 2018 were involved in 75 accidents, causing 314 injuries and 41 deaths. In 2017 the numbers were 113 dead and 906 injured, and in 2016, 105 people died and 1,102 others were injured in passenger van accidents. A government initiative to replace existing vans with larger minibuses in 2017, then delayed to 2019, was put on hold by the incoming Prayut administration.

==Air transport==

===Airports===

As of 2012, Thailand had 103 airports with 63 paved runways, in addition to 6 heliports. The busiest airport in the county is Bangkok&#x27;s Suvarnabhumi Airport. 
Major international airports
* Suvarnabhumi Airport (BKK) (New Bangkok International Airport, a major international hub)
* Don Mueang International Airport (DMK) (Old Bangkok International, now used mostly by low-cost carriers)
* Chiang Mai International Airport (CNX)
* Chiang Rai International Airport (CEI)
* Hat Yai International Airport (HDY)
* Phuket International Airport (HKT)
* Krabi International Airport (KBV)
* Samui International Airport (USM)
* Surat Thani International Airport (URT)
* Udon Thani International Airport (UTH)
* U-Tapao International Airport (UTP)

===Airlines===

The national carrier of Thailand is Thai Airways International, founded in 1959. Bangkok Airways has been operating since 1968 and now markets itself as &quot;Asia&#x27;s Boutique Airline&quot;. Low-cost carriers have become prevalent since 2003, including Thai Smile, Thai AirAsia, Thai AirAsia X, Thai Lion Air, Thai Vietjet Air and Nok Air.

==Water transport==
As of 2011 there were 3,999 km of principal waterways, of which 3,701 km had navigable depths of 0.9 m or more throughout the year. There are numerous minor waterways navigable by shallow-draft native craft, such as long-tailed boats.

===River and canal transport===
In Bangkok, the Chao Phraya River is a major transportation artery, with ferries, water taxis (the Chao Phraya Express Boat) and long-tailed boats. There are local, semi-express, and express lines for commuters, though the winding river means trips can be much farther than by bus. There is also the Khlong Saen Saeb boat service, which provides fast, inexpensive transport in central Bangkok.

===Ferries===
Ferry service between hundreds of islands and the mainland is available, as well as across navigable rivers, such as Chao Phraya and Mae Khong (Mekong). There are a number of international ferries. In November 2018, Hua Hin deputy chief Chareewat Phramanee confirmed the ferry service, suspended due to low tourist numbers during low season, would be up and running again for high season between Hua Hin and Pattaya, a 2.5-hour journey for 1,250 Thai Bhat on a catamaran with a maximum capacity of 340.

===Sea transport===
In Thailand, the Gulf of Thailand and Andaman Sea is a transportation system:
* Trat – Ko Chang boat service
* Surat Thani – Ko Samui boat service
* Phuket – Phi Phi Islands boat service
* Phuket – Ao Nang boat service
* Bang Pu – Hua Hin – Pranburi boat service
* Bang Pu – Pattaya boat service
* Pattaya – Hua Hin – Pranburi boat service

===Ports and harbors===
* Bangkok
* Laem Ngop
* Laem Chabang near Si Racha
* Pattani
* Phuket (Patong)
* Sattahip
* Songkhla
* Ranong
* Satun

===Merchant marine fleet===
As of 2010 Thailand&#x27;s merchant marine fleet consisted of 363 ships ( or over) totaling 1,834,809 GT/. By type this includes 31 bulk carrier, 99 cargo ships, 28 chemical tankers, 18 container ships, 36 liquified gas vessels, 1 passenger ship, 10 passenger/cargo ships, 114 petroleum tankers, 24 refrigerated cargo ships, 1 roll-on/roll-off, 1 other passenger vessel.

==Pipelines==
Pipelines are used for bulk transport of gas (1,889 km as of 2010), liquid petroleum (85 km) and refined products: (1,099 km).

==See also==
* Tuk-tuk
* Songthaew
* Motorcycle taxi
* Driving licence in Thailand
* Right- and left-hand traffic
* Vehicle registration plates of Thailand
* List of motor vehicle deaths in Thailand by year
* Transport in Bangkok

== References ==
==External links==

* Thailand Transportation Modes – Transportation modes.
* Long distance travel and public transport info – Departure stations in Bangkok and timetables.
* Thai national bus company
* Railway map
* Thailand Accident Research Center (TARC) – Road &amp; Transportation Safety.
* Driving in Thailand – Driving a car in Thailand and how to get a drivers license.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q932952" start="0" end="21" title="Transport in Thailand" label="Transport in Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004147" start="135" end="146" title="List of railway lines in Thailand" label="rail travel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="254" end="275" title="Rail transport in Thailand#Proposed high speed routes" label="high-speed rail lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233750" start="462" end="477" title="motorcycle taxi" label="motorcycle taxi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="611" end="640" title="BTS Skytrain#Stations and lines" label="first rapid rail transit line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1829474" start="1062" end="1096" title="Thai motorway network" label="A motorway network across Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148568" start="1385" end="1398" title="Thai AirAsia" label="Thai Air Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065088" start="1403" end="1410" title="Nok Air" label="Nok Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q59720" start="1531" end="1538" title="tuk-tuk" label="tuk-tuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q17088425" start="1540" end="1547" title="vanpool" label="vanpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935247" start="1549" end="1558" title="songthaew" label="songthaew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165702" start="1621" end="1646" title="State Railway of Thailand" label="State Railway of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q23925684" start="1706" end="1741" title="Krung Thep Aphiwat Central Terminal" label="Krung Thep Aphiwat Central Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q125929" start="1813" end="1836" title="Bangkok Railway Station" label="Bangkok Railway Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806807" start="1891" end="1902" title="Lat Krabang" label="Lat Krabang"/>
<link wikidata="Q24609" start="1965" end="1976" title="meter gauge" label="meter gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q277586" start="2878" end="2886" title="Rail transport in Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41179" start="2944" end="2950" title="Mekong" label="Mekong"/>
<link wikidata="Q917862" start="2964" end="2996" title="First Thai-Lao Friendship Bridge" label="First Thai-Lao Friendship Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103795" start="3010" end="3018" title="Rail transport in Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q750901" start="3080" end="3087" title="Rail transport in Burma" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11718" start="3104" end="3117" title="Burma Railway" label="Death Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q239121" start="3207" end="3219" title="Kanchanaburi" label="Kanchanaburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018167" start="3228" end="3233" title="Dawei" label="Dawei"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283953" start="3236" end="3261" title="Rail transport in Bangkok" label="Rail transport in Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q806485" start="3626" end="3629" title="MRT (Bangkok)" label="MRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q806501" start="3650" end="3666" title="Bangkok Skytrain" label="Bangkok Skytrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133704" start="3696" end="3721" title="Suvarnabhumi Airport Link" label="Suvarnabhumi Airport Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q2542280" start="3747" end="3760" title="SRT Red Lines" label="SRT Red Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="3852" end="3855" title="Light rail" label="LRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q876526" start="3867" end="3876" title="Khon Kaen" label="Khon Kaen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878855" start="4045" end="4062" title="bus rapid transit" label="bus rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q368329" start="4158" end="4178" title="Khon Kaen University" label="Khon Kaen University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095201" start="4566" end="4585" title="Chiang Mai monorail" label="Chiang Mai monorail"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4587" end="4598" title="Pattaya Light Rail Transit" label="Pattaya LRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q25394912" start="4600" end="4610" title="Phuke Light Rail Transit" label="Phuket LRT"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4615" end="4631" title="Hat Yai monorail" label="Hat Yai monorail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363891" start="4965" end="4972" title="Lopburi" label="Lopburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q123569532" start="5094" end="5137" title="Suvarnabhumi Airport Automated People Mover" label="Suvarnabhumi Airport Automated People Mover"/>
<link wikidata="Q194316" start="5170" end="5190" title="Suvarnabhumi Airport" label="Suvarnabhumi Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="5500" end="5503" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="6027" end="6052" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="6290" end="6297" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q760" start="6299" end="6310" title="Saint Lucia" label="Saint Lucia"/>
<link wikidata="Q967" start="6334" end="6341" title="Burundi" label="Burundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="6343" end="6351" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="6353" end="6371" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="6373" end="6401" title="Democratic Republic of Congo" label="Democratic Republic of Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="6403" end="6412" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q929" start="6422" end="6446" title="Central African Republic" label="Central African Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q223189" start="6837" end="6851" title="minivan" label="passenger vans"/>
<link wikidata="Q42417678" start="7850" end="7858" title="Songkran" label="Songkran"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="8599" end="8624" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q640365" start="9390" end="9414" title="Ministry of Interior (Thailand)" label="Interior Ministry&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="9643" end="9657" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4170221" start="9882" end="9903" title="Ministry of Transport (Thailand)" label="Ministry of Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4402404" start="10049" end="10059" title="Child safety seat" label="child seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q180154" start="10188" end="10192" title="kilometres per hour" label="km/h"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855217" start="11328" end="11358" title="Bangkok Mass Transit Authority" label="Bangkok Mass Transit Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q806484" start="11424" end="11439" title="Greater Bangkok" label="Greater Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q242932" start="11999" end="12009" title="Nonthaburi Province" label="Nonthaburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365723" start="12011" end="12023" title="Pathum Thani" label="Pathum Thani"/>
<link wikidata="Q13139252" start="12025" end="12037" title="Samut Prakan" label="Samut Prakan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359220" start="12039" end="12051" title="Samut Sakhon" label="Samut Sakhon"/>
<link wikidata="Q520338" start="12056" end="12069" title="Nakhon Pathom" label="Nakhon Pathom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12053093" start="12281" end="12292" title="Bangkok BRT" label="Bangkok BRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878855" start="12298" end="12315" title="bus rapid transit" label="bus rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030199" start="12609" end="12620" title="Chong Nonsi BTS Station" label="Chong Nonsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18393239" start="12630" end="12640" title="Talat Phlu BTS Station" label="Talat Phlu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7640511" start="12671" end="12678" title="Sunlong Bus" label="Sunlong"/>
<link wikidata="Q138589" start="13398" end="13407" title="Chonburi (city)" label="Chon Buri"/>
<link wikidata="Q14214542" start="13460" end="13476" title="Eastern seaboard of Thailand" label="Eastern seaboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16939396" start="13889" end="13898" title="toll road" label="toll road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888694" start="14254" end="14269" title="utility cycling" label="utility cycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q753154" start="14513" end="14531" title="World Car-Free Day" label="World Car-Free Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855218" start="14818" end="14821" title="Bangkok Metropolitan Administration" label="BMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108126" start="14998" end="15015" title="Prayut Chan-o-cha" label="Prayut Chan-o-cha"/>
<link wikidata="Q59720" start="15569" end="15577" title="Auto rickshaw" label="tuk-tuks"/>
<link wikidata="Q946479" start="15660" end="15667" title="minibus" label="minibus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935247" start="15691" end="15700" title="songthaew" label="songthaew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063737" start="15935" end="15951" title="Victory Monument (Thailand)" label="Victory Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q946479" start="16482" end="16489" title="minibus" label="minibus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108126" start="16555" end="16561" title="Prayut Chan-o-cha" label="Prayut"/>
<link wikidata="Q194316" start="16755" end="16775" title="Suvarnabhumi Airport" label="Suvarnabhumi Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q194316" start="16809" end="16829" title="Suvarnabhumi Airport" label="Suvarnabhumi Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046755" start="16901" end="16933" title="Don Mueang International Airport" label="Don Mueang International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065082" start="17008" end="17040" title="Chiang Mai International Airport" label="Chiang Mai International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q969597" start="17049" end="17081" title="Chiang Rai International Airport" label="Chiang Rai International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q912583" start="17090" end="17119" title="Hat Yai International Airport" label="Hat Yai International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q240694" start="17128" end="17156" title="Phuket International Airport" label="Phuket International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q616894" start="17165" end="17192" title="Krabi Airport" label="Krabi International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q867656" start="17201" end="17228" title="Samui Airport" label="Samui International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q770306" start="17237" end="17270" title="Surat Thani Airport" label="Surat Thani International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299161" start="17279" end="17311" title="Udon Thani Airport" label="Udon Thani International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371432" start="17320" end="17349" title="U-Tapao International Airport" label="U-Tapao International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q188710" start="17409" end="17435" title="Thai Airways International" label="Thai Airways International"/>
<link wikidata="Q806487" start="17454" end="17469" title="Bangkok Airways" label="Bangkok Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189248" start="17630" end="17640" title="Thai Smile" label="Thai Smile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148568" start="17642" end="17654" title="Thai AirAsia" label="Thai AirAsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16308074" start="17656" end="17670" title="Thai AirAsia X" label="Thai AirAsia X"/>
<link wikidata="Q15043926" start="17672" end="17685" title="Thai Lion Air" label="Thai Lion Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q23899316" start="17687" end="17703" title="Thai Vietjet Air" label="Thai Vietjet Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065088" start="17708" end="17715" title="Nok Air" label="Nok Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q2174644" start="17954" end="17970" title="long-tailed boat" label="long-tailed boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q118850" start="18022" end="18039" title="Chao Phraya River" label="Chao Phraya River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270057" start="18105" end="18129" title="Chao Phraya Express Boat" label="Chao Phraya Express Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431800" start="18306" end="18322" title="Khlong Saen Saeb" label="Khlong Saen Saeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q41179" start="18559" end="18565" title="Mekong" label="Mekong"/>
<link wikidata="Q131217" start="18956" end="18972" title="Gulf of Thailand" label="Gulf of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q47632" start="18977" end="18988" title="Andaman Sea" label="Andaman Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="19306" end="19313" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q475863" start="19316" end="19325" title="Amphoe Laem Ngop" label="Laem Ngop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025958" start="19328" end="19340" title="Laem Chabang" label="Laem Chabang"/>
<link wikidata="Q913445" start="19346" end="19354" title="Amphoe Si Racha" label="Si Racha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025966" start="19357" end="19364" title="Pattani (town)" label="Pattani"/>
<link wikidata="Q182565" start="19367" end="19373" title="Phuket Province" label="Phuket"/>
<link wikidata="Q630024" start="19375" end="19381" title="Patong" label="Patong"/>
<link wikidata="Q476658" start="19385" end="19393" title="Amphoe Sattahip" label="Sattahip"/>
<link wikidata="Q795595" start="19396" end="19404" title="Songkhla" label="Songkhla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012440" start="19407" end="19413" title="Ranong" label="Ranong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365666" start="19416" end="19421" title="Satun" label="Satun"/>
<link wikidata="Q11446" start="19517" end="19521" title="ship" label="ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q15276" start="19583" end="19595" title="bulk carrier" label="bulk carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q105999" start="19600" end="19610" title="cargo ship" label="cargo ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q15254" start="19616" end="19631" title="chemical tanker" label="chemical tanker"/>
<link wikidata="Q17210" start="19637" end="19651" title="container ship" label="container ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055880" start="19682" end="19696" title="passenger ship" label="passenger ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q14928" start="19728" end="19745" title="oil tanker" label="petroleum tankers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504307" start="19750" end="19774" title="Reefer ship" label="refrigerated cargo ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q473932" start="19778" end="19794" title="roll-on/roll-off" label="roll-on/roll-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="19912" end="19921" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q59720" start="19980" end="19987" title="Tuk-tuk" label="Tuk-tuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935247" start="19990" end="19999" title="Songthaew" label="Songthaew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233750" start="20002" end="20017" title="Motorcycle taxi" label="Motorcycle taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308123" start="20020" end="20047" title="Driving licence in Thailand" label="Driving licence in Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q220656" start="20050" end="20078" title="Right- and left-hand traffic" label="Right- and left-hand traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164542" start="20081" end="20120" title="Vehicle registration plates of Thailand" label="Vehicle registration plates of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6629333" start="20123" end="20171" title="List of motor vehicle deaths in Thailand by year" label="List of motor vehicle deaths in Thailand by year"/>
<link wikidata="Q18354030" start="20174" end="20194" title="Transport in Bangkok" label="Transport in Bangkok"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30136" wikidata="Q947702" url="?curid=30136" title="Royal Thai Armed Forces">
<text>The Royal Thai Armed Forces (RTARF; ; ) are the armed forces of the Kingdom of Thailand.

The Highest Commander of the Royal Thai Armed Forces (จอมทัพไทย; ) is the King of Thailand. The armed forces are managed by the Ministry of Defence of Thailand, which is headed by the minister of defence and commanded by the Royal Thai Armed Forces Headquarters, which in turn is headed by the Chief of Defence Forces. The commander-in-chief of the Royal Thai Army is considered the most powerful position in the Thai Armed Forces.

Royal Thai Armed Forces Day is celebrated on 18 January to commemorate the victory of King Naresuan the Great in battle against the Viceroy of Burma in 1593.

==Role==
The Royal Thai Armed Forces primarily aim to protect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Thailand. Their duties include defending the Thai monarchy against all threats, maintaining public order, and assisting in national disaster relief and drug control. Additionally, they support social development by cooperating with civilian government initiatives.

There are differing perspectives on the roles of the Thai armed forces. While their official duties are well-defined, some critics argue that their functions extend to preserving ruling class hegemony against democratic movements and facilitating the self-enrichment of high-ranking military officials

The Royal Thai Armed Forces have also played a role in international peacekeeping efforts. Notably, they contributed to the United Nations peacekeeping forces, including their participation in the International Force for East Timor (INTERFET) from 1999 to 2002. Additionally, they were part of the multinational force in Iraq, contributing 423 personnel from 2003 to 2004. This international involvement reflects their expanding role beyond national borders.

==Personnel==
, the Royal Thai Armed Forces (RTARF) comprised approximately 360,850 active duty and 200,000 reserve personnel, which is nearly one percent of Thailand&#x27;s population of 70 million. This proportion of military personnel in relation to the total population is higher than that of the United States but lower than Vietnam&#x27;s. The Thai military includes over 1,700 flag officers (generals and admirals), equating to about one general for every 212 troops. This ratio is notably higher than that of the United States military, which as of November 1, 2018, had 920 active duty general and flag officers for a force of 1,317,325 personnel, resulting in one flag officer for every 1,430 troops. On May 2, 2015, 1,043 new flag officers from all three services of the Thai military were sworn in. The number of officers who retired during the same period is not specified.

Observations by some analysts suggest that the goals of Thai generals include aligning with politically favorable parties, securing advantageous postings, and personal enrichment, which reportedly involves sharing gains with subordinates to maintain loyalty.

In early 2021, Thailand&#x27;s Ministry of Defence announced a plan to reduce the number of flag officers by 25% by 2029. As of March 2021, the RTARF had about 1,400 generals and admirals: 250 at RTARF headquarters, 400 in the army, 250 in the navy, 190 in the air force, and 300 in the Office of the Permanent Secretary of Defence.

===Conscription===
Conscription, a national duty outlined in the Constitution of the Kingdom of Thailand, was initiated in 1905. It mandates military service for all Thai citizens, although in practice, it primarily applies to males over 21 years of age who have not completed reserve training. The annual conscription process, typically held in early April, begins with eligible individuals reporting to their selection center at 07:00 on the designated day.

During this process, draftees have the option to volunteer for service or participate in a lottery if they do not volunteer. Those who choose to volunteer undergo thorough physical and mental health evaluations, including a drug test. The results of these drug tests are recorded in the Narcotics Control Board&#x27;s database. In 2018, data showed that out of 182,910 men tested, 12,209, or 6.7 percent, tested positive for drugs, with the majority detected for methamphetamine, followed by marijuana, and other substances.

Individuals who test positive for drugs are subject to different treatments based on their conscription status. Over 3,000 men who tested positive and were drafted into the military received drug rehabilitation treatment as part of their service. Conversely, those who tested positive but were not drafted underwent a 13-day rehabilitation program in their home provinces.

Candidates who do not meet the physical and mental health standards are exempted from service. Those who pass the examinations and volunteer for enlistment select their preferred service branch (Royal Thai Army, Royal Thai Navy, or Royal Thai Air Force) and a reporting date. They receive official documentation summarizing the draft selection of the year, along with an enlistment order detailing the specifics of their basic training, including the time and location. The process concludes for the day with the dismissal of the enlistees, who then await their reporting date for basic training.

Following the dismissal of the volunteers, the conscription lottery commences at each selection center. The number of individuals conscripted via the lottery is determined by the center&#x27;s set quota, minus the number of volunteers. Like the volunteers, those participating in the lottery undergo the same physical and mental health assessments, with ineligible individuals being similarly dismissed.

During the lottery, each man draws a card from an opaque box. A black card signifies exemption from military service, and the individual receives a letter of exemption. Conversely, drawing a red card mandates military service, with the induction date specified on the card. Individuals with higher educational qualifications may request a reduction in their service obligation.

In 2018, over 500,000 men were called for selection by the Royal Thai Armed Forces. The combined quota across the forces was approximately 104,000, including 80,000 for the Royal Thai Army, 16,000 for the Royal Thai Navy, and 8,700 for the Royal Thai Air Force. On the selection day, 44,800 men volunteered for service. After accounting for these volunteers and those dismissed due to ineligibility, the remaining quota was approximately 60,000 slots. This quota was to be filled by the approximately 450,000 men participating in the draft lottery, making the overall probability of drawing a red card about 13 percent.

In 2017, a total of 103,097 men participated in the military draft in Thailand, conducted from April 1 to 12. The armed forces required 77,000 conscripts annually. In some cases, certain selection centers did not need to conduct the balloting lottery because their quotas were already fulfilled by volunteers. In these instances, individuals who opted not to volunteer and instead waited for the lottery were issued certificates of exemption.

The duration of military service in Thailand varies depending on whether an individual volunteers and their level of educational attainment. Volunteers are generally required to serve for shorter periods. Those without a high school diploma must serve for two years, irrespective of their volunteer status. High school graduates who volunteer are obligated to serve for one year, whereas those who do not volunteer and draw red cards during the lottery are required to serve for two years. Individuals holding an associate degree or higher and who volunteer have a six-month service period. Those with similar educational qualifications who draw red cards during the lottery may request a reduction in their service time, up to a maximum of one year. University students are permitted to defer their conscription until they have completed their degree or reached the age of 26.

All conscripts in the Thai military are assigned the rank of Private, Seaman, or Aircraftman (OR-1), and they retain this rank throughout their service, regardless of their educational qualifications. Their wages are subject to increase after completing basic training and with time-in-grade.

It is reported by some sources that a significant number of conscripts, over half according to these claims, are utilized as servants to senior officers or clerks in military cooperative shops. However, it is important to note that the placement of conscripts, irrespective of their volunteer status and educational background, is typically determined by the operational needs of their respective service branches. The most common roles assigned include infantryman for Royal Thai Army conscripts, Royal Marine for Royal Thai Navy conscripts, and security forces specialist for Royal Thai Air Force conscripts. Their duties can vary, encompassing military operations, manning security checkpoints, force generation, and performing manual labor or clerical tasks as required by their unit.

Upon completing their service, conscripts are presented with the option to reenlist. In April 2020, for instance, only 5,460 out of 42,000 conscripts eligible for discharge at the end of the month chose to continue their service in the military.

Top government officials in Thailand maintain that conscription is essential for the country. However, there is an ongoing debate regarding the necessity and effectiveness of conscription in 21st-century Thailand. Critics argue that, as of 2019, the external threats to Thailand are minimal. This perspective seems to align with Thailand&#x27;s new National Security Plan, published in the Royal Gazette on November 22, 2019. Effective from November 19, 2019, to September 30, 2022, the plan suggests that external geopolitical threats are not significant in the forthcoming years, focusing instead on domestic issues, notably concerns about declining faith in the monarchy and political divisions. In September 2023, the Defence Minister announced that conscription will be gradually abolished from April 2024 to 2027.

Amnesty International, in a report from March 2020, alleges that Thai military conscripts are subjected to institutionalized abuse, which is often overlooked by military authorities. The report describes this practice as a &quot;long-standing open secret in Thai society&quot;. One notable case cited by Amnesty occurred in 2011, involving the death of Wichian Pueksom, allegedly due to torture by 10 officers. As of the report&#x27;s publication, no verdict had been rendered in this case.

==Budget==
The defence budget nearly tripled from 78.1 billion baht in 2005 to 207 billion baht for FY2016 (1 October 2015 – 30 September 2016), amounting to roughly 1.5% of GDP. The budget for FY2017 is 214 billion baht (US$6.1 billion)—including funds for a submarine purchase—a nominal increase of three percent. The proposed budget again represents around 1.5% of GDP and eight percent of total government spending for FY2017. The FY2018 defence budget is 220 billion baht, 7.65% of the total budget. According to &quot;Jane&#x27;s Defence Budgets&quot;, the Royal Thai Army generally receives 50% of defense expenditures while the air force and navy receive 22% each.
The Ministry of Defense budget for FY2021 is 223,464 million baht, down from 231,745M baht in FY2020.

==History==
===Ancient military forces===

The Royal Siamese Armed Forces was the military arm of the Siamese monarchy from the 12th to the 19th centuries. It refers to the military forces of the Sukhothai Kingdom, the Ayutthaya Kingdom, the Thonburi Kingdom and the early Rattanakosin Kingdom in chronological order. The Siamese army was one of the dominant armed forces in Southeast Asia. As Thailand has never been colonized by a European power, the Royal Thai Armed Forces boasts one of the longest and uninterrupted military traditions in Asia.

The army was organized into a small standing army of a few thousand, which defended the capital and the palace, and a much larger conscription-based wartime army. Conscription was based on the &quot;ahmudan&quot; system, which required local chiefs to supply, in times of war, a predetermined quota of men from their jurisdiction on the basis of population. The wartime army also consisted of elephantry, cavalry, artillery, and naval units.

In 1852, the Royal Siamese Armed Forces came into existence as permanent force at the behest of King Mongkut, who needed a European trained military force to thwart any Western threat and any attempts at colonialisation. By 1887, during the next reign of King Chulalongkorn, a permanent military command in the &quot;Kalahom&quot; Department was established. The office of &quot;Kalahom&quot;, as a permanent office of war department, was established by King Borommatrailokkanat (1431–1488) in the mid-15th century during the Ayutthaya Kingdom. Siam&#x27;s history of organized warfare is thus one of Asia&#x27;s longest and uninterrupted military traditions. However, since 1932, when the military, with the help of civilians, overthrew the system of absolute monarchy and instead created a constitutional system, the military has dominated and been in control of Thai politics, providing it with many prime ministers and carrying out many coups d&#x27;état, the most recent being in 2014.

===Conflicts===

The Royal Thai Armed Forces were involved in many conflicts throughout its history, including global, regional and internal conflicts. However, most these were within Southeast Asia. The only three foreign incursions into Thai territory were the Franco-Siamese conflict of 1893, the Japanese invasion of Thailand in December 1941, and in the 1980s with Vietnamese incursions into Thailand that led to several battles with the Thai Army. Operations on foreign territory were either territorial wars (such as the Laos Civil War) or conflicts mandated by the United Nations.

====Franco-Siamese conflict (1893)====
With the rapid expansion of the French Empire into Indochina, conflicts necessarily occurred. War became inevitable when a French mission led by Auguste Pavie to King Chulalongkorn to try to bring Laos under French rule ended in failure. The French colonialists invaded Siam from the northeast and sent two warships to fight their way past the river forts and train their guns on the Grand Palace in Bangkok (the Paknam Incident). The French also declared a blockade around Bangkok, which almost brought them into conflict with the United Kingdom. Siam was forced to accept the French ultimatum and surrendered Laos to France, also allowing French troops to occupy the Thai province of Chantaburi for several decades.

====World War I (1917–1918)====

King Vajiravudh on 22 July 1917 declared war on the Central Powers and joined the Entente Powers on the Western Front. He sent a volunteer corps, the Siamese Expeditionary Force, composed of 1,233 modern-equipped and trained men commanded by Field Marshal Prince Chakrabongse Bhuvanath. The force included air and medical personnel, the medical units actually seeing combat. Siam became the only independent Asian nation with forces in Europe during the Great War. Although Siam&#x27;s participation militarily was minimal, it enabled the revision or complete cancellation of so-called &quot;unequal treaties&quot; with the Western powers. The Expeditionary Force was given the honour of marching in the victory parade under the Arc de Triomphe in Paris. Nineteen Siamese soldiers died during the conflict, and their ashes are interred in the World War I monument at the north end of Bangkok&#x27;s Pramane Grounds.

====Franco-Thai War (1940–1941)====
The Franco-Thai War began in October 1940, when the country under the rule of Field Marshal Prime Minister Plaek Phibunsongkhram followed up border clashes by invading a French Indo-China, under the Vichy regime (after the Nazi occupation of Paris) to regain lost land and settle territorial disputes. The war also bolstered Phibun&#x27;s program of promoting Thai nationalism. The war ended indecisively, with Thai victories on land and a naval defeat at sea. However, the disputed territories in French Indochina were ceded to Thailand.

====World War II (1942–1945)====

To attack British India, British Burma and British Malaya, the Empire of Japan needed to use bases in Thailand. By playing both nations against one another, Prime Minister Phibunsongkhram was able to maintain a degree of neutrality for some time. However, this ended in the early hours of 8 December 1941, when Japan launched a surprise attack on Thailand at nine places along the coastline and from French Indo-China. The greatly outnumbered Thai forces put up resistance, but were soon overwhelmed. By 07:30, Phibun ordered an end to hostilities, though resistance continued for at least another day until all units could be notified. Phibun signed an armistice with Japan that allowed the empire to move its troops through Thai territory. Impressed by Japan&#x27;s easy conquest of British Malaya, Phibun formally made Thailand part of the Axis by declaring war on the United Kingdom and the United States, though the Regent refused to sign it in the young king&#x27;s name. (The Thai ambassador to Washington refused to deliver the declaration, and the United States continued to consider Thailand an occupied country.) An active and foreign-assisted underground resistance movement, the Free Thai, was largely successful and helped Thailand to be viewed positively in the eyes of the victorious Allies after the war and be treated as an occupied nation rather than a defeated enemy.

====Korean War (1950–1953)====
During the United Nations-mandated conflict in the Korean peninsula, Thailand provided the reinforced 1st Battalion of the 21st Infantry Regiment, Some 65,000 Thais served in Korea during the war. Thai foot soldiers took part in the 1953 Battle of Pork Chop Hill. During the war the battalion was attached at various times to U.S. 187th Airborne Regimental Combat Team and the British 29th Infantry Brigade. The kingdom also provided four naval vessels, the HTMS &quot;Bangprakong&quot;, &quot;Bangpako&quot;, &quot;Tachin&quot;, and &quot;Prasae&quot;, and an air transport unit to the UN command structure. The Thai contingent was actively engaged and suffered heavy casualties, including 139 dead and more than 300 wounded. They remained in South Korea after the cease fire, returning to Thailand in 1955.

====Vietnam War (1955–1975)====
Due to its proximity to Thailand, Vietnam&#x27;s conflicts were closely monitored by Bangkok. Thai involvement did not become official until the total involvement of the United States in support of South Vietnam in 1963. The Thai government then allowed the United States Air Force in Thailand to use its air and naval bases. At the height of the war, almost 50,000 American military personnel were stationed in Thailand, mainly airmen.

In October 1967 a regiment-size Thai unit, the Queen&#x27;s Cobras, were sent to Camp Bearcat at Bien Hoa, to fight alongside the Americans, Australians, New Zealanders and South Vietnamese. About 40,000 Thai military would serve in South Vietnam, with 351 killed in action and 1,358 wounded. Thai troops earned a reputation for bravery and would serve in Vietnam until 1971, when the men of the Royal Thai Army Expeditionary Division (Black Panthers) returned home.

Thailand was also involved in the Laotian Civil War, supporting covert operations against the communist Pathet Lao and the North Vietnamese from 1964 to 1972.

By 1975 relations between Bangkok and Washington had soured, and the government of Kukrit Pramoj requested the withdrawal of all US military personnel and the closure of all US bases. This was completed by March 1976.

====Communist insurgency (1976–1980s)====
The communist victory in Vietnam in 1975 emboldened the communist movement in Thailand, which had been in existence since the 1920s. After the Thammasat University massacre of leftist student demonstrators in 1976 and the repressive policies of right-wing Prime Minister Tanin Kraivixien, sympathies for the movement increased. By the late-1970s, it is estimated that the movement had as many as 12,000 armed insurgents, mostly based in the northeast along the Laotian border and receiving foreign support. By the 1980s, however, all insurgent activities had been defeated. In 1982 Prime Minister Prem Tinsulanonda issued a general amnesty for all former communist insurgents.

====Vietnamese border raids (1979–1988)====
With the Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia in 1978, communist Vietnam had a combined force of about 300,000 in Laos and Cambodia. This posed a massive potential threat to the Thais, as they could no longer rely on Cambodia to act as a buffer state. Small encounters occasionally took place when Vietnamese forces crossed into Thailand in pursuit of fleeing Khmer Rouge troops. However, a full and official conflict was never declared, as neither country wanted it.

====Thai–Laotian Border War (1987–1988)====
This was a small conflict over mountainous territory including three disputed villages on the border between Sainyabuli Province in Laos and Phitsanulok Province in Thailand, whose ownership had been left unclear by the map drawn by the French some 80 years earlier. Caused by then-Army commander Chavalit Yongchaiyudh against the wishes of the government, the war ended with a stalemate and return to status quo ante bellum. The two nations suffered combined casualties of about 1,000.

====East Timor (1999–2002)====
After the East Timor crisis, Thailand, with 28 other nations, provided troops for the International Force for East Timor or INTERFET. Thailand also provided the force commander, Lieutenant General Winai Phattiyakul. The force was based in Dili and lasted from 25 October 1999 to 20 May 2002.

====Iraq War (2003–2004)====
After the successful US invasion of Iraq, Thai Humanitarian Assistance Task Force 976 Thai-Iraq Thailand contributed 423 non-combat troops in August 2003 to nation building and medical assistance in post-Saddam Iraq. The Thais could not leave their base in Karbala as their rules governing their participation restricted them to humanitarian assistance which could not be accomplished due to the insurgency during the Thai&#x27;s tenure in Iraq. Troops of the Royal Thai Army were attacked in the 2003 Karbala bombings, which killed two soldiers and wounded five others. However, the Thai mission in Iraq was considered an overall success, and Thailand withdrew its forces in August 2004. The mission is considered the main reason the United States decided to designate Thailand as a major non-NATO ally in 2003.

====South Thailand insurgency (2001–ongoing)====
The ongoing southern insurgency had begun in response to Prime Minister Plaek Phibunsongkhram&#x27;s 1944 National Cultural Act, which replaced the use of Malaya in the region&#x27;s schools with the Thai language and also abolished the local Islamic courts in the three ethnic Malay and Muslim majority border provinces of Yala, Pattani, and Narathiwat. However, it had always been on a comparatively small scale. The insurgency intensified in 2001, during the government of Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra. Terrorist attacks were now extended to the ethnic Thai minority in the provinces. The Royal Thai Armed Forces also went beyond their orders and retaliated with strong armed tactics that only encouraged more violence. By the end of 2012 the conflict had claimed 3,380 lives, including 2,316 civilians, 372 soldiers, 278 police, 250 suspected insurgents, 157 education officials, and seven Buddhist monks. Many of the dead were Muslims themselves, but they had been targeted because of their presumed support of the Thai government.

==== Cambodian–Thai border stand-off (2008–2011) ====
Is an event that began in June 2008 over the border dispute with the Temple of Preah Vihear afterwards. There were many clashes between the two sides. Along with the claims of each party over the said dispute territory.

====Sudan (2010–2011)====
Thai soldiers joined UNMIS in 2011.

=== Current developments ===
====Thai military deputized as police====
On 29 March 2016, in a move that the &quot;Bangkok Post&quot; said will &quot;...will inflict serious and long-term damage...&quot;, the NCPO, under a Section 44 order (NCPO Order 13/2559) signed by junta chief Prayut Chan-o-cha, granted to commissioned officers of the Royal Thai Armed Forces broad police powers to suppress and arrest anyone they suspect of criminal activity without a warrant and detain them secretly at almost any location without charge for up to seven days. Bank accounts can be frozen, and documents and property can be seized. Travel can be banned. Automatic immunity for military personnel has been built into the order, and there is no independent oversight or recourse in the event of abuse. The order came into immediate effect. The net result is that the military will have more power than the police and less oversight.

The government has stated that the purpose of this order is to enable military officers to render their assistance in an effort to &quot;...suppress organized crimes such as extortion, human trafficking, child and labor abuses, gambling, prostitution, illegal tour guide services, price collusion, and firearms. It neither aims to stifle nor intimidate dissenting voices. Defendants in such cases will go through normal judicial process, with police as the main investigator...trial[s] will be conducted in civilian courts, not military ones. Moreover, this order does not deprive the right of the defendants to file complaints against military officers who have abused their power.&quot;

The NCPO said that the reason for its latest order is that there are simply not enough police, in spite of the fact that there are about 230,000 officers in the Royal Thai Police force. They make up about 17 percent of all non-military public servants. This amounts to 344 police officers for every for every 100,000 persons in Thailand, more than twice the ratio in Myanmar and the Philippines, one and a half times that of Japan and Indonesia and roughly the same proportion as the United States.

In a joint statement released on 5 April 2016, six groups, including Human Rights Watch (HRW), Amnesty International, and the International Commission of Jurists (ICJ), condemned the move.

====Corruption====
The &quot;Asia Sentinel&quot; in 2014 called the Thai military one of the most deeply corrupt militaries in Asia. The Thai armed forces have a history of procurement scandals and dodgy dealings dating back to at least the 1980s.

*In the 1980s, the army bought hundreds of substandard armored personnel carriers (APC) from the Chinese that were so shoddy that light was visible through the welds securing the armor plate.
*The Thai air force bought Chinese jets with short-lived engines so delicate that the planes were towed to the flight line for takeoff and towed back on landing in order to minimize engine hours.
*In 1997, the HTMS &quot;Chakri Naruebet&quot; aircraft carrier was commissioned. Due to its lackluster operational history, the Thai media have nicknamed the ship &quot;Thai-tanic&quot;, and consider her to be a white elephant.
*The Aeros 40D S/N 21 airship, nicknamed &quot;Sky Dragon&quot;, was purchased for 350 million baht in 2009. It cost 2.8 million baht to inflate and 280,000 baht a month to keep inflated. It served for eight years, mostly in storage, and crashed once. The present leadership of the NCPO was instrumental in approving its purchase.

==Weapons and equipment==

Thailand&#x27;s defense spending has soared since 2006. Since then the military has seized control from civilian governments on two occasions. Defense spending has increased by US$1 billion since the latest coup in 2014.
In early January 2022, Thailand&#x27;s cabinet backed a plan to buy four fighter jets starting in 2023 with 13.8 billion baht ($413.67 million) budgeted for the purchase over a 4 year period to replace some of the country&#x27;s aging F-16 jets.

==Uniforms, ranks, insignia==
To build institutional solidarity and esprit de corps, each Thai service component has developed its own distinctive uniforms, ranking system, and insignia. Many Thai military uniforms reflect historical foreign influences. For example, most of the distinctive service uniforms were patterned on those of the US, but lower ranking enlisted navy personnel wear uniforms resembling those of their French counterparts. The early influence of British advisers to the Thai royal court and the historical role of the military in royal pomp and ceremony contributed to the splendor of formal dress uniforms worn by high-ranking officers and guards of honour on ceremonial occasions.

The rank structures of the three armed services are similar to those of the respective branches of the US Armed Forces, although the Thai system has fewer NCO and warrant officer designations. The king, as head of state and constitutional head of the armed forces, commissions all officers. Appointments to NCO ranks are authorised by the minister of defence. In theory, the authority and responsibilities of officers of various ranks correspond to those of their US counterparts. However, because of a perennial surplus of senior officers—in 1987 there were some 600 generals and admirals in a total force of about 273,000—Thai staff positions are often held by officers of higher rank than would be the case in the US or other Western military establishments.

Thai military personnel are highly conscious of rank distinctions and of the duties, obligations, and benefits they entail. Relationships among officers of different grades and among officers, NCOs, and the enlisted ranks are governed by military tradition in a society where observance of differences in status are highly formalised. The social distance between officers and NCOs is widened by the fact that officers usually are college or military academy graduates, while most NCOs have not gone beyond secondary school. There is a wider gap between officers and conscripts, most of whom have even less formal education, service experience, or specialised training.

Formal honours and symbols of merit occupy an important place in Thai military tradition. The government grants numerous awards, and outstanding acts of heroism, courage, and meritorious service receive prompt recognition.

===Officer and enlisted rank insignia===

== Gallery ==
==See also==
* Border Patrol Police
* King&#x27;s Guard (Thailand)
* List of flags of the Royal Thai Armed Forces
* Military ranks of the Thai armed forces
* Royal Thai Air Force
* Royal Thai Police
* Territorial Defence Student
* Thahan Phran
* Underwater Demolition Assault Unit
* Volunteer Defense Corps (Thailand)

== Notes ==
== References ==


==Further reading==
* Osornprasop, Sutayut. &quot;Thailand and the Secret War in Laos&quot;, 1960–1974 (in) Albert Lau (ed.), &quot;Southeast Asia and the Cold War&quot;. Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon; New York: Routledge, 2012. (hardback).
* 

== External links ==

* of Royal Thai Armed Forces Headquarters. .
* Official website of Royal Thai Army (archived)
* Official website of Royal Thai Navy
* Official website of Royal Thai Air Forces. .
* &quot;Religion, guns tear apart south Thailand&quot; – (2 September 2009) article in &quot;Asia Times Online&quot; giving an overview of the Thai army&#x27;s use of paramilitary forces.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q947702" start="4" end="27" title="Royal Thai Armed Forces" label="Royal Thai Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q947702" start="29" end="34" title="Royal Thai Armed Forces" label="RTARF"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="68" end="87" title="Thailand" label="Kingdom of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q17060709" start="94" end="142" title="Highest Commander of the Royal Thai Armed Forces" label="Highest Commander of the Royal Thai Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663787" start="164" end="180" title="Monarchy of Thailand" label="King of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q851907" start="218" end="249" title="Ministry of Defence (Thailand)" label="Ministry of Defence of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6479158" start="315" end="351" title="Royal Thai Armed Forces Headquarters" label="Royal Thai Armed Forces Headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567632" start="384" end="407" title="Chief of Defence Forces (Thailand)" label="Chief of Defence Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567634" start="413" end="431" title="List of commanders-in-chief of the Royal Thai Army" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749588" start="439" end="454" title="Royal Thai Army" label="Royal Thai Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401546" start="523" end="550" title="Public holidays in Thailand" label="Royal Thai Armed Forces Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q515704" start="614" end="632" title="Naresuan the Great" label="Naresuan the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456170" start="636" end="642" title="Burmese–Siamese War (1584–1593)" label="battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q13018893" start="655" end="662" title="Mingyi Swa" label="Viceroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q519718" start="666" end="671" title="Toungoo dynasty" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q526594" start="764" end="785" title="territorial integrity" label="territorial integrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663787" start="834" end="847" title="Monarchy of Thailand" label="Thai monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q873675" start="1021" end="1040" title="Government of Thailand" label="civilian government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354958" start="1427" end="1447" title="peacekeeping" label="peacekeeping efforts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="1482" end="1496" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q402096" start="1555" end="1589" title="International Force for East Timor" label="International Force for East Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963018" start="1656" end="1683" title="multinational force in Iraq" label="multinational force in Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929104" start="3365" end="3404" title="2007 Constitution of Thailand" label="Constitution of the Kingdom of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="3606" end="3618" title="conscription" label="conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q191924" start="4224" end="4239" title="methamphetamine" label="methamphetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="4253" end="4262" title="marijuana" label="marijuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749588" start="6216" end="6231" title="Royal Thai Army" label="Royal Thai Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427907" start="6248" end="6263" title="Royal Thai Navy" label="Royal Thai Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q404766" start="6283" end="6303" title="Royal Thai Air Force" label="Royal Thai Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q9340801" start="8447" end="8467" title="military cooperative" label="military cooperative"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="8735" end="8743" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923045" start="8779" end="8791" title="Royal Thai Marine Corps" label="Royal Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6641434" start="8828" end="8854" title="Royal Thai Air Force Security Force Regiment" label="security forces specialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q851907" start="10040" end="10056" title="Ministry of Defence (Thailand)" label="Defence Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="10139" end="10160" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10492" end="10507" title="Wichian Pueksom" label="Wichian Pueksom"/>
<link wikidata="Q191891" start="10731" end="10733" title="fiscal year" label="FY"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="10805" end="10808" title="GDP" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q191891" start="11339" end="11341" title="Fiscal year" label="FY"/>
<link wikidata="Q177882" start="11365" end="11369" title="Thai baht" label="baht"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663787" start="11509" end="11525" title="Thai monarchy" label="Siamese monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q863279" start="11603" end="11620" title="Sukhothai Kingdom" label="Sukhothai Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="11626" end="11643" title="Ayutthaya Kingdom" label="Ayutthaya Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115291" start="11649" end="11665" title="Thonburi Kingdom" label="Thonburi Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155700" start="11680" end="11700" title="Rattanakosin Kingdom" label="Rattanakosin Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="12088" end="12100" title="conscription" label="conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q223694" start="12351" end="12361" title="war elephants" label="elephantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q47315" start="12363" end="12370" title="cavalry" label="cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="12372" end="12381" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4508" start="12387" end="12392" title="navy" label="naval"/>
<link wikidata="Q312849" start="12502" end="12509" title="Mongkut" label="Mongkut"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="12524" end="12530" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q158861" start="12661" end="12674" title="Chulalongkorn" label="Chulalongkorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q16307330" start="12712" end="12742" title="Kalahom" label="&amp;quot;Kalahom&amp;quot; Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q889173" start="12860" end="12879" title="Borommatrailokkanat" label="Borommatrailokkanat"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="12927" end="12944" title="Ayutthaya Kingdom" label="Ayutthaya Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="12946" end="12950" title="Siam" label="Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120252" start="13129" end="13138" title="Siamese Revolution of 1932" label="overthrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="13153" end="13170" title="absolute monarchy" label="absolute monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="13193" end="13207" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154151" start="13266" end="13279" title="Politics of Thailand" label="Thai politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q12376089" start="13304" end="13319" title="Prime Ministers of Thailand" label="prime ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="13342" end="13359" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coups d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q16914766" start="13365" end="13376" title="2014 Thai coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="most recent"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="13577" end="13591" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359846" start="13656" end="13687" title="Franco-Siamese conflict of 1893" label="Franco-Siamese conflict of 1893"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200928" start="13693" end="13722" title="Japanese invasion of Thailand" label="Japanese invasion of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="13763" end="13770" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q877450" start="13921" end="13935" title="Laos Civil War" label="Laos Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="13966" end="13980" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="14054" end="14060" title="French Third Republic" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q179023" start="14061" end="14067" title="French colonial empire" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q43467" start="14073" end="14082" title="Indochina" label="Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q766871" start="14167" end="14180" title="Auguste Pavie" label="Auguste Pavie"/>
<link wikidata="Q158861" start="14189" end="14202" title="Chulalongkorn" label="Chulalongkorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="14219" end="14223" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="14422" end="14429" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924112" start="14435" end="14450" title="Paknam Incident" label="Paknam Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q273976" start="14480" end="14488" title="blockade" label="blockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="14554" end="14568" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q188689" start="14607" end="14616" title="ultimatum" label="ultimatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q327730" start="14708" end="14718" title="Chantaburi" label="Chantaburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q161389" start="14779" end="14789" title="Vajiravudh" label="Vajiravudh"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="14826" end="14840" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="14856" end="14870" title="Entente Powers" label="Entente Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="14878" end="14891" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482893" start="14924" end="14951" title="Siam during World War I" label="Siamese Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035565" start="15037" end="15059" title="Chakrabongse Bhuvanath" label="Chakrabongse Bhuvanath"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="15182" end="15186" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="15210" end="15216" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q864737" start="15366" end="15382" title="Unequal treaty" label="unequal treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="15398" end="15412" title="Western world" label="Western powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q64436" start="15503" end="15518" title="Arc de Triomphe" label="Arc de Triomphe"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="15522" end="15527" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q780845" start="15731" end="15746" title="Franco-Thai War" label="Franco-Thai War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12376089" start="15819" end="15833" title="Prime Minister of Thailand" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q152777" start="15834" end="15855" title="Plaek Phibunsongkhram" label="Plaek Phibunsongkhram"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="15926" end="15938" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="15950" end="15954" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q56707181" start="16087" end="16103" title="Thai nationalism" label="Thai nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="16311" end="16324" title="British Raj" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376315" start="16326" end="16339" title="British rule in Burma" label="British Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q871091" start="16344" end="16358" title="British Malaya" label="British Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="16364" end="16379" title="Empire of Japan" label="Empire of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12376089" start="16458" end="16472" title="Prime Minister of Thailand" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q152777" start="16473" end="16488" title="Plaek Phibunsongkhram" label="Phibunsongkhram"/>
<link wikidata="Q185963" start="16522" end="16532" title="Neutral country" label="neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200928" start="16629" end="16644" title="Japanese invasion of Thailand" label="surprise attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q107706" start="16955" end="16964" title="armistice" label="armistice"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="17144" end="17148" title="Axis powers" label="Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q43080817" start="17284" end="17313" title="List of ambassadors of Thailand to the United States" label="Thai ambassador to Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q708957" start="17493" end="17502" title="Free Thai Movement" label="Free Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="17601" end="17607" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="17772" end="17788" title="Korean peninsula" label="Korean peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631117" start="17844" end="17866" title="21st Infantry Regiment (Thailand)" label="21st Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872081" start="17959" end="17983" title="Battle of Pork Chop Hill" label="Battle of Pork Chop Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555749" start="18047" end="18089" title="187th Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="U.S. 187th Airborne Regimental Combat Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632942" start="18098" end="18127" title="29th Infantry Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="British 29th Infantry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="18597" end="18604" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q240352" start="18708" end="18725" title="Gulf of Tonkin Resolution" label="total involvement"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="18733" end="18746" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889238" start="18821" end="18856" title="United States Air Force in Thailand" label="United States Air Force in Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q48734350" start="19048" end="19067" title="Royal Thai Volunteer Regiment" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Cobras"/>
<link wikidata="Q18357143" start="19082" end="19094" title="Bearcat Base" label="Camp Bearcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q19316" start="19098" end="19106" title="Bien Hoa" label="Bien Hoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q25537633" start="19397" end="19435" title="Royal Thai Army Expeditionary Division" label="Royal Thai Army Expeditionary Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q877450" start="19503" end="19520" title="Laotian Civil War" label="Laotian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q858887" start="19573" end="19583" title="Pathet Lao" label="Pathet Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q959588" start="19712" end="19725" title="Kukrit Pramoj" label="Kukrit Pramoj"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="19894" end="19903" title="communist" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907348" start="20033" end="20103" title="6 October 1976 Massacre" label="Thammasat University massacre of leftist student demonstrators in 1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q74861" start="20161" end="20177" title="Tanin Kraivixien" label="Tanin Kraivixien"/>
<link wikidata="Q379827" start="20487" end="20504" title="Prem Tinsulanonda" label="Prem Tinsulanonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q635533" start="20632" end="20652" title="Cambodian–Vietnamese War" label="invasion of Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q587252" start="20845" end="20857" title="buffer state" label="buffer state"/>
<link wikidata="Q191764" start="20967" end="20978" title="Khmer Rouge" label="Khmer Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q465929" start="21229" end="21248" title="Sainyabuli Province" label="Sainyabuli Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q275781" start="21261" end="21281" title="Phitsanulok Province" label="Phitsanulok Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068511" start="21417" end="21438" title="Chavalit Yongchaiyudh" label="Chavalit Yongchaiyudh"/>
<link wikidata="Q752847" start="21522" end="21544" title="status quo ante bellum" label="status quo ante bellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q152848" start="21649" end="21666" title="1999 East Timorese crisis" label="East Timor crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q402096" start="21725" end="21771" title="International Force for East Timor" label="International Force for East Timor or INTERFET"/>
<link wikidata="Q9310" start="21878" end="21882" title="Dili" label="Dili"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="21971" end="22001" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="successful US invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q65045421" start="22003" end="22056" title="Thai Humanitarian Assistance Task Force 976 Thai-Iraq" label="Thai Humanitarian Assistance Task Force 976 Thai-Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q965174" start="22160" end="22176" title="Coalition Provisional Authority" label="post-Saddam Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q199909" start="22218" end="22225" title="Karbala" label="Karbala"/>
<link wikidata="Q3657501" start="22458" end="22479" title="2003 Karbala bombings" label="2003 Karbala bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q145560" start="22745" end="22764" title="major non-NATO ally" label="major non-NATO ally"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094356" start="22836" end="22855" title="South Thailand insurgency" label="southern insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q152777" start="22896" end="22917" title="Plaek Phibunsongkhram" label="Plaek Phibunsongkhram"/>
<link wikidata="Q142702" start="23102" end="23107" title="Malay (ethnic group)" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="23112" end="23118" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q242977" start="23148" end="23152" title="Yala Province" label="Yala"/>
<link wikidata="Q236781" start="23154" end="23161" title="Pattani Province" label="Pattani"/>
<link wikidata="Q271442" start="23167" end="23177" title="Narathiwat Province" label="Narathiwat"/>
<link wikidata="Q164373" start="23315" end="23333" title="Thaksin Shinawatra" label="Thaksin Shinawatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q487859" start="24189" end="24194" title="United Nations Mission in Sudan" label="UNMIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q16919521" start="24413" end="24417" title="National Council for Peace and Order" label="NCPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108126" start="24487" end="24504" title="Prayut Chan-o-cha" label="Prayut Chan-o-cha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1831399" start="25979" end="25996" title="Royal Thai Police" label="Royal Thai Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="26387" end="26405" title="Human Rights Watch" label="Human Rights Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="26413" end="26434" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q684800" start="26444" end="26479" title="International Commission of Jurists" label="International Commission of Jurists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806466" start="26537" end="26550" title="Asia Sentinel" label="Asia Sentinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q774057" start="27159" end="27191" title="HTMS Chakri Naruebet" label="HTMS &amp;quot;Chakri Naruebet&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q877152" start="27358" end="27372" title="white elephant" label="white elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342258" start="30636" end="30656" title="Border Patrol Police" label="Border Patrol Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q4926855" start="30659" end="30687" title="King&amp;#x27;s Guard (Thailand)" label="King&amp;#x27;s Guard (Thailand)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6579011" start="30690" end="30734" title="List of flags of the Royal Thai Armed Forces" label="List of flags of the Royal Thai Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q6687115" start="30737" end="30776" title="Military ranks of the Thai armed forces" label="Military ranks of the Thai armed forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q404766" start="30779" end="30799" title="Royal Thai Air Force" label="Royal Thai Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1831399" start="30802" end="30819" title="Royal Thai Police" label="Royal Thai Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794236" start="30822" end="30849" title="Territorial Defence Student" label="Territorial Defence Student"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921912" start="30852" end="30864" title="Thahan Phran" label="Thahan Phran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970667" start="30867" end="30901" title="Underwater Demolition Assault Unit" label="Underwater Demolition Assault Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q13012735" start="30904" end="30938" title="Volunteer Defense Corps (Thailand)" label="Volunteer Defense Corps (Thailand)"/>
<link wikidata="Q727162" start="31508" end="31525" title="Asia Times Online" label="Asia Times Online"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30137" wikidata="Q4919354" url="?curid=30137" title="Foreign relations of Thailand">
<text>The foreign relations of Thailand are handled by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Thailand.

Thailand participates fully in international and regional organizations. It has developed close ties with other ASEAN members—Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Brunei, Laos,and Vietnam—whose foreign and economic ministers hold annual meetings. Regional cooperation is progressing in economic, trade, banking, political, and cultural matters. In 2003, Thailand served as APEC host. Dr. Supachai Panitchpakdi, the former Deputy Prime Minister of Thailand, served as Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) from 2005 until 31 August 2013. In 2005 Thailand attended the inaugural East Asia Summit.

Since the military coup of May 2014, Thailand&#x27;s global reputation has plunged, according to Professor Thitinan Pongsudhirak of Chulalongkorn University. He maintains that, &quot;When the fourth anniversary of Thailand&#x27;s coup comes to pass later this month [May 2018], Thailand&#x27;s foreign relations will be one of the many costs to be counted from the military government...Instead of moving ahead in its relations with the outside world, Thailand has regressed to a standstill.

==Disputes==
Parts of the border with Laos are undefined. A maritime boundary dispute with Vietnam was resolved, August 1997. Parts of maritime border with Cambodia are disputed. Sporadic conflict with Myanmar over alignment of border.

==Diplomatic relations==
List of countries which Thailand maintains diplomatic relations with:
==Asia==
===ASEAN===
=== Rest of Asia ===
==Americas==
==Europe==
==Oceania==
==Thai diplomatic missions==
===Royal Thai embassies and consulates===

===Permanent missions===
===Thailand economic and trade office===
==International organization participation==
APEC, AsDB, ASEAN, BIMSTEC, CP, ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, NAM, OAS (observer), OPCW, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNITAR, UNMIBH, UNTAET, UNU, UPU, WCL, WCO, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

==See also==

* List of ambassadors of Thailand to Chile
* List of ambassadors of Thailand to Mexico
* List of diplomatic missions in Thailand

==References==
==Further reading==

* Busbarat, Pongphisoot. &quot;Thailand&#x27;s foreign policy towards neighbouring countries and ASEAN.&quot; in &quot;Routledge Handbook of Contemporary Thailand&quot; (Routledge, 2019) pp. 431–446.
* Chachavalpongpun, Pavin. &quot;Reinventing Thailand: Thaksin and his foreign policy&quot; (Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, 2010).
* Chambers, Paul, and Poowin Bunyavejchewin. &quot;Thailand&#x27;s foreign economic policy toward mainland Southeast Asia.&quot; (2019). online 
* Guan, Ang Cheng. &quot;Southeast Asia&#x27;s cold war: An interpretive history&quot; (U of Hawaii Press, 2018).
* Klein, Ira. &quot;Salisbury, Rosebery, and the Survival of Siam.&quot; &quot;Journal of British Studies&quot; 8.1 (1968): 119-139. in 1890s
* Phuangkasem, Corrine. &quot;Thailand&#x27;s Foreign Relations: 1964-80&quot; (Brookfield Publishing Company, 1984).
* Suwannathat-Pian, Kobkua. &quot;Thai-Malay relations: traditional intra-regional relations from the seventeenth to the early twentieth centuries&quot; (Oxford University Press, USA, 1988).
* Theeravit, Khien. &quot;Thailand: An Overview of Politics and Foreign Relations.&quot; &quot;Southeast Asian Affairs&quot; (1979): 299-311. online
* Theeravit, Khien. &quot;Thai-Kampuchean Relations: Problems and Prospects.&quot; &quot;Asian Survey&quot;, 22#6 1982, pp. 561–576. online for Cambodia
* Zawacki, Benjamin. &quot;Thailand: Shifting ground between the U.S. and a rising China&quot; (2nd ed. . Bloomsbury, 2021).

==External links==
* Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Thailand
* Foreign Embassies in Thailand</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4919354" start="4" end="33" title="Foreign relations of Thailand" label="foreign relations of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q789856" start="53" end="92" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Thailand)" label="Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q473046" start="495" end="516" title="Supachai Panitchpakdi" label="Supachai Panitchpakdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q542549" start="731" end="747" title="East Asia Summit" label="East Asia Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q855730" start="882" end="906" title="Chulalongkorn University" label="Chulalongkorn University"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="1281" end="1285" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089219" start="1303" end="1320" title="maritime boundary" label="maritime boundary"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="1334" end="1341" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="1399" end="1407" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="1445" end="1452" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="1587" end="1592" title="ASEAN" label="ASEAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q170481" start="1836" end="1840" title="Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation" label="APEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q188822" start="1842" end="1846" title="Asian Development Bank" label="AsDB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="1848" end="1853" title="Association of Southeast Asian Nations" label="ASEAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q795985" start="1855" end="1862" title="Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation" label="BIMSTEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077459" start="1864" end="1866" title="Colombo Plan" label="CP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142901" start="1868" end="1873" title="United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific" label="ESCAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="1875" end="1878" title="Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations" label="FAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q477328" start="1880" end="1884" title="Group of 77" label="G-77"/>
<link wikidata="Q41984" start="1886" end="1890" title="International Atomic Energy Agency" label="IAEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q191384" start="1892" end="1896" title="International Bank for Reconstruction and Development" label="IBRD"/>
<link wikidata="Q125761" start="1898" end="1902" title="International Civil Aviation Organization" label="ICAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138589" start="1904" end="1909" title="International Confederation of Free Trade Unions" label="ICFTU"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="1911" end="1915" title="International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement" label="ICRM"/>
<link wikidata="Q827525" start="1917" end="1920" title="International Development Association" label="IDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q689859" start="1922" end="1926" title="International Fund for Agricultural Development" label="IFAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q656801" start="1928" end="1931" title="International Finance Corporation" label="IFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="1933" end="1938" title="International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement" label="IFRCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q233611" start="1940" end="1943" title="International Hydrographic Organization" label="IHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="1945" end="1948" title="International Labour Organization" label="ILO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="1950" end="1953" title="International Monetary Fund" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q201054" start="1955" end="1958" title="International Maritime Organization" label="IMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666759" start="1960" end="1968" title="International Mobile Satellite Organization" label="Inmarsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q778126" start="1970" end="1978" title="Intelsat" label="Intelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8475" start="1980" end="1988" title="Interpol" label="Interpol"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="1990" end="1993" title="International Olympic Committee" label="IOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q472311" start="1995" end="1998" title="International Organization for Migration" label="IOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="2000" end="2003" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="ISO"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="2005" end="2008" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="ITU"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="2010" end="2013" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="NAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q123759" start="2015" end="2018" title="Organization of American States" label="OAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q842490" start="2031" end="2035" title="Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons" label="OPCW"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045198" start="2037" end="2040" title="Permanent Court of Arbitration" label="PCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="2042" end="2044" title="United Nations" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q182000" start="2046" end="2052" title="United Nations Conference on Trade and Development" label="UNCTAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="2054" end="2060" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q132551" start="2062" end="2067" title="United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees" label="UNHCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q386120" start="2069" end="2074" title="United Nations Industrial Development Organization" label="UNIDO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064062" start="2076" end="2082" title="United Nations Iraq–Kuwait Observation Mission" label="UNIKOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q131878" start="2084" end="2090" title="United Nations Institute for Training and Research" label="UNITAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q487377" start="2092" end="2098" title="United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="UNMIBH"/>
<link wikidata="Q332358" start="2100" end="2106" title="United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor" label="UNTAET"/>
<link wikidata="Q492442" start="2108" end="2111" title="United Nations University" label="UNU"/>
<link wikidata="Q17495" start="2113" end="2116" title="Universal Postal Union" label="UPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q595208" start="2118" end="2121" title="World Confederation of Labour" label="WCL"/>
<link wikidata="Q605326" start="2123" end="2126" title="World Customs Organization" label="WCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q748999" start="2128" end="2132" title="World Federation of Trade Unions" label="WFTU"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="2134" end="2137" title="World Health Organization" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q177773" start="2139" end="2143" title="World Intellectual Property Organization" label="WIPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q170424" start="2145" end="2148" title="World Meteorological Organization" label="WMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q61923" start="2150" end="2154" title="World Tourism Organization" label="WToO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="2156" end="2160" title="World Trade Organization" label="WTrO"/>
<link wikidata="Q48988340" start="2178" end="2218" title="List of ambassadors of Thailand to Chile" label="List of ambassadors of Thailand to Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q48988335" start="2221" end="2262" title="List of ambassadors of Thailand to Mexico" label="List of ambassadors of Thailand to Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q6528162" start="2265" end="2304" title="List of diplomatic missions in Thailand" label="List of diplomatic missions in Thailand"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30138" wikidata="Q945" url="?curid=30138" title="Togo">
<text>Togo, officially the Togolese Republic, is a country in West Africa. It is bordered by Ghana to the west, Benin to the east and Burkina Faso to the north. It is one of the least developed countries and extends south to the Gulf of Guinea, where its capital, Lomé, is located. It is a small, tropical country, spanning with a population of approximately 8 million, and it has a width of less than between Ghana and its eastern neighbour Benin.

Various peoples settled the boundaries of present day Togo between the 11th and 16th centuries. Between the 16th and 18th centuries, the coastal region served primarily as a European slave trading outpost, earning Togo and the surrounding region the name &quot;The Slave Coast&quot;. In 1884, Germany declared a region including a protectorate called Togoland. After World War I, rule over Togo was transferred to France. Togo gained independence from France in 1960. In 1967, Gnassingbé Eyadéma led a successful military coup d&#x27;état and became president of an anti-communist, single-party state. In 1993, Eyadéma faced multiparty elections marred by irregularities, and won the presidency three times. At the time of his death, Eyadéma was the &quot;longest-serving leader in modern African history&quot;, having been president for 38 years. In 2005, his son Faure Gnassingbé was elected president.

Togo is a tropical, sub-Saharan nation whose economy depends mostly on agriculture. The official language is French, but other languages are spoken, particularly those of the Gbe family. 47.8% of the population adhere to Christianity, making it the largest religion in the country. Togo is a member of the United Nations, African Union, Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone, Francophonie, Commonwealth of Nations, and Economic Community of West African States.

== History ==
Archaeological finds indicate that tribes were able to produce pottery and process iron. The name Togo is translated from the Ewe language as &quot;behind the river&quot;. During the period from the 11th century to the 16th century, tribes entered the region: the Ewé from the west, and the Mina and Gun from the east. Most of them settled in coastal areas. The Atlantic slave trade began in the 16th century, and for the next two hundred years the coastal region was a trading centre for Europeans in search of slaves, earning Togo and the surrounding region the name &quot;The Slave Coast&quot;.

In 1884, a paper was signed at Togoville with King Mlapa III, whereby Germany claimed a protectorate over a stretch of territory along the coast and gradually extended its control inland. Its borders were defined after the capture of hinterland by German forces and signing agreements with France and Britain. In 1905, this became the German colony of Togoland. The local population was forced to work, cultivate cotton, coffee, and cocoa and pay taxes. A railway and the port of Lomé were built for export of agricultural products. The Germans introduced techniques of cultivation of cocoa, coffee and cotton and developed the infrastructure.

During the First World War, Togoland was invaded by Britain and France, proclaiming the Anglo-French condominium. The Togoland Campaign involved the successful French and British invasion of the German colony of Togoland during the West African Campaign of the First World War. Following the Allied invasion of the colony in August 1914, German forces were defeated, forcing the colony&#x27;s surrender on 26 August 1914. On 7 December 1916, the condominium collapsed and Togoland was subsequently partitioned into British and French zones, creating the colonies of British Togoland and French Togoland. On 20 July 1922, Great Britain received the League of Nations mandate to govern the western part of Togo and France to govern the eastern part. In 1945, the country received the right to send three representatives to the French parliament.

After World War II, these mandates became UN Trust Territories. The residents of British Togoland voted to join the Gold Coast as part of the independent nation of Ghana in 1957. French Togoland became an autonomous republic within the French Union in 1959, while France retained the right to control defence, foreign relations, and finances.

=== Independence ===
The Togolese Republic was proclaimed on 27 April 1960. In the first presidential elections in 1961, Sylvanus Olympio became the first president, gaining 100% of the vote in elections boycotted by the opposition. On 9 April 1961, the Constitution of the Togolese Republic was adopted, according to which the supreme legislative body was the National Assembly of Togo. In December 1961, leaders of opposition parties were arrested because they were accused of the preparation of an anti-government conspiracy. A decree was issued on the dissolution of the opposition parties. Olympio tried to reduce dependence on France by establishing cooperation with the United States, United Kingdom, and West Germany. He rejected the efforts of French soldiers who were demobilized after the Algerian War and tried to get a position in the Togolese army. These factors eventually led to a military coup on 13 January 1963 during which he was assassinated by a group of soldiers under the direction of Sergeant Gnassingbé Eyadéma. A state of emergency was declared in Togo. The military handed over power to an interim government led by Nicolas Grunitzky. In May 1963, Grunitzky was elected President of the Republic. The new leadership pursued a policy of developing relations with France. His main aim was to dampen the divisions between north and south, promulgate a new constitution, and introduce a multiparty system.

On 13 January 1967, Eyadéma Gnassingbé overthrew Grunitzky in a bloodless coup and assumed the presidency. He created the Rally of the Togolese People Party, banned activities of other political parties and introduced a 1-party system in November 1969. He was reelected in 1979 and 1986. In 1983, the privatization program launched and in 1991 other political parties were allowed. In 1993, EU froze the partnership, describing Eyadema&#x27;s re-election in 1993, 1998 and 2003, as a seizure of power. In April 2004, in Brussels, talks were held between the European Union and Togo on the resumption of cooperation.

Eyadéma Gnassingbé died on Saturday, 5 February 2005. The military&#x27;s installation of his son, Faure Gnassingbé, as president provoked international condemnation, except from France. Some &quot;democratically elected&quot; African leaders such as Abdoulaye Wade of Senegal and Olusegun Obasanjo of Nigeria supported the move, thereby creating a rift within the African Union. Gnassingbé left power and held elections, which he won two months later. The opposition declared that the election results were fraudulent. The events of 2005 led to questions regarding the government&#x27;s commitment to democracy that had been made in an attempt to normalize relations with EU which cut off aid in 1993 due to questions about Togo&#x27;s human rights situation. Up to 400 people were killed in the violence surrounding the presidential elections, according to the UN. Around 40,000 Togolese fled to neighbouring countries. Gnassingbé was reelected in 2010 and 2015.

Togo became the first African nation to win an Olympic medal in canoeing at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing when Benjamin Boukpeti won bronze in the K-1 slalom.

In 2017, anti-government protests erupted. UN condemned the resulting crackdown by security forces, and Gambia&#x27;s foreign minister, Ousainou Darboe, had to issue a correction after saying that Gnassingbé should resign.

In the February 2020 presidential elections, Faure Gnassingbé won his fourth presidential term in office as the president of Togo. According to the official result, he won with a margin of around 72% of the vote share. This enabled him to defeat his closest challenger, the former prime minister Agbeyome Kodjo who had 18%. On 4 May 2020, Bitala Madjoulba, the commander of a Togolese military battalion, was found dead in his office. The day of Madjoulba&#x27;s death came after the re-elected Faure Gnassingbé was sworn in for his fourth term. An investigation was opened for this case, resulting in Major General Kadangha Abalo Felix being prosecuted and tried for involvement in Madjoulba&#x27;s assassination and &#x27;conspiracy against the internal security of the state.&#x27; 

=== Joining the Commonwealth ===
Togo joined the Commonwealth in June 2022. Prior to its admission at the 2022 Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, Foreign Minister Robert Dussey said that he expected Commonwealth membership to provide new export markets, funding for development projects and opportunities for Togolese citizens to learn English and access new educational and cultural resources.

== Government ==

The president is elected by universal and direct suffrage for five years, and is the commander of the armed forces and has the right to initiate legislation and dissolve parliament. Executive power is exercised by the president and the government. The head of government is the Prime Minister who is appointed by the president.

President Gnassingbé Eyadéma, who ruled Togo under a one-party system, died of a heart attack on 5 February 2005. Under the Togolese Constitution, the President of the Parliament, Fambaré Ouattara Natchaba, should have become president of the country, pending a presidential election to be called within 60 days. Natchaba was out of the country, returning on an Air France plane from Paris. The Togolese army, known as Forces Armées Togolaises (FAT), or Togolese Armed Forces, closed the nation&#x27;s borders, forcing the plane to land in Benin. With an engineered power vacuum, the Parliament voted to remove the constitutional clause that would have required an election within 60 days and declared that Eyadema&#x27;s son, Faure Gnassingbé, would inherit the presidency and hold office for the rest of his father&#x27;s term. Faure was sworn in on 7 February 2005, with international criticism of the succession. The African Union described the takeover as a military coup d&#x27;état. International pressure also came from the United Nations. Within Togo, opposition to the takeover culminated in riots in which between 400 and 500 people died. There were uprisings in cities and towns mainly in the southern part of the country. In the town of Aného reports of a general civilian uprising followed by a massacre by government troops. In response, Faure Gnassingbé agreed to hold elections and on 25 February, Gnassingbé resigned as president, and afterward accepted the nomination to run for the office in April.

On 24 April 2005, Gnassingbé was elected president of Togo, receiving over 60% of the vote according to official results. His main rival in the race had been Emmanuel Bob-Akitani from the Union des Forces du Changement (UFC). Electoral fraud was suspected due to a lack of European Union or other independent oversight. Parliament designated Deputy President, Bonfoh Abbass, as interim president until the inauguration. On 3 May 2005, Faure Gnassingbé was sworn in as the new president and the European Union suspended aid to Togo in support of the opposition claims, unlike the African Union and the United States which declared the vote &quot;reasonably fair&quot;. The Nigerian president and Chair of AU, Olusẹgun Ọbasanjọ, sought to negotiate between the incumbent government and the opposition to establish a coalition government, and rejected an AU Commission appointment of former Zambian president, Kenneth Kaunda, as special AU envoy to Togo. In June, President Gnassingbé named opposition leader Edem Kodjo as the prime minister.

In October 2007, after postponements, elections were held under proportional representation. This allowed the less populated north to seat as many MPs as the more populated south. The president-backed party Rally of the Togolese People (RPT) won a majority with UFC coming second and the other parties claiming inconsequential representation. Vote rigging accusations were levelled at RPT supported by the civil and military security apparatus. With the presence of an EU observer mission, cancelled ballots and illegal voting took place, the majority of which in RPT strongholds. On 3 December 2007 Komlan Mally of RPT was appointed to prime minister succeeding Agboyibor. On 5 September 2008, Mally resigned as prime minister of Togo.

Faure Gnassingbé won re-election in the March 2010 presidential election, taking 61% of the vote against Jean-Pierre Fabre from UFC, who had been backed by an opposition coalition called FRAC (Republican Front for Change). Electoral observers noted &quot;procedural errors&quot; and technical problems, and the opposition did not recognize the results, claiming irregularities had affected the outcome. Periodic protests against Faure Gnassingbé followed the election. In May 2010, opposition leader Gilchrist Olympio announced that he would enter into a power-sharing deal with the government, a coalition arrangement which provides UFC with eight ministerial posts. In June 2012, electoral reforms prompted protesters to take to the street in Lomé for days; protesters sought a return to the 1992 constitution that would re-establish presidential term limits. July 2012 saw the resignation of the prime minister, Gilbert Houngbo. Days later, the commerce minister, Kwesi Ahoomey-Zunu, was named to lead the new government. In the same month, the home of opposition leader Jean-Pierre Fabre was raided by security forces, and thousands of protesters again rallied publicly against the government crackdown.

In April 2015, President Faure Gnassingbé was re-elected for a third term. In February 2020, Faure Gnassingbé was again re-elected for his fourth presidential term. The opposition had accusations of fraud and irregularities. The Gnassingbé family has ruled Togo since 1967, meaning it is Africa&#x27;s longest lasting dynasty.

=== 2024 Constitutional Reform ===
In March 2024, President Faure Gnassingbé presented a new constitution. One of the constitutional changes in the new constitution has Togo go from being under a presidential system to being under a parliamentary one, as well as weakening the power of the president, it becoming a mostly ceremonial role, strengthening the power of parliament, and strengthening the power of prime minister and renaming the office &quot;President of the Council of Ministers&quot; (). The term of the new office will be six years, renewable indefinitely, whereas the term of the president is lowered to four from the previous five, renewable once. In April 2024, the Togolese parliament voted in favour of the new constitution and the new constitution was officially adopted on 6 May 2024.

=== Administrative divisions ===

Togo is divided into 5 regions which are subdivided in turn into 39 prefectures. From north to south the regions are Savanes, Kara, Centrale, Plateaux and Maritime.

=== Foreign relations ===
While Togo&#x27;s foreign policy is nonaligned, it has historical and cultural ties with western Europe, especially France and Germany. Togo recognizes the People&#x27;s Republic of China, North Korea, and Cuba. It re-established relations with Israel in 1987. Togo pursues an active foreign policy and participates in international organizations. It is particularly active in West African regional affairs and in the African Union.

In 2017, Togo signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons. Togo joined the Commonwealth of Nations, along with Gabon, at the 2022 Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Kigali, Rwanda. In joining the Commonwealth, Foreign Minister Robert Dussey told Reuters&quot;,&quot; the country sought to expand its &quot;diplomatic, political and economic network&quot; and to &quot;forge closer ties with the anglophone world.&quot;

=== Military ===
FAT (, &quot;Togolese armed forces&quot;), consists of the army, navy, air force, and gendarmerie. Total military expenditures during the fiscal year of 2005 totalled 1.6% of the country&#x27;s GDP. Military bases exist in Lomé, Temedja, Kara, Niamtougou, and Dapaong. The current Chief of the General Staff is Brigadier General Titikpina Atcha Mohamed, who took office on 19 May 2009. The air force is equipped with Alpha jets.

=== Human rights ===

Togo was labelled &quot;Not Free&quot; by Freedom House from 1972 to 1998 and from 2002 to 2006, and has been categorized as &quot;Partly Free&quot; from 1999 to 2001 and from 2007. According to a U.S. State Department report based on conditions in 2010, human rights problems include &quot;security force use of excessive force, including torture, which resulted in deaths and injuries; official impunity; harsh and life-threatening prison conditions; arbitrary arrests and detention; lengthy pretrial detention; executive influence over the judiciary; infringement of citizens&#x27; privacy rights; restrictions on freedoms of press, assembly, and movement; official corruption; discrimination and violence against women; child abuse, including female genital mutilation (FGM), and sexual exploitation of children; regional and ethnic discrimination; trafficking in persons, especially women and children; societal discrimination against persons with disabilities; official and societal discrimination against homosexual persons; societal discrimination against persons with HIV; and forced labour, including by children.&quot; Same-sex sexual activity is illegal in Togo, with a penalty of one to three years imprisonment.

== Geography ==
It has an area equal to . It borders the Bight of Benin in the south; Ghana lies to the west; Benin to the east; and to the north, it is bound by Burkina Faso. North of the equator, it lies mostly between latitudes 6° and 11°N, and longitudes 0° and 2°E.

The coast of Togo in the Gulf of Guinea is 56 km (35 miles) long and consists of lagoons with sandy beaches. In the north, the land is characterized by a rolling savanna in contrast to the centre of the country, which is characterized by hills. The south of Togo is characterized by a savanna and woodland plateau which reaches a coastal plain with lagoons and marshes. The highest mountain of the country is the Mont Agou at 986 metres (3235&#x27;) above sea level. The longest river is the Mono River with a length of 400 km (250 miles). It runs from north to south.

The climate is &quot;generally tropical&quot; with average temperatures ranging from on the coast to about in the northernmost regions, with a drier climate and characteristics of a tropical savanna.

Togo contains three terrestrial ecoregions: Eastern Guinean forests, Guinean forest-savanna mosaic, and West Sudanian savanna. The coast of Togo is characterized by marshes and mangroves. The country had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 5.88/10, ranking it 92nd globally out of 172 countries.

At least five parks and reserves have been established: Abdoulaye Faunal Reserve, Fazao Malfakassa National Park, Fosse aux Lions National Park, Koutammakou, and Kéran National Park.

===Wildlife===
== Economy ==

The country possesses phosphate deposits and an export sector based on agricultural products such as coffee, cocoa bean, and peanuts (groundnuts), which together generate roughly 30% of export earnings. Cotton is a cash crop. The fertile land occupies 11.3% of the country, most of which is developed. Some crops are cassava, jasmine rice, maize and millet. Some other sectors are brewery and the textile industry. Low market prices for Togo&#x27;s major export commodities coupled with the volatile political situation of the 1990s and 2000s had a negative effect on the economy.

It is listed in the least developed country group. It serves as a regional commercial and trade centre. The government&#x27;s decade-long efforts supported by the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to carry out economic reforms, to encourage investments, and to create the balance between income and consumption has stalled. Political unrest, including private and public sector strikes throughout 1992 and 1993, jeopardized the reform program, shrank the tax base, and disrupted economic activities in the country. Togo was ranked 117th in the Global Innovation Index in 2024.

It imports machinery, equipment, petroleum products, and food. Its main import partners are France (21.1%), the Netherlands (12.1%), Côte d&#x27;Ivoire (5.9%), Germany (4.6%), Italy (4.4%), South Africa (4.3%) and China (4.1%). The main exports are cocoa, coffee, re-export of goods, phosphates and cotton. &quot;Major export partners&quot; are Burkina Faso (16.6%), China (15.4%), the Netherlands (13%), Benin (9.6%) and Mali (7.4%).
In terms of structural reforms, it has made progress in the liberalization of the economy, namely in the fields of trade and port activities. The privatization program of the cotton sector, telecommunications and water supply has stalled.

On 12 January 1994, the devaluation of the currency by 50% provided an impetus to renewed structural adjustment; these efforts were facilitated by the end of strife in 1994 and a return to overt political calm. Progress depends on increased openness in government financial operations (to accommodate increased social service outlays) and possible downsizing of the armed forces, on which the regime has depended to stay in place. Lack of aid and depressed cocoa prices generated a 1% fall in GDP in 1998, with growth resuming in 1999. Togo is a member of the Organization for the Harmonization of Business Law in Africa (OHADA).

Agriculture is the &quot;backbone&quot; of the economy. A shortage of funds for the purchase of irrigation equipment and fertilizers has reduced agricultural output. Agriculture generated 28.2% of GDP in 2012 and employed 49% of the working population in 2010. The country is essentially self-sufficient in food production. Livestock production is dominated by cattle breeding.

Mining generated about 33.9% of GDP in 2012 and employed 12% of the population in 2010. Togo&#x27;s gold production in 2015 is 16 metric tons. Togo has the fourth-largest phosphate deposits in the world. Their production is 2.1 million tons per year. There are reserves of limestone, marble and salt. Industry provides 20.4% of Togo&#x27;s national income, as it consists of light industries and builders. Some reserves of limestone allows Togo to produce cement.

==Transport==
===Road===

Togo has a road network of as of 2000, with no updated data as of 2023. It has only two major highways, Highway N1 and N2, connecting the capital, Lomé with the city of Dapaong, where it gets diverged northwards to Burkina Faso and from there north-west to Mali, and north-east to Niger. N1 is the longest highway of Togo, at a length of . N2 connects Lomé with Aneho. The extension of N2 is Highway RNIE1, or the Trans–West African Coastal Highway, from Aneho to Cotonou in Benin. Other roads and highways are local and regional roads in the rest of the country, also passing through borders with the neighbouring countries. The Trans–West African Coastal Highway crosses Togo, connecting it to Benin and Nigeria to the east, and Ghana and Ivory Coast to the west. Once the construction in Liberia and Sierra Leone part gets completed, the highway will continue west to seven other Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) nations.

===Railways===

Togo has a railway network of as of 2008, with no further updates in the network as of 2023. It follows a track gauge of 1,000 mm (3 ft 3+3⁄8 in) (narrow gauge) Trains are operated by (SNCT), which was established as a result of the restructuring and renaming of from 1997 to 1998. Between Hahotoé and the port of Kpémé, the (CTMB) operated phosphate trains.

The following are the railway networks present in the country:
*Lomé–Aného railway
*Lomé–Blitta railway
*Lomé–Kpalimé railway
*Hahotoé–Kpémé railway (operated by CTMB)

===Air===
Togo has a total of eight airports, as of 2012, out of which two are international airports and six are domestic airports. The only major airport of the country is Lomé–Tokoin International Airport serving the capital, Lomé, and another Niamtougou International Airport in Niamtougou, serving the country&#x27;s northern part.

===Water===

Togo, in terms of water transport, is only navigable, mostly seasonally on the Mono River, depending on rainfall, as of 2011. Togo has only one large container port for carrying trade operations in and out of the country, the Port of Lomé, in the capital.

== Demographics ==
The November 2010 census gave Togo a population of 6,191,155, more than double the total counted in the last census; in 2022 the Togo population was 8,680,832. That census, taken in 1981, showed the nation had a population of 2,719,567. The capital, Lomé, grew from 375,499 in 1981 to 837,437 in 2010. When the urban population of surrounding Golfe prefecture is added, the Lomé Agglomeration contained 1,477,660 residents in 2010.

Other cities in Togo according to the new census were Sokodé (95,070), Kara (94,878), Kpalimé (75,084), Atakpamé (69,261), Dapaong (58,071) and Tsévié (54,474). With an estimated population of (), Togo is the 107th largest country by population. Most of the population (65%) live in rural villages dedicated to agriculture or pastures. The population of Togo shows a stronger growth: from 1961 (the year after independence) to 2003 it quintupled.
=== Ethnic groups ===

In Togo, there are about 40 different ethnic groups, the most numerous of which are the Ewe in the south who make up 32% of the population. Along the southern coastline, they account for 21% of the population. Also found are Kotokoli or Tem and Tchamba in the centre and the Kabye people in the north (22%). The are 14% of the population. Sometimes the Ewes and Ouatchis are considered the same, while the French who studied both groups considered them different people.
Other ethnic groups include the Mina, Mossi, the Moba and Bassar, the Tchokossi of Mango (about 8%).

=== Religion ===


According to a 2012 US government religious freedoms report, in 2004 the University of Lomé estimated that 33% of the population were traditional animists, 28% were Roman Catholic, 20% Sunni Muslim, 9% Protestant and another 5% belonged to other Christian denominations. The remaining 5% were reported to include persons not affiliated with any religious group. The report noted that &quot;many&quot; Christians and Muslims continue to perform indigenous religious practices.

In 2023, The World Factbook stated that 42.3% of the population was Christian and 14% Muslim, with 36.9% being followers of indigenous beliefs, less than one percent being Hindus, Jews, and followers of other religions, and 6.2% being unaffiliated.

Christianity began to spread from the middle of the 15th century, after the arrival of Portuguese Catholic missionaries. Germans introduced Protestantism in the second half of the 19th century when a hundred missionaries of the Bremen Missionary Society were sent to the coastal areas of Togo and Ghana. Togo&#x27;s Protestants were known as &quot;Brema&quot;, a corruption of the word &quot;Bremen&quot;. After World War I, German missionaries had to leave, which gave birth to the early autonomy of the Ewe Evangelical Church.

In 2022, Freedom House rated Togo&#x27;s religious freedom as 3 out of 4, noting that religious freedom is constitutionally protected and generally respected in practice. Islam, Catholicism and Protestantism are recognised by the state; other groups must register as religious associations to receive similar benefits. The registration process has been subject to long delays with almost 900 applications pending at the beginning of 2021.

=== Languages ===

According to Ethnologue, 39 distinct languages are spoken in the country, some of them by communities that number fewer than 100,000 members. Of the 39 languages, the sole official language is French. Two spoken indigenous languages were designated politically as national languages in 1975: Ewé (; ) and Kabiyé.

Though not native to most groups, French is used in formal education, legislature, all forms of media, administration and commerce. Ewe is a language of wider communication in the south. Tem functions to a limited extent as a trade language in some northern towns. Officially, Ewe and Kabiye are &quot;national languages&quot;, which in the Togolese context means languages that are promoted in formal education and used in the media. Others are Gen, Aja, Moba, Ntcham, and Ife. In joining the Commonwealth, the Togolese government has anticipated opportunities for Togolese citizens to learn English.

=== Health ===
The Human Rights Measurement Initiative finds that Togo is fulfilling 73.1% of what it should be fulfilling for the right to health based on its level of income. When looking at the right to health with respect to children, Togo achieves 93.8% of what is expected based on its current income. In regards to the right to health amongst the adult population, the country achieves 88.2% of what is expected based on the nation&#x27;s level of income. It falls into the &quot;very bad&quot; category when evaluating the right to reproductive health because the nation is fulfilling 37.3% of what the nation is expected to achieve based on the resources (income) it has available.

Health expenditure in Togo was 5.2% of GDP in 2014, which ranks the country in 45th place in the world. The infant mortality rate is approximately 43.7 deaths per 1,000 children in 2016. Male life expectancy at birth was at 62.3 in 2016, whereas it was at 67.7 years for females. There were 5 physicians per 100,000 people in 2008 According to a 2013 UNICEF report, 4% of women in Togo have undergone female genital mutilation.

, the maternal mortality rate per 100,000 births for Togo is 368, compared with 350 in 2010 and 539.7 in 1990. The under 5 mortality rate per 1,000 births is 100, and the neonatal mortality as a percentage of under 5&#x27;s mortality is 32. In Togo the number of midwives per 1,000 live births is 2 and the lifetime risk of death for pregnant women is 1 in 67.

In 2016, Togo had 4100 (2400-6100) new HIV infections and 5100 (3100-7700) AIDS-related deaths. There were 100,000 (73,000-130,000) people living with HIV in 2016, among whom 51% (37-67%) were accessing antiretroviral therapy. Among pregnant women living with HIV, 86% (59% - &gt;95%) were accessing treatment or prophylaxis to prevent transmission of HIV to their children. An estimated &lt;1000 (&lt;500-1400) children were newly infected with HIV due to mother-to-child transmission. Among people living with HIV, approximately 42% (30-55%) had suppressed viral loads.

AFD is working to enhance living conditions in Lomé, the coastal city with a population of 1.4 million, by modernizing solid waste management services. The project involves enhancing garbage collection through the construction of a new landfill that meets international standards.

In 2024, a Universal Health Insurance program was launched, covering 800,000 people within six months and implemented through the National Social Security Fund and the National Health Insurance Institute.

=== Education ===
Education in Togo is compulsory for six years. In 1996, the gross primary enrollment rate was 119.6%, and the net primary enrollment rate was 81.3%. In 2011, the net enrollment rate was 94%. The education system has &quot;suffered from teacher shortages, lower educational quality in rural areas, and high repetition and dropout rates&quot;.

== Culture ==
The culture reflects the influences of ethnic groups, the largest of which are the Ewe, Mina, Tem, Tchamba and Kabre. Some people follow native animistic practices and beliefs.

Ewe statuary is characterized by its statuettes which illustrate the worship of the ibeji. Sculptures and hunting trophies were used rather than the &quot;more ubiquitous&quot; African masks. The wood-carvers of Kloto has their &quot;chains of marriage&quot;: Two characters are connected by rings whittled from one piece of wood.

The dyed fabric batiks of the artisanal centre of Kloto represent stylized and coloured scenes of ancient everyday life. There are loincloths used in the ceremonies of the weavers of Assahoun. Works of the painter Sokey Edorh are inspired by the &quot;immense arid extents, swept by the dry wind&quot;, and where the soil keeps the prints of the men and the animals. The plastics technician Paul Ahyi practiced the &quot;zota&quot;, a kind of pyroengraving, and his monumental achievements decorate Lomé.

Basketball is Togo&#x27;s &quot;second most practiced sport&quot;. Togo featured a national team in beach volleyball that competed at the 2018–2020 CAVB Beach Volleyball Continental Cup in the men&#x27;s section.

Mass media in Togo includes radio, television, and online and print formats. The news agency began in 1975. The Union des Journalistes Independants du Togo press association is headquartered in Lomé.Togolese Television is the state-owned service.

== See also ==

* Outline of Togo
* Horses in Togo

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==

* Bullock, A L C, &quot;Germany&#x27;s Colonial Demands&quot; (Oxford University Press, 1939).
* Gründer, Horst, &quot;Geschichte der deutschen Kolonien&quot;, 3. Aufl. (Paderborn, 1995).
* Mwakikagile, Godfrey, &quot;Military Coups in West Africa Since The Sixties&quot; (Nova Science Publishers, Inc., 2001).
* Packer, George, &quot;The Village of Waiting&quot; (Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1988).
* Piot, Charles, &quot;Nostalgia for the Future: West Africa After the Cold War&quot; (University of Chicago Press, 2010).
* Schnee, Dr. Heinrich, &quot;German Colonization, Past and Future – the Truth about the German Colonies&quot; (George Allen &amp; Unwin, 1926).
* Sebald, Peter, &quot;Togo 1884 bis 1914. Eine Geschichte der deutschen &quot;Musterkolonie&quot; auf der Grundlage amtlicher Quellen&quot; (Berlin, 1987).
* Seely, Jennifer, &quot;The Legacies of Transition Governments in Africa: The Cases of Benin and Togo&quot; (Palgrave Macmillan, 2009).
* Zurstrassen, Bettina, &quot;&quot;Ein Stück deutscher Erde schaffen&quot;. Koloniale Beamte in Togo 1884–1914&quot; (Frankfurt/M., Campus, 2008) (Campus Forschung, 931).
==External links==

* , Republic of Togo 
* National Assembly of Togo official site
* Togo profile from ECOWAS
* Country Profile from the BBC News
* 
* News headline links from Al Jazeera.
* Togo, Democracy Now!
* Country Profile from New Internationalist
* Togo from Encyclopædia Britannica</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q945" start="0" end="4" title="Togo" label="Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q945" start="21" end="38" title="Togo" label="Togolese Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="56" end="67" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="87" end="92" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089075" start="96" end="104" title="Ghana–Togo border" label="the west"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="106" end="111" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q975685" start="115" end="123" title="Benin–Togo border" label="the east"/>
<link wikidata="Q965" start="128" end="140" title="Burkina Faso" label="Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089027" start="144" end="153" title="Burkina Faso–Togo border" label="the north"/>
<link wikidata="Q752401" start="172" end="197" title="least developed countries" label="least developed countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q41430" start="223" end="237" title="Gulf of Guinea" label="Gulf of Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="249" end="256" title="capital city" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q3792" start="258" end="262" title="Lomé" label="Lomé"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="325" end="335" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="404" end="409" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="618" end="624" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360692" start="709" end="720" title="Slave Coast of West Africa" label="Slave Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="737" end="744" title="German Empire" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q161062" start="795" end="803" title="Togoland" label="Togoland"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="811" end="822" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="858" end="864" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q155385" start="921" end="939" title="Gnassingbé Eyadéma" label="Gnassingbé Eyadéma"/>
<link wikidata="Q16639048" start="946" end="982" title="1967 Togolese coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="successful military coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="1233" end="1239" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4414" start="1309" end="1325" title="Faure Gnassingbé" label="Faure Gnassingbé"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="1360" end="1368" title="Tropics" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="1370" end="1381" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="sub-Saharan"/>
<link wikidata="Q668284" start="1525" end="1535" title="Gbe languages" label="Gbe family"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="1571" end="1583" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="1656" end="1670" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="1672" end="1685" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q47543" start="1687" end="1722" title="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation" label="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q47539" start="1724" end="1765" title="South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone" label="South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q134102" start="1767" end="1779" title="Organisation internationale de la Francophonie" label="Francophonie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="1781" end="1804" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="1810" end="1851" title="Economic Community of West African States" label="Economic Community of West African States"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="1868" end="1882" title="Archaeology" label="Archaeological"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642" start="1931" end="1938" title="pottery" label="pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="1951" end="1955" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q30005" start="1994" end="2006" title="Ewe language" label="Ewe language"/>
<link wikidata="Q732317" start="2132" end="2135" title="Ewe people" label="Ewé"/>
<link wikidata="Q33450" start="2159" end="2163" title="Gen language" label="Mina"/>
<link wikidata="Q33291" start="2168" end="2171" title="Fon language" label="Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="2230" end="2250" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="Atlantic slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360692" start="2447" end="2458" title="Slave Coast of West Africa" label="Slave Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q998417" start="2498" end="2507" title="Togoville" label="Togoville"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="2555" end="2567" title="protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q161062" start="2819" end="2827" title="Togoland" label="Togoland"/>
<link wikidata="Q705818" start="2854" end="2868" title="Forced labour" label="forced to work"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658046" start="2923" end="2930" title="Lomé–Aného railway" label="railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3792" start="2947" end="2951" title="Lomé" label="Lomé"/>
<link wikidata="Q208008" start="3052" end="3057" title="Cocoa bean" label="cocoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8486" start="3059" end="3065" title="coffee" label="coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="3070" end="3076" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3123" end="3138" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="3164" end="3171" title="United Kingdom" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="3272" end="3278" title="Third French Republic" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="3283" end="3290" title="British Empire" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q659991" start="3344" end="3365" title="West African Campaign (World War I)" label="West African Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="3404" end="3410" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q797527" start="3678" end="3694" title="British Togoland" label="British Togoland"/>
<link wikidata="Q797214" start="3699" end="3714" title="French Togoland" label="French Togoland"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="3760" end="3777" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3963" end="3975" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q985073" start="3999" end="4019" title="United Nations Trust Territories" label="UN Trust Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339526" start="4055" end="4060" title="1956 British Togoland status plebiscite" label="voted"/>
<link wikidata="Q503623" start="4073" end="4083" title="Gold Coast (British colony)" label="Gold Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="4121" end="4126" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q848478" start="4193" end="4205" title="French Union" label="French Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813213" start="4384" end="4412" title="Togolese general election, 1961" label="first presidential elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q312667" start="4422" end="4438" title="Sylvanus Olympio" label="Sylvanus Olympio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969578" start="4662" end="4687" title="National Assembly of Togo" label="National Assembly of Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="5013" end="5025" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q200790" start="5101" end="5113" title="Algerian War" label="Algerian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882219" start="5251" end="5262" title="assassinate" label="assassinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q155385" start="5319" end="5337" title="Gnassingbé Eyadéma" label="Gnassingbé Eyadéma"/>
<link wikidata="Q561303" start="5445" end="5462" title="Nicolas Grunitzky" label="Nicolas Grunitzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514253" start="5854" end="5888" title="Rally of the Togolese People" label="Rally of the Togolese People Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="6033" end="6046" title="privatization" label="privatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="6290" end="6304" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4414" start="6448" end="6464" title="Faure Gnassingbé" label="Faure Gnassingbé"/>
<link wikidata="Q106963" start="6600" end="6614" title="Abdoulaye Wade" label="Abdoulaye Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="6618" end="6625" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q202006" start="6630" end="6647" title="Olusegun Obasanjo" label="Olusegun Obasanjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="6651" end="6658" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="6714" end="6727" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="6951" end="6960" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827815" start="7039" end="7042" title="aid" label="aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="7395" end="7415" title="2008 Summer Olympics" label="2008 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="7419" end="7426" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q350261" start="7432" end="7449" title="Benjamin Boukpeti" label="Benjamin Boukpeti"/>
<link wikidata="Q338204" start="7468" end="7478" title="Canoeing at the 2008 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s slalom K-1" label="K-1 slalom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005" start="7585" end="7598" title="The Gambia" label="Gambia&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q710820" start="7617" end="7632" title="Ousainou Darboe" label="Ousainou Darboe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4414" start="7750" end="7766" title="Faure Gnassingbé" label="Faure Gnassingbé"/>
<link wikidata="Q392055" start="8001" end="8015" title="Agbéyomé Kodjo" label="Agbeyome Kodjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4414" start="8200" end="8216" title="Faure Gnassingbé" label="Faure Gnassingbé"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="8541" end="8553" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q23640674" start="8598" end="8643" title="2022 Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting" label="2022 Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q27756289" start="8662" end="8675" title="Robert Dussey" label="Robert Dussey"/>
<link wikidata="Q718167" start="9015" end="9027" title="Togolese Armed Forces" label="armed forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q35749" start="9083" end="9093" title="parliament" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q155385" start="9252" end="9270" title="Gnassingbé Eyadéma" label="Gnassingbé Eyadéma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522820" start="9422" end="9447" title="Fambaré Ouattara Natchaba" label="Fambaré Ouattara Natchaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q718167" start="9696" end="9717" title="Togolese Armed Forces" label="Togolese Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4414" start="9969" end="9985" title="Faure Gnassingbé" label="Faure Gnassingbé"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="10214" end="10230" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="10274" end="10288" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q104880455" start="10330" end="10349" title="2005 Togo protests and riots" label="culminated in riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018574" start="10492" end="10497" title="Aného" label="Aného"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586640" start="10627" end="10636" title="Togo presidential election, 2005" label="elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q461208" start="10920" end="10940" title="Emmanuel Bob-Akitani" label="Emmanuel Bob-Akitani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151805" start="10950" end="10980" title="Union des Forces du Changement" label="Union des Forces du Changement"/>
<link wikidata="Q305669" start="11122" end="11135" title="Bonfoh Abbass" label="Bonfoh Abbass"/>
<link wikidata="Q4414" start="11197" end="11213" title="Faure Gnassingbé" label="Faure Gnassingbé"/>
<link wikidata="Q202006" start="11470" end="11487" title="Olusẹgun Ọbasanjọ" label="Olusẹgun Ọbasanjọ"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="11650" end="11656" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q105480" start="11669" end="11683" title="Kenneth Kaunda" label="Kenneth Kaunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q961159" start="11768" end="11778" title="Edem Kodjo" label="Edem Kodjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514253" start="12010" end="12038" title="Rally of the Togolese People" label="Rally of the Togolese People"/>
<link wikidata="Q269076" start="12403" end="12415" title="Komlan Mally" label="Komlan Mally"/>
<link wikidata="Q4414" start="12541" end="12557" title="Faure Gnassingbé" label="Faure Gnassingbé"/>
<link wikidata="Q3169278" start="12646" end="12663" title="Jean-Pierre Fabre" label="Jean-Pierre Fabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q47160711" start="12953" end="12986" title="protests against Faure Gnassingbé" label="protests against Faure Gnassingbé"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084503" start="13041" end="13058" title="Gilchrist Olympio" label="Gilchrist Olympio"/>
<link wikidata="Q49892" start="14274" end="14293" title="presidential system" label="presidential system"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="14311" end="14328" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary one"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187629" start="14487" end="14501" title="List of prime ministers of Togo" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q515716" start="14988" end="14998" title="prefecture" label="prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q279945" start="15037" end="15044" title="Savanes Region, Togo" label="Savanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q316216" start="15046" end="15050" title="Kara Region" label="Kara"/>
<link wikidata="Q316220" start="15052" end="15060" title="Centrale Region, Togo" label="Centrale"/>
<link wikidata="Q316306" start="15062" end="15070" title="Plateaux Region, Togo" label="Plateaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q316291" start="15075" end="15083" title="Maritime Region" label="Maritime"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="15301" end="15312" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="15318" end="15322" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="15489" end="15500" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="15530" end="15543" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130514" start="15574" end="15618" title="treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons" label="treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="15636" end="15659" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000" start="15672" end="15677" title="Gabon" label="Gabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23640674" start="15686" end="15731" title="2022 Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting" label="2022 Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859" start="15735" end="15741" title="Kigali" label="Kigali"/>
<link wikidata="Q27756289" start="15797" end="15810" title="Robert Dussey" label="Robert Dussey"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="15816" end="15823" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q987355" start="15965" end="15981" title="English-speaking world" label="anglophone world"/>
<link wikidata="Q204310" start="16093" end="16104" title="gendarmerie" label="gendarmerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q191891" start="16145" end="16156" title="fiscal year" label="fiscal year"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="16201" end="16204" title="GDP" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3792" start="16230" end="16234" title="Lomé" label="Lomé"/>
<link wikidata="Q860729" start="16245" end="16249" title="Kara, Togo" label="Kara"/>
<link wikidata="Q201342" start="16251" end="16261" title="Niamtougou" label="Niamtougou"/>
<link wikidata="Q970904" start="16267" end="16274" title="Dapaong" label="Dapaong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813432" start="16301" end="16314" title="Staff (military)" label="General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q313740" start="16424" end="16434" title="Dassault/Dornier Alpha Jet" label="Alpha jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q242424" start="16501" end="16514" title="Freedom House" label="Freedom House"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="16656" end="16677" title="United States Department of State" label="U.S. State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q132781" start="16799" end="16806" title="torture" label="torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="17076" end="17093" title="freedom of the press" label="freedoms of press"/>
<link wikidata="Q162254" start="17095" end="17103" title="Freedom of Assembly" label="assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q208373" start="17206" end="17231" title="female genital mutilation" label="female genital mutilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="17536" end="17539" title="Human immunodeficiency virus" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q47530" start="17743" end="17757" title="Bight of Benin" label="Bight of Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="17772" end="17777" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="17796" end="17801" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q965" start="17848" end="17860" title="Burkina Faso" label="Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186300" start="17917" end="17919" title="6th parallel north" label="6°"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256475" start="17924" end="17928" title="11th parallel north" label="11°N"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401774" start="17945" end="17947" title="prime meridian" label="0°"/>
<link wikidata="Q938807" start="17952" end="17955" title="2nd meridian east" label="2°E"/>
<link wikidata="Q41430" start="17983" end="17997" title="Gulf of Guinea" label="Gulf of Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="18120" end="18127" title="savanna" label="savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672617" start="18243" end="18271" title="Guinean forest-savanna mosaic" label="savanna and woodland plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753509" start="18371" end="18380" title="Mont Agou" label="Mont Agou"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="18437" end="18442" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q268624" start="18450" end="18460" title="Mono River" label="Mono River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290693" start="18710" end="18726" title="Tropical and subtropical grasslands, savannas, and shrublands" label="tropical savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090194" start="18773" end="18796" title="Eastern Guinean forests" label="Eastern Guinean forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672617" start="18798" end="18827" title="Guinean forest-savanna mosaic" label="Guinean forest-savanna mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474468" start="18833" end="18854" title="West Sudanian savanna" label="West Sudanian savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q30198" start="18894" end="18901" title="marshes" label="marshes"/>
<link wikidata="Q19756" start="18906" end="18915" title="mangroves" label="mangroves"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520600" start="18940" end="18972" title="Forest Landscape Integrity Index" label="Forest Landscape Integrity Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q4665172" start="19100" end="19124" title="Abdoulaye Faunal Reserve" label="Abdoulaye Faunal Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q144029" start="19126" end="19156" title="Fazao Malfakassa National Park" label="Fazao Malfakassa National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q19461810" start="19158" end="19187" title="Fosse aux Lions National Park" label="Fosse aux Lions National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q508040" start="19189" end="19200" title="Koutammakou" label="Koutammakou"/>
<link wikidata="Q246121" start="19206" end="19225" title="Kéran National Park" label="Kéran National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="19280" end="19289" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8486" start="19359" end="19365" title="coffee" label="coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q208008" start="19367" end="19377" title="cocoa bean" label="cocoa bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q37383" start="19383" end="19389" title="peanut" label="peanut"/>
<link wikidata="Q83124" start="19575" end="19582" title="cassava" label="cassava"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733021" start="19584" end="19596" title="jasmine rice" label="jasmine rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="19598" end="19603" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q259438" start="19608" end="19614" title="millet" label="millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q131734" start="19639" end="19646" title="brewery" label="brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="19655" end="19662" title="textile" label="textile"/>
<link wikidata="Q752401" start="19860" end="19883" title="least developed country" label="least developed country"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="20003" end="20013" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="20022" end="20049" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q4196458" start="20403" end="20426" title="Global Innovation Index" label="Global Innovation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q11019" start="20448" end="20457" title="machinery" label="machinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="20470" end="20479" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="20570" end="20588" title="Côte d&amp;#x27;Ivoire" label="Côte d&amp;#x27;Ivoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q208008" start="20686" end="20691" title="Cocoa bean" label="cocoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8486" start="20693" end="20699" title="coffee" label="coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="20721" end="20731" title="phosphates" label="phosphates"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="20736" end="20742" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q965" start="20782" end="20794" title="Burkina Faso" label="Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="20842" end="20847" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="20859" end="20863" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q746418" start="20932" end="20946" title="liberalization" label="liberalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q601401" start="20987" end="20992" title="trade" label="trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="21062" end="21080" title="telecommunications" label="telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="21478" end="21490" title="armed forces" label="armed forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029901" start="21672" end="21732" title="Organization for the Harmonization of Business Law in Africa" label="Organization for the Harmonization of Business Law in Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="21743" end="21754" title="Agriculture" label="Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="21839" end="21849" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q83323" start="21864" end="21875" title="fertilizers" label="fertilizers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="21940" end="21943" title="GDP" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341794" start="22031" end="22046" title="self-sufficient" label="self-sufficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q103459" start="22067" end="22076" title="Livestock" label="Livestock"/>
<link wikidata="Q80962" start="22104" end="22119" title="cattle breeding" label="cattle breeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="22122" end="22128" title="Mining" label="Mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="22293" end="22302" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="22395" end="22404" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="22406" end="22412" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q11254" start="22417" end="22421" title="salt" label="salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q45190" start="22578" end="22584" title="cement" label="cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q970904" start="22782" end="22789" title="Dapaong" label="Dapaong"/>
<link wikidata="Q965" start="22828" end="22840" title="Burkina Faso" label="Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="22870" end="22874" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="22894" end="22899" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018574" start="22975" end="22980" title="Aneho" label="Aneho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157731" start="23027" end="23061" title="Trans–West African Coastal Highway" label="Trans–West African Coastal Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q43595" start="23077" end="23084" title="Cotonou" label="Cotonou"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="23088" end="23093" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="23309" end="23314" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="23319" end="23326" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="23344" end="23349" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="23354" end="23365" title="Ivory Coast" label="Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="23404" end="23411" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="23416" end="23428" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="23496" end="23537" title="Economic Community of West African States" label="Economic Community of West African States"/>
<link wikidata="Q214519" start="23679" end="23690" title="track gauge" label="track gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112477" start="23720" end="23732" title="Narrow-gauge railway" label="narrow gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658046" start="23997" end="24015" title="Lomé–Aného railway" label="Lomé–Aného railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q802674" start="24017" end="24036" title="Lomé–Blitta railway" label="Lomé–Blitta railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q802678" start="24038" end="24058" title="Lomé–Kpalimé railway" label="Lomé–Kpalimé railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q644371" start="24181" end="24202" title="international airport" label="international airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q837800" start="24216" end="24233" title="domestic airports" label="domestic airports"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431925" start="24276" end="24309" title="Lomé–Tokoin International Airport" label="Lomé–Tokoin International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q956152" start="24349" end="24381" title="Niamtougou International Airport" label="Niamtougou International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q201342" start="24385" end="24395" title="Niamtougou" label="Niamtougou"/>
<link wikidata="Q268624" start="24532" end="24542" title="Mono River" label="Mono River"/>
<link wikidata="Q732317" start="25720" end="25723" title="Ewe people" label="Ewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q36531" start="25857" end="25872" title="Tem language" label="Kotokoli or Tem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711981" start="25877" end="25884" title="Tchamba" label="Tchamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q8102636" start="25907" end="25919" title="Kabye people" label="Kabye people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165955" start="26141" end="26146" title="Mossi people" label="Mossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="26710" end="26728" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="26873" end="26879" title="Hindus" label="Hindus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="26881" end="26885" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q58721" start="26936" end="26948" title="Irreligion" label="unaffiliated"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="26951" end="26963" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="27049" end="27057" title="Roman Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="27091" end="27104" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q24879" start="27343" end="27349" title="Bremen" label="Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="27363" end="27374" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27456" end="27478" title="Ewe Evangelical Church" label="Ewe Evangelical Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="28112" end="28129" title="official language" label="official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q319972" start="28204" end="28221" title="national language" label="national language"/>
<link wikidata="Q30005" start="28232" end="28235" title="Ewe language" label="Ewé"/>
<link wikidata="Q35475" start="28245" end="28251" title="Kabiyé language" label="Kabiyé"/>
<link wikidata="Q759652" start="28357" end="28371" title="Administration (law)" label="administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q36531" start="28441" end="28444" title="Tem language" label="Tem"/>
<link wikidata="Q835884" start="29657" end="29673" title="infant mortality" label="infant mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="29741" end="29765" title="life expectancy at birth" label="life expectancy at birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q208373" start="29950" end="29975" title="female genital mutilation" label="female genital mutilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826643" start="30913" end="30916" title="French Development Agency" label="AFD"/>
<link wikidata="Q3792" start="30960" end="30964" title="Lomé" label="Lomé"/>
<link wikidata="Q180388" start="31032" end="31064" title="Waste management" label="solid waste management services."/>
<link wikidata="Q152810" start="31149" end="31157" title="landfill" label="landfill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341166" start="31419" end="31436" title="Education in Togo" label="Education in Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q732317" start="31859" end="31862" title="Ewe people" label="Ewe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31864" end="31868" title="Mina people" label="Mina"/>
<link wikidata="Q8102636" start="31887" end="31892" title="Kabre" label="Kabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q43004" start="31920" end="31929" title="animistic" label="animistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066288" start="31991" end="32001" title="statuettes" label="statuettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027389" start="32038" end="32043" title="ibeji" label="ibeji"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408917" start="32166" end="32171" title="Kloto" label="Kloto"/>
<link wikidata="Q635427" start="32302" end="32307" title="batik" label="batik"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743747" start="32677" end="32686" title="Paul Ahyi" label="Paul Ahyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3792" start="32785" end="32789" title="Lomé" label="Lomé"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="32792" end="32802" title="Basketball" label="Basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q4543" start="32892" end="32908" title="beach volleyball" label="beach volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q85731006" start="32930" end="32977" title="2018–2020 CAVB Beach Volleyball Continental Cup" label="2018–2020 CAVB Beach Volleyball Continental Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q30682391" start="33006" end="33024" title="Mass media in Togo" label="Mass media in Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546725" start="33205" end="33224" title="Togolese Television" label="Togolese Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112487" start="33272" end="33287" title="Outline of Togo" label="Outline of Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q63978538" start="33290" end="33304" title="Horses in Togo" label="Horses in Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345330" start="33625" end="33654" title="Nova Science Publishers, Inc." label="Nova Science Publishers, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="34589" end="34595" title="ECOWAS" label="ECOWAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="34623" end="34631" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704134" start="34662" end="34672" title="Al Jazeera" label="Al Jazeera"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998753" start="34720" end="34740" title="New Internationalist" label="New Internationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="34753" end="34776" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30139" wikidata="Q707167" url="?curid=30139" title="History of Togo">
<text>The history of Togo can be traced to archaeological finds which indicate that ancient local tribes were able to produce pottery and process tin. During the period from the 11th century to the 16th century, the Ewé, the Mina, the Gun, and various other tribes entered the region. Most of them settled in coastal areas. The Portuguese arrived in the late 15th century, followed by other European powers. Until the 19th century, the coastal region was a major slave trade centre, earning Togo and the surrounding region the name &quot;The Slave Coast&quot;.

In 1884, Germany claimed a coastal protectorate, which grew inland until it became the German colony of Togoland in 1905. A railway, the port of Lomé, and other infrastructure were developed. During the First World War, Togoland was invaded by Britain and France. In 1922, Great Britain received the League of Nations mandate to govern the western part of Togo and France to govern the eastern part. After World War II, these mandates became UN Trust Territories. The residents of British Togoland voted to join the Gold Coast as part of the new independent nation of Ghana in 1957.

French Togoland became the Togolese Republic in 1960. Its Constitution, adopted in 1961, instituted the National Assembly of Togo as the supreme legislative body. In the same year, the first president, Sylvanus Olympio, dissolved the opposition parties and arrested their leaders. When he was assassinated in a coup in 1963, the military handed over power to an interim government led by Nicolas Grunitzky.

The military leader Gnassingbé Eyadéma overthrew Grunitzky in a bloodless coup in 1967. He assumed the presidency and introduced a one-party system in 1969. Eyadéma remained in power for the next 38 years. When he died in 2005, the military installed his son, Faure Gnassingbé, as president. Gnassingbe held elections and won, but the opposition claimed fraud. Because of political violence, around 40,000 Togolese fled to neighboring countries. Gnassingbé was re-elected two more times. In late 2017, anti-government protests were suppressed by security forces.

==Pre-colonial==

Little is known about the history of Togo before the late fifteenth century, when Portuguese explorers arrived, although there are signs of Ewe settlement for several centuries before their arrival. Various tribes moved into the country from all sides – the Ewe from Benin, and the Mina and the Guin from Ghana. These three groups settled along the coast.

Before the colonial period, the various ethnic groups in Togo had little contact with each other. Except for two small kingdoms in the north, the territory consisted of groups of villages which were under military pressure from the two neighbouring West African powers – the Ashanti from Ghana and the Dahomey from Benin.

The first Europeans to see Togo were João de Santarém and Pêro Escobar, the Portuguese explorers who sailed along its coast between 1471 and 1473. The Portuguese built forts in neighboring Ghana (at Elmina) and Benin (at Ouidah). Although the coast of Togo had no natural harbors, the Portuguese did trade at a small fort at Porto Seguro. For the next 200 years, the coastal region was a major trading center for Europeans in search of slaves, earning Togo and the surrounding region the name &quot;The Slave Coast&quot;.

==Colonial rule==
===German Togoland===
The German Empire established the protectorate of Togoland (in what is now the nation of Togo and most of what is now the Volta Region of Ghana) in 1884 during the period generally known as the &quot;Scramble for Africa&quot;. Gustav Nachtigal, Germany&#x27;s Commissioner for West Africa who oversaw both the inclusion of Togoland as well as Kamerun into the German colonial empire, had negotiated with King Mlapa III to gain control of the coast of what would eventually become Togoland, particularly the cities of Lomé, Sebe and Aného. France, at the time controller of neighboring Benin, recognized German rule in the region on 24 December 1885.

The colony was established in part of what was then the Slave Coast and German control was gradually extended inland. Because it became Germany&#x27;s only self-supporting colony and because of its extensive rail and road infrastructure—Germany had opened Togo&#x27;s first rail line between Lomé and Aného in 1905—Togoland was known as its model possession.

At the outbreak of the First World War in 1914 the colony was drawn into the conflict. It was invaded and quickly overrun by British and French forces during the Togoland campaign and placed under military rule. In 1916 the territory was divided into separate British and French administrative zones, and this was formalized in 1922 with the creation of British Togoland and French Togoland.

===League of Nations mandates===

On August 8, 1914, French and British forces invaded Togoland and the German forces there surrendered on 26 August. In 1916, Togoland was divided into French and British administrative zones. Following the war, Togoland formally became a League of Nations mandate divided for administrative purposes between France and the United Kingdom. After World War I, newly founded Czechoslovakia was also interested in this colony but this idea did not succeed. Lome was initially allocated to the British zone but after negotiations transferred to France 1 October 1920.

After World War II, the mandate became a UN trust territory administered by the United Kingdom and France. During the mandate and trusteeship periods, western Togo was administered as part of the British Gold Coast. In December 1956, the residents of British Togoland voted to join the Gold Coast as part of the new independent nation of Ghana.
In the Representative Assembly elections in 1946, there were two parties, the Committee of Togolese Unity (CUT) and the Togolese Party of Progress (PTP). The CUT was overwhelmingly successful, and Sylvanus Olympio, the CUT leader became Council leader. However, the CUT was defeated in the 1951 Representative Assembly elections and the 1952 Territorial Assembly elections, and refused to participate in further French supervised elections because it claimed that the PTP was receiving French support. By statute in 1955, French Togoland became an autonomous republic within the French union, although it retained its UN trusteeship status. Following elections to the Territorial Assembly on 12 June 1955, which were boycotted by CUT, considerable power over internal affairs was granted, with an elected executive body headed by a prime minister responsible to the legislature. These changes were embodied in a constitution approved in a 1956 referendum. On 10 September 1956, Nicolas Grunitzky became Prime Minister of the Republic of Togo. The situation escalated further on 21 June 1957, when the local population of the Pya-Hodo, Kozah, took advantage of the visit of the United Nations mission, to express its frustration with the French colonial administration. Faced with the anger of the demonstrators, protesting against the arrest of the Togolese nationalist, Bouyo Moukpé, the colonial army fired on the crowd that frequented the Hoda market, killing 20 and injuring many. Due to irregularities in the plebiscite, a UN-supervised parliamentary election was held on 27 April 1958, the first held in Togo with universal suffrage, which was won by the opposition pro-independence CUT and its leader Sylvanus Olympio, who became prime minister. On 13 October 1958 the French government announced that full independence would be granted. On 14 November 1958 the United Nations’ General Assembly took note of the French government&#x27;s declaration according to which Togo which was under French administration would gain independence in 1960, thus marking an end to the trusteeship period. On 5 December 1959 the United Nations’ General Assembly resolved that the UN Trusteeship Agreement with France for Cameroon would end when Togo became independent on 27 April 1960.

On 27 April 1960, in a smooth transition, Togo severed its constitutional ties with France, shed its UN trusteeship status, and became fully independent under a provisional constitution with Olympio as president.

==Independence and turmoil==

A new constitution adopted by referendum in 1961 established an executive president, elected for 7 years by universal suffrage and a weak National Assembly. The president was empowered to appoint ministers and dissolve the assembly, holding a monopoly of executive power. In elections that year, from which Grunitzky&#x27;s party was disqualified, Olympio&#x27;s party won 100% of the vote and all 51 National Assembly seats, and he became Togo&#x27;s first elected president.

During this period, four principal political parties existed in Togo: the leftist Juvento, the Democratic Union of the Togolese People (UDPT), the PTP, founded by Grunitzky but having limited support, and the Party of Togolese Unity, the party of President Olympio. Rivalries between elements of these parties had begun as early as the 1940s, and they came to a head with Olympio dissolving the opposition parties in January 1962 because of alleged plots against the majority party government. The reign of Olympio was marked by the terror of his militia, the Ablode Sodjas. Many opposition members, including Grunitzky and Meatchi, were jailed or fled to avoid arrest.

On 13 January 1963 Olympio was overthrown and killed in a coup d&#x27;état led by army non-commissioned officers dissatisfied with conditions following their discharge from the French army. Grunitzky returned from exile 2 days later to head a provisional government with the title of prime minister. On 5 May 1963, the Togolese adopted a new constitution by referendum, which reinstated a multi-party system. They also voted in a general election to choose deputies from all political parties for the National Assembly, and elected Grunitzky as president and Antoine Meatchi as vice president. Nine days later, President Grunitzky formed a government in which all parties were represented.

During the next several years, the Grunitzky government&#x27;s power became insecure. On 21 November 1966, an attempt to overthrow Grunitzky, inspired principally by civilian political opponents in the UT party, was unsuccessful. Grunitzky then tried to lessen his reliance on the army, but on 13 January 1967, a coup led by Lt. Col. Étienne Eyadéma (later Gen. Gnassingbé Eyadéma) and Kléber Dadjo ousted President Grunitzky without bloodshed. Following the coup, political parties were banned, and all constitutional processes were suspended. Dadjo became the chairman of the &quot;committee of national reconciliation&quot;, which ruled the country until 14 April, when Eyadéma assumed the presidency. In late 1969, a single national political party, the Rally of the Togolese People (RPT), was created, and President Eyadéma was elected party president on 29 November 1969. In 1972, a referendum, in which Eyadéma ran unopposed, confirmed his role as the country&#x27;s president.

==Eyadéma&#x27;s rule==
===The second republic and third republic===

In late 1979, Eyadéma declared a third republic and a transition to greater civilian rule with a mixed civilian and military cabinet. He garnered 99.97% of the vote in uncontested presidential elections held in late 1979 and early 1980. A new constitution also provided for a national assembly to serve primarily as a consultative body. Eyadéma was reelected to a third consecutive 7-year term in December 1986 with 99.5% of the vote in an uncontested election. On 23 September 1986, a group of some 70 armed Togolese dissidents crossed into Lomé from Ghana in an unsuccessful attempt to overthrow the Eyadéma government.

===Opposition===
In 1989 and 1990, Togo, like many other countries, was affected by the winds of democratic change sweeping Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union. On 5 October 1990, the trial of students who handed out antigovernment tracts sparked riots in Lomé. Anti-government demonstrations and violent clashes with the security forces marked the months that followed. In April 1991, the government began negotiations with newly formed opposition groups and agreed to a general amnesty that permitted exiled political opponents to return to Togo. After a general strike and further demonstrations, the government and opposition signed an agreement to hold a &quot;national forum&quot; on 12 June 1991.

The national forum, dominated by opponents of President Eyadéma, opened in July 1991 and immediately declared itself to be a sovereign &quot;National Conference.&quot; Although subjected to severe harassment from the government, the conference drafted an interim constitution calling for a 1-year transitional regime tasked with organizing free elections for a new government. The conference selected Joseph Kokou Koffigoh, a lawyer and human rights group head, as transitional prime minister but kept President Eyadéma as chief of state for the transition, although with limited powers.

A test of wills between the president and his opponents followed over the next 3 years during which President Eyadéma gradually gained the upper hand. Frequent political paralysis and intermittent violence marked this period. Following a vote by the transitional legislature (High Council of the Republic) to dissolve the President&#x27;s political party—the RPT—in November 1991, the army attacked the prime minister&#x27;s office on 3 December and captured the prime minister. Koffigoh then formed a second transition government in January 1992 with substantial participation by ministers from the President&#x27;s party. Opposition leader Gilchrist Olympio, son of the slain president Sylvanus Olympio, was ambushed and seriously wounded apparently by soldiers on 5 May 1992.

In July and August 1992, a commission composed of presidential and opposition representatives negotiated a new political agreement. On 27 September, the public overwhelmingly approved the text of a new, democratic constitution, formally initiating Togo&#x27;s fourth republic.

===Powerless legislature and political violence===
The democratic process was set back in October 1991, when elements of the army held the interim legislature hostage for 24 hours. This effectively put an end to the interim legislature. In retaliation, on 16 November, opposition political parties and labor unions declared a general strike intended to force President Eyadéma to agree to satisfactory conditions for elections. The general strike largely shut down Lomé for months and resulted in severe damage to the economy.

In January 1993, President Eyadéma declared the transition at an end and reappointed Koffigoh as prime minister under Eyadéma&#x27;s authority. This set off public demonstrations, and, on 25 January, members of the security forces fired on peaceful demonstrators, killing at least 19. In the ensuing days, several security force members were waylaid and injured or killed by civilian oppositionists. On 30 January 1993, elements of the military went on an 8-hour rampage throughout Lomé, firing indiscriminately and killing at least 12 people. This incident provoked more than 300,000 Togolese to flee Lomé for Benin, Ghana, or the interior of Togo. Although most had returned by early 1996, some still remain abroad.

On 25 March 1993, armed Togolese dissident commandos based in Ghana attacked Lomé&#x27;s main military camp and tried unsuccessfully to kill President Eyadéma. They inflicted significant casualties, however, which set off lethal reprisals by the military against soldiers thought to be associated with the attackers.

===Negotiating with the opposition===
Under substantial domestic and foreign pressure and the burden of the general strike, the presidential faction entered negotiations with the opposition in early 1993. Four rounds of talks led to the 11 July Ouagadougou agreement setting forth conditions for upcoming presidential and legislative elections and ending the general strike as of 3 August 1993. The presidential elections were set for 25 August, but hasty and inadequate technical preparations, concerns about fraud, and the lack of effective campaign organization by the opposition led the chief opposition candidates—former minister and Organization of African Unity Secretary General Edem Kodjo and lawyer Yawovi Agboyibo—to drop out of the race before election day and to call for a boycott. President Eyadéma won the elections by a 96.42% vote against token opposition. About 36% of the voters went to the polls; the others boycotted.

Ghana-based armed dissidents launched a new commando attack on military sites in Lomé in January 1994. President Eyadéma was unhurt, and the attack and subsequent reaction by the Togolese armed forces resulted in hundreds of deaths, mostly civilians. The government went ahead with legislative elections on 6 February and 20 February 1994. In generally free and fair polls as witnessed by international observers, the allied opposition parties UTD and CAR together won a narrow majority in the National Assembly.

===Edem Kodjo named as prime minister===
On April 22, President Eyadéma named Edem Kodjo, the head of the smaller opposition party, the UTD, as prime minister instead of Yawovi Agboyibo, whose CAR party had far more seats. Kodjo&#x27;s acceptance of the post of prime minister provoked the CAR to break the opposition alliance and refuse to join the Kodjo government. 

Kodjo was then forced to form a governing coalition with the RPT. Kodjo&#x27;s government emphasized economic recovery, building democratic institutions and the rule of law and the return of Togolese refugees abroad. In early 1995, the government made slow progress toward its goals, aided by the CAR&#x27;s August 1995 decision to end a 9-month boycott of the National Assembly. However, Kodjo was forced to reshuffle his government in late 1995, strengthening the representation by Eyadéma&#x27;s RPT party, and he resigned in August 1996. Since then, Eyadéma has reemerged with a sure grip on power, controlling most aspects of government.

In the June 1998 presidential election, the government prevented citizens from effectively exercising the right to vote. The Interior Ministry declared Eyadéma the winner with 52% of the vote in the 1998 election; however, serious irregularities in the government&#x27;s conduct of the election strongly favored the incumbent and appear to have affected the outcome materially. Although the government did not obstruct the functioning of political opponents openly, the President used the strength of the military and his government allies to intimidate and harass citizens and opposition groups. The government and the state remained highly centralized: President Eyadéma&#x27;s national government appointed the officials and controlled the budgets of all subnational government entities, including prefectures and municipalities, and influenced the selection of traditional chiefs.

===National Assembly elections===
The second multi-party legislative elections of Eyadéma&#x27;s 33-year rule were held on 21 March 1999. However, the opposition boycotted the election, in which the ruling party won 79 of the 81 seats in the National Assembly. Those two seats went to candidates from little-known independent parties. Procedural problems and significant fraud, particularly misrepresentation of voter turnout marred the legislative elections. 
After the legislative election, the government announced that it would continue to pursue dialog with the opposition. In June 1999, the RPT and opposition parties met in Paris, in the presence of facilitators representing France, Germany, the European Union, and La Francophonie (an international organization of French-speaking countries), to agree on security measures for formal negotiations in Lomé. In July 1999, the government and the opposition began discussions, and on 29 July 1999, all sides signed an accord called the &quot;Lomé Framework Agreement&quot;, which included a pledge by President Eyadéma that he would respect the constitution and not seek another term as president after his current one expires in 2003. The accord also called for the negotiation of a legal status for opposition leaders, as well as for former heads of state (such as their immunity from prosecution for acts in office). In addition, the accord addressed the rights and duties of political parties and the media, the safe return of refugees, and the security of all citizens. The accord also contained a provision for compensating victims of political violence. The President also agreed to dissolve the National Assembly in March and hold new legislative elections, which would be supervised by an independent national election commission () and which would use the single-ballot method to protect against some of the abuses of past elections. However, the March 2000 date passed without presidential action, and new legislative elections were ultimately rescheduled for October 2001. Because of funding problems and disagreements between the government and opposition, the elections were again delayed, this time until March 2002.

In May 2002 the government scrapped CENI, blaming the opposition for its inability to function. In its stead, the government appointed seven magistrates to oversee preparations for legislative elections. Not surprisingly, the opposition announced it would boycott them. Held in October, as a result of the opposition&#x27;s boycott the government party won more than two-thirds of the seats in the National Assembly. In December 2002, Eyadéma&#x27;s government used this rubber-stamp parliament to amend Togo&#x27;s constitution, allowing President Eyadéma to run for an “unlimited” number of terms. A further amendment stated that candidates must reside in the country for at least 12 months before an election, a provision that barred the participation in the upcoming presidential election of popular Union des Forces du Progrès (UFC) candidate, Gilchrist Olympio, who had been in exile since 1992. The presidential election was held 1 June. President Eyadéma was re-elected with 57% of the votes, amid allegations of widespread vote rigging.

== Death of Eyadéma and Gnassingbé&#x27;s rise ==

President Eyadéma died on 5 February 2005 while on board an airplane en route to France for treatment for a heart attack. Papa Gnassingbé is said to have killed more than fifteen thousand people during his dictatorship. His son Faure Gnassingbé, the country&#x27;s former minister of public works, mines, and telecommunications, was named president by Togo&#x27;s military following the announcement of his father&#x27;s death. Under international pressure from the African Union and the United Nations however, who both denounced the transfer of power from father to son as a coup, Gnassingbé was forced to step down on 25 February 2005, shortly after accepting the nomination to run for elections in April. Deputy Speaker Bonfoh Abbass was appointed interim president until the inauguration of the 24 April election winner. As to official results, the winner of the election was Gnassingbé who garnered 60% of the vote. Opposition leader Emmanuel Bob-Akitani however disputed the election and declared himself to be the winner with 70% of the vote. After the announcement of the results, tensions flared up and to date, 100 people have been killed. On 3 May 2005, Gnassingbé was sworn in and vowed to concentrate on &quot;the promotion of development, the common good, peace and national unity&quot;.

== Faure Gnassingbé in power (2005–present) == 

In August 2006 President Gnassingbe and members of the opposition signed the Global Political Agreement (GPA), bringing an end to the political crisis triggered by Gnassingbé Eyadéma&#x27;s death in February 2005 and the flawed and violent electoral process that followed. The GPA provided for a transitional unity government whose primary purpose would be to prepare for benchmark legislative elections, originally scheduled for June 24, 2007. CAR opposition party leader and human rights lawyer Yawovi Agboyibo was appointed Prime Minister of the transitional government in September 2006. Leopold Gnininvi, president of the CDPA party, was appointed minister of state for mines and energy. The third opposition party, UFC, headed by Gilchrist Olympio, declined to join the government, but agreed to participate in the national electoral commission and the National Dialogue follow-up committee, chaired by Burkina Faso President Blaise Compaore.

Parliamentary elections took place on October 14, 2007. Olympio, who returned from exile to campaign, took part for the first time in 17 years. The ruling party, Rally of the Togolese People (RPT), won a majority of the parliamentary seats in the election. International observers declared the poll &quot;largely&quot; free and fair. Despite these assurances, the secretary-general of the opposition party Union of Forces for Change(UFC) initially stated that his party would not accept the election results.
Mr Olympio stated that the election results did not properly represent the voters&#x27; will, pointing out that the UFC received nearly as many votes as the RPT, but that due to the way the electoral system was designed the UFC won far fewer seats.

In April 2015, President Faure Gnassingbe was re-elected for a third term. In late 2017, tens of thousands of demonstrators gathered in a series of mass protests to demand the immediate resignation of President Faure Gnassingbe. In February 2020, Faure Gnassingbé was again re-elected for his fourth presidential term. The opposition had a lot of accusations of fraud and irregularities. The Gnassingbé family has ruled Togo since 1967, meaning it is Africa’s longest lasting dynasty.

In June 2022, Togo joined the Commonwealth of Nations as its 56th member.

==See also==
* History of Africa
* History of West Africa
* List of heads of government of Togo
* List of heads of state of Togo
* Politics of Togo
* Lomé history and timeline

==References==
==Bibliography==
* Most of the information here is derived from the U.S. Department of State website on Togo.

==Further reading==
* Chafer, Tony. &quot;The End of Empire in French West Africa: France&#x27;s Successful Decolonization&quot;. Berg (2002). 
* 
* 

==External links==
* Background Note: Togo</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q707167" start="4" end="19" title="History of Togo" label="history of Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642" start="120" end="127" title="pottery" label="pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="140" end="143" title="tin" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q732317" start="210" end="213" title="Ewe people" label="Ewé"/>
<link wikidata="Q33450" start="219" end="223" title="Gen language" label="Mina"/>
<link wikidata="Q33291" start="229" end="232" title="Fon language" label="Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q12981973" start="457" end="468" title="History of slavery" label="slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360692" start="536" end="547" title="Slave Coast of West Africa" label="Slave Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="591" end="603" title="protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q329618" start="643" end="656" title="German colonial empire" label="German colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q161062" start="660" end="668" title="Togoland" label="Togoland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3792" start="701" end="705" title="Lomé" label="Lomé"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="759" end="774" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="800" end="807" title="United Kingdom" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="812" end="818" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="856" end="873" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="962" end="974" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q985073" start="998" end="1018" title="United Nations Trust Territories" label="UN Trust Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q797527" start="1037" end="1053" title="British Togoland" label="British Togoland"/>
<link wikidata="Q503623" start="1072" end="1082" title="Gold Coast (British colony)" label="Gold Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="1124" end="1129" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q797214" start="1140" end="1155" title="French Togoland" label="French Togoland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969578" start="1244" end="1269" title="National Assembly of Togo" label="National Assembly of Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q312667" start="1342" end="1358" title="Sylvanus Olympio" label="Sylvanus Olympio"/>
<link wikidata="Q561303" start="1528" end="1545" title="Nicolas Grunitzky" label="Nicolas Grunitzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q155385" start="1568" end="1586" title="Gnassingbé Eyadéma" label="Gnassingbé Eyadéma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4414" start="1808" end="1824" title="Faure Gnassingbé" label="Faure Gnassingbé"/>
<link wikidata="Q48812304" start="2050" end="2074" title="Anti-government protests in Togo, 2017" label="anti-government protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q945" start="2167" end="2171" title="Togo" label="Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q732317" start="2388" end="2391" title="Ewe people" label="Ewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="2397" end="2402" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2412" end="2416" title="Mina people" label="Mina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2425" end="2429" title="Guin people" label="Guin"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="2435" end="2440" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q722071" start="2762" end="2769" title="Ashanti Empire" label="Ashanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="2775" end="2780" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q468814" start="2789" end="2796" title="Dahomey" label="Dahomey"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="2802" end="2807" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="2820" end="2826" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q72300" start="2847" end="2863" title="João de Santarém" label="João de Santarém"/>
<link wikidata="Q71938" start="2868" end="2880" title="Pêro Escobar" label="Pêro Escobar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570124" start="2886" end="2906" title="Portuguese discoveries" label="Portuguese explorers"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="2961" end="2971" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q968662" start="3009" end="3015" title="Elmina" label="Elmina"/>
<link wikidata="Q850031" start="3031" end="3037" title="Ouidah" label="Ouidah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691663" start="3135" end="3147" title="Agbodrafo" label="Porto Seguro"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="3377" end="3390" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q161062" start="3423" end="3431" title="Togoland" label="Togoland"/>
<link wikidata="Q945" start="3462" end="3466" title="Togo" label="Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q712832" start="3495" end="3507" title="Volta Region" label="Volta Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q179848" start="3573" end="3592" title="Scramble for Africa" label="Scramble for Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q60549" start="3600" end="3616" title="Gustav Nachtigal" label="Gustav Nachtigal"/>
<link wikidata="Q668294" start="3716" end="3723" title="Kamerun" label="Kamerun"/>
<link wikidata="Q107366006" start="3782" end="3791" title="Togo-Bè Kingdom" label="Mlapa III"/>
<link wikidata="Q3792" start="3890" end="3894" title="Lomé" label="Lomé"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442739" start="3896" end="3900" title="Sebe" label="Sebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018574" start="3905" end="3910" title="Aného" label="Aného"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="3958" end="3963" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360692" start="4080" end="4091" title="Slave Coast of West Africa" label="Slave Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="4407" end="4422" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q512700" start="4546" end="4563" title="Togoland campaign" label="Togoland campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q797527" start="4738" end="4754" title="British Togoland" label="British Togoland"/>
<link wikidata="Q797214" start="4759" end="4774" title="French Togoland" label="French Togoland"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="5049" end="5066" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="5183" end="5197" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q104121794" start="5226" end="5232" title="Czechoslovak Togo" label="colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="5416" end="5418" title="United Nations" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q503623" start="5571" end="5589" title="British Gold Coast" label="British Gold Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q22115584" start="5727" end="5760" title="French Togoland Representative Assembly election, 1946" label="Representative Assembly elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985355" start="5798" end="5825" title="Party of Togolese Unity" label="Committee of Togolese Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2800838" start="5840" end="5866" title="Togolese Party of Progress" label="Togolese Party of Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q22115585" start="6010" end="6048" title="French Togoland Representative Assembly election, 1951" label="1951 Representative Assembly elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q22115586" start="6057" end="6092" title="French Togoland Territorial Assembly election, 1952" label="1952 Territorial Assembly elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q22115587" start="6371" end="6408" title="French Togoland Territorial Assembly election, 1955" label="elections to the Territorial Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4251987" start="6659" end="6674" title="French Togoland autonomy referendum, 1956" label="1956 referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q561303" start="6698" end="6715" title="Nicolas Grunitzky" label="Nicolas Grunitzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3910171" start="6855" end="6860" title="Kozah Prefecture" label="Kozah"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7091" end="7103" title="Bouyo Moukpé" label="Bouyo Moukpé"/>
<link wikidata="Q117662822" start="7123" end="7141" title="Pya-Hodo Massacre" label="fired on the crowd"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501939" start="7248" end="7284" title="French Togoland parliamentary election, 1958" label="UN-supervised parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q319891" start="7340" end="7358" title="universal suffrage" label="universal suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q312667" start="7428" end="7444" title="Sylvanus Olympio" label="Sylvanus Olympio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813208" start="8271" end="8284" title="Togolese constitutional referendum, 1961" label="by referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813213" start="8519" end="8538" title="Togolese general election, 1961" label="elections that year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6318995" start="8804" end="8811" title="Juvento" label="Juvento"/>
<link wikidata="Q22115575" start="8817" end="8856" title="Democratic Union of the Togolese People" label="Democratic Union of the Togolese People"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985355" start="8931" end="8954" title="Party of Togolese Unity" label="Party of Togolese Unity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9282" end="9295" title="Ablode Sodjas" label="Ablode Sodjas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571240" start="9451" end="9467" title="1963 Togolese coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813209" start="9748" end="9761" title="Togolese constitutional referendum, 1963" label="by referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813214" start="9823" end="9839" title="Togolese general election, 1963" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2753194" start="9952" end="9967" title="Antoine Meatchi" label="Antoine Meatchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q122963453" start="9971" end="9985" title="Vice President of Togo" label="vice president"/>
<link wikidata="Q16639048" start="10397" end="10401" title="1967 Togolese coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q155385" start="10418" end="10433" title="Étienne Eyadéma" label="Étienne Eyadéma"/>
<link wikidata="Q540954" start="10470" end="10482" title="Kléber Dadjo" label="Kléber Dadjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514253" start="10842" end="10870" title="Rally of the Togolese People" label="Rally of the Togolese People"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813226" start="10973" end="10983" title="Togolese presidential referendum, 1972" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707420" start="12869" end="12890" title="Joseph Kokou Koffigoh" label="Joseph Kokou Koffigoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084503" start="13699" end="13716" title="Gilchrist Olympio" label="Gilchrist Olympio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15925" end="15946" title="Ouagadougou agreement" label="Ouagadougou agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q191703" start="16319" end="16348" title="Organization of African Unity" label="Organization of African Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q961159" start="16367" end="16377" title="Edem Kodjo" label="Edem Kodjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q747770" start="16389" end="16404" title="Yawovi Agboyibo" label="Yawovi Agboyibo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4090436" start="19197" end="19219" title="election boycott" label="boycotted the election"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="19739" end="19753" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q134102" start="19759" end="19774" title="La Francophonie" label="La Francophonie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20032" end="20056" title="Lomé Framework Agreement" label="Lomé Framework Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119039" start="22027" end="22054" title="Union des Forces du Progrès" label="Union des Forces du Progrès"/>
<link wikidata="Q4414" start="22549" end="22565" title="Faure Gnassingbé" label="Faure Gnassingbé"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="22787" end="22800" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="22809" end="22823" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="22898" end="22902" title="Coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q305669" start="23045" end="23058" title="Bonfoh Abbass" label="Bonfoh Abbass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586640" start="23189" end="23197" title="Togolese presidential election, 2005" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q461208" start="23261" end="23281" title="Emmanuel Bob-Akitani" label="Emmanuel Bob-Akitani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3587257" start="24624" end="24647" title="Togolese parliamentary election, 2007" label="Parliamentary elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514253" start="24786" end="24814" title="Rally of the Togolese People" label="Rally of the Togolese People"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151805" start="25030" end="25056" title="Union of Forces for Change" label="Union of Forces for Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="25899" end="25922" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q149813" start="25959" end="25976" title="History of Africa" label="History of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5867197" start="25979" end="26001" title="History of West Africa" label="History of West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187629" start="26004" end="26039" title="List of heads of government of Togo" label="List of heads of government of Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q866730" start="26042" end="26072" title="List of heads of state of Togo" label="List of heads of state of Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153838" start="26075" end="26091" title="Politics of Togo" label="Politics of Togo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26099" end="26106" title="Lomé#History" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q18394448" start="26111" end="26119" title="Timeline of Lomé" label="timeline"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30140" wikidata="Q2310127" url="?curid=30140" title="Geography of Togo">
<text>Togo is a small Sub-Saharan state, comprising a long strip of land in West Africa. Togo&#x27;s geographic coordinates are a latitude of 8° north and a longitude of 1°10′ east. It is bordered by three countries: Benin to the east, with of border; Burkina Faso to the north, with of border; and Ghana, with of border. To the south Togo has of coastline along the Bight of Benin of the Gulf of Guinea in the North Atlantic Ocean. Togo stretches north from the Gulf and is only wide at the broadest point. In total, Togo has an area of , of which is land and is water.

Togo is commonly divided into six geographic regions. In the south are low-lying sandy beaches. The coastal region is narrow and followed by tidal flats and shallow lagoons. There are also over 200 lakes, the largest of which is Lake Togo.
==Area statistics==
; Area:
:* Total: 56,785 km²
:**&quot;country rank in the world:&quot; 123rd
:* Land: 54,390 km²
:* Water: 2,400 km²

; Area comparative
:* Australia comparative: approximately the size of Tasmania
:* Canada comparative: approximately equal in size to Nova Scotia
:* United Kingdom comparative: approximately four times the size of Northern Ireland
:* United States comparative: approximately smaller than West Virginia
:* EU comparative: approximately equal in size to Croatia

== Land use ==
* Natural resources: phosphates, limestone, marble, arable land
* Land use:
** arable land: 44.2%
** permanent crops: 3.7%
** other: 52.1% (2011)
* Irrigated land: 73 km2 (2003)
* Total renewable water resources: 14.7 km2
* Natural hazards: hot, dry Harmattan wind can reduce visibility in north during winter; periodic droughts.

== Physical geography ==
The country consists primarily of two savanna plains regions separated by a southwest–northeast range of hills (the &quot;Chaîne du Togo&quot;). In the north lies the Ouatchi Plateau. This plateau is about wide and located at an altitude of above sea level. &quot;Terre de Barre&quot; is another name for this region, in use because of the reddish leached soil which is rich in iron. This southern area of Togo has been categorised by the World Wildlife Fund as part of the Guinean forest-savanna mosaic ecoregion.

Northeast of the Ouatchi Plateau lies a tableland. At its highest this region is about above sea level. The area is drained by the Mono River and its tributaries, including the Ogou River.

To the west and the southwest of the tableland lie the Togo Mountains. These mountains run across the central region of Togo, ranging from the southwest to the northeast. The mountain range reaches into Benin where it is known as the Atakora Mountains and Ghana where it is known as the Akwapim Hills. The highest mountain in Togo is Mount Agou with a height of .

North of the Togo Mountains lies a sandstone plateau through which the Oti River flows. The vegetation is characterized by savanna. The River Oti which drains the plateau is one of the main tributaries of the River Volta.

In the far northwest of Togo lies a higher region which is characterized by its rocks: granite and gneiss. The cliffs of Dapaong (Dapango) are located in this part of Togo.

== Climate ==
Almost all of Togo has a tropical savanna climate (Köppen &quot;Aw&quot;). Average temperatures ranging from on the coast to about in the northernmost regions. There is a dry season between November and March dominated by the desert winds of the Harmattan, which bring less humid and less unpleasant weather. To the south there are two seasons of rain, the first between April and July and the second weaker rainy season between September and November. In this region rainfall is much lower than in the rest of southern West Africa due to divergent coast-parallel winds between mid-July and mid-September creating a short, foggy secondary dry season.



== Environment ==
Current issues:
* deforestation attributable to slash-and-burn agriculture and the use of wood for fuel
* health hazards and impact on the fishing industry from water pollution
* air pollution increasing in urban areas

Togo is party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution (MARPOL 73/78), Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling

== Extreme points ==

This is a list of the extreme points of Togo, the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location.
* Northernmost point – the tripoint with Ghana and Burkina Faso, Savanes Region
* Easternmost point – unnamed location on the border with Benin in the Mono River immediately west of the Beninese town of Grand-Popo, Maritime Region
* Southernmost point – the point at which the border with Ghana enters the Atlantic Ocean, Maritime Region
* Westernmost point - a point about 2.5 km south-southwest of the tripoint with Ghana and Burkina Faso, Savanes Region

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q945" start="0" end="4" title="Togo" label="Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="16" end="27" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="70" end="81" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q22664" start="95" end="117" title="Geographic coordinate system" label="geographic coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="124" end="132" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q36477" start="151" end="160" title="longitude" label="longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="211" end="216" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q965" start="246" end="258" title="Burkina Faso" label="Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="293" end="298" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q47530" start="361" end="375" title="Bight of Benin" label="Bight of Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41430" start="383" end="397" title="Gulf of Guinea" label="Gulf of Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="405" end="425" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="North Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q945" start="566" end="570" title="Togo" label="Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q31796" start="707" end="717" title="tidal flat" label="tidal flat"/>
<link wikidata="Q187223" start="731" end="737" title="lagoon" label="lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q943221" start="795" end="804" title="Lake Togo" label="Lake Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="1015" end="1023" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="1078" end="1089" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="1158" end="1174" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="1232" end="1245" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1249" end="1251" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="1296" end="1303" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="1341" end="1351" title="phosphates" label="phosphates"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="1353" end="1362" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="1364" end="1370" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q214152" start="1570" end="1579" title="Harmattan" label="Harmattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="1714" end="1721" title="savanna" label="savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7110221" start="1843" end="1858" title="Ouatchi Plateau" label="Ouatchi Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q191552" start="2054" end="2058" title="Iron ore" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q117892" start="2115" end="2134" title="World Wildlife Fund" label="World Wildlife Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672617" start="2150" end="2179" title="Guinean forest-savanna mosaic" label="Guinean forest-savanna mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q295469" start="2180" end="2189" title="ecoregion" label="ecoregion"/>
<link wikidata="Q268624" start="2323" end="2333" title="Mono River" label="Mono River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2369" end="2379" title="Ogou River" label="Ogou River"/>
<link wikidata="Q581452" start="2437" end="2451" title="Togo Mountains" label="Togo Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="2585" end="2590" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q581452" start="2616" end="2633" title="Atakora Mountains" label="Atakora Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="2638" end="2643" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q581452" start="2669" end="2682" title="Akwapim Hills" label="Akwapim Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753509" start="2716" end="2726" title="Mount Agou" label="Mount Agou"/>
<link wikidata="Q252472" start="2818" end="2827" title="Oti River" label="Oti River"/>
<link wikidata="Q192415" start="2956" end="2967" title="River Volta" label="River Volta"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="3057" end="3064" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q166409" start="3069" end="3075" title="gneiss" label="gneiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q970904" start="3091" end="3098" title="Dapaong" label="Dapaong"/>
<link wikidata="Q113562" start="3183" end="3207" title="tropical savanna climate" label="tropical savanna climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="3209" end="3215" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q214152" start="3404" end="3413" title="Harmattan" label="Harmattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="3848" end="3861" title="deforestation" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="4068" end="4080" title="Biodiversity" label="Biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q208645" start="4082" end="4096" title="United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change" label="Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q47359" start="4113" end="4127" title="Kyoto Protocol" label="Kyoto Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q183481" start="4129" end="4144" title="Desertification" label="Desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q11394" start="4146" end="4164" title="Endangered Species" label="Endangered Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088099" start="4166" end="4180" title="Law of the Sea" label="Law of the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q219438" start="4182" end="4204" title="Ozone Layer Protection" label="Ozone Layer Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q651219" start="4222" end="4234" title="MARPOL 73/78" label="MARPOL 73/78"/>
<link wikidata="Q26837533" start="4237" end="4255" title="Tropical Timber 83" label="Tropical Timber 83"/>
<link wikidata="Q26837533" start="4257" end="4275" title="Tropical Timber 94" label="Tropical Timber 94"/>
<link wikidata="Q170321" start="4277" end="4285" title="Wetlands" label="Wetlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q42767" start="4287" end="4294" title="Whaling" label="Whaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q945" start="4358" end="4362" title="Togo" label="Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q316655" start="4471" end="4479" title="tripoint" label="tripoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="4485" end="4490" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q965" start="4495" end="4507" title="Burkina Faso" label="Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q279945" start="4509" end="4523" title="Savanes Region, Togo" label="Savanes Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="4582" end="4587" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q268624" start="4595" end="4605" title="Mono River" label="Mono River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542478" start="4647" end="4657" title="Grand-Popo" label="Grand-Popo"/>
<link wikidata="Q316291" start="4659" end="4674" title="Maritime Region" label="Maritime Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="4750" end="4764" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30141" wikidata="Q2983227" url="?curid=30141" title="Demographics of Togo">
<text>The demographics of [[Togo]] include ethnicity, population density, age, education level, health, economic status and religious affiliations.

Togo’s population is estimated to have grown to four times its size between 1960 and 2010. With nearly 60% of its populace under the age of 25 and a high annual growth rate attributed largely to high fertility, Togo’s population is likely to continue to expand for the foreseeable future. Reducing fertility, boosting job creation, and improving education will be essential to reducing the country’s high poverty rate. In 2008, Togo eliminated primary school enrollment fees, leading to higher enrollment but increased pressure on limited classroom space, teachers, and materials. Togo has a good chance of achieving universal primary education, but educational quality, the underrepresentation of girls, and the low rate of enrollment in secondary and tertiary schools remain concerns.

==Population==
Population distribution is very uneven due to soil and terrain variations. The population is generally concentrated in the south and along the major north-south highway connecting the coast to the Sahel. Age distribution is also uneven; nearly one-half of Togolese are less than fifteen years old.

French, the official language, is used in administration and documentation. The public primary schools combine French with Ewe or Kabye as languages of instruction, depending on the region. English is spoken in neighboring Ghana and is taught in Togolese secondary schools. As a result, many Togolese, especially in the south and along the Ghana border, speak some English.

According to the total population was in , compared to only 1 395 000 in 1950. The proportion of children below the age of 15 in 2010 was 39.6%, 56.9% was between 15 and 65 years of age, while 3.4% was 65 years or older


Population by Sex and Age Group (Census 06.XI.2010):
Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (Estimates 01.VII.2020) (Post-censal estimates.):


==Vital statistics==

Registration of vital events is in Togo not complete. The Population Departement of the United Nations prepared the following estimates. Population estimates account for under numeration in population census.

Source: UN DESA, World Population Prospects, 2022

===Demographic and Health Surveys===
Total Fertility Rate (TFR) (Wanted Fertility Rate) and Crude Birth Rate (CBR):

Fertility data as of 2013-2014 and 2017 (DHS Program):

===Life expectancy at birth===
==Language and ethnicity==
Togo&#x27;s population of million people ( est.) is composed of about 21 ethnic groups, the two biggest being the Tèm in the Centre (Bafilo, Sokodé, Sotouboua (about 22% of the population); they also live in Ghana and Bénin in big numbers. Tèms have a lot ties with 2/3 of the country as they live in the center of Togo. They exercise diversely almost all occupations from farmers, motors mechanic to business people] and Ewe in the South (about 21% of the population)).
Dagomba is the first most common language in the north, where other Gur languages such as Mossi and Gourma are also found.

The ethnic groups of the coastal region, particularly Ewe and Gen language (or Mina) (the two major African languages in the south), constitute the bulk of the civil servants, professionals, and merchants, due in part to the former colonial administrations which provided greater infrastructure development in the south. Most of the southern peoples use these two closely related languages, which are spoken in commercial sectors throughout Togo.

The Kabye live on marginal land and traditionally have emigrated south from their home area in the Kara region to seek employment. Their historical means of social advancement has been through the military and law enforcement forces, and they continue to dominate these services.

Other groups include the Akposso on the Central Plateau, the Ana people who are related to the Yoruba, and live in the center of the country, in the strip between Atakpame and Tchamba, the Bassar in the Centre-West, the Tchamba in the Centre-East and the Konkombas in the upper region of Bassar, the Lambas in the Kandé region, the Hausa, the Tamberma, the Losso and the Ouachi.

==Religion==
Christian 42.3%, folk religion 36.9%, Muslim 14%, Hindu &lt;1%, Buddhist &lt;1%, Jewish &lt;1%, other &lt;1%, none 6.2% (2020 est.)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2983227" start="0" end="28" title="Demographics of Togo" label="The demographics of [[Togo]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="37" end="46" title="Ethnic group" label="ethnicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="48" end="66" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q10359139" start="118" end="140" title="Religion in Togo" label="religious affiliations"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1356" end="1362" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="1435" end="1442" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="1468" end="1473" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q945" start="2046" end="2050" title="Togo" label="Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="2099" end="2113" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671637" start="2229" end="2236" title="UN DESA" label="UN DESA"/>
<link wikidata="Q945" start="2503" end="2507" title="Togo" label="Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q739827" start="2617" end="2620" title="Tem people" label="Tèm"/>
<link wikidata="Q732317" start="2925" end="2928" title="Ewe (people)" label="Ewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q32238" start="2974" end="2981" title="Dagomba language" label="Dagomba"/>
<link wikidata="Q33536" start="3042" end="3055" title="Gur languages" label="Gur languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q36096" start="3064" end="3069" title="Mossi language" label="Mossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294392" start="3074" end="3080" title="Gourma" label="Gourma"/>
<link wikidata="Q33450" start="3160" end="3172" title="Gen language" label="Gen language"/>
<link wikidata="Q420651" start="3852" end="3859" title="Akposso" label="Akposso"/>
<link wikidata="Q4750528" start="3888" end="3898" title="Ana people" label="Ana people"/>
<link wikidata="Q190168" start="3922" end="3928" title="Yoruba people" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q126124" start="3990" end="3998" title="Atakpame" label="Atakpame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711981" start="4003" end="4010" title="Tchamba" label="Tchamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q810474" start="4016" end="4022" title="Bassar" label="Bassar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711981" start="4047" end="4054" title="Tchamba" label="Tchamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678775" start="4082" end="4091" title="Konkomba people" label="Konkombas"/>
<link wikidata="Q810474" start="4115" end="4121" title="Bassar" label="Bassar"/>
<link wikidata="Q641349" start="4127" end="4133" title="Lamba people" label="Lambas"/>
<link wikidata="Q168824" start="4141" end="4146" title="Kandé" label="Kandé"/>
<link wikidata="Q33938" start="4159" end="4164" title="Hausa people" label="Hausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q35186" start="4170" end="4178" title="Tamberma" label="Tamberma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972445" start="4184" end="4189" title="Losso" label="Losso"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30142" wikidata="Q1153838" url="?curid=30142" title="Politics of Togo">
<text>Politics of Togo takes place in a framework of a parliamentary republic, whereby the president is the head of state and the prime minister is head of government, who is appointed by the president with the parliament&#x27;s approval. Executive power is exercised by the prime minister while the role of the president is largely ceremornial. Legislative power is vested in both the government and parliament. After independence, the party system was dominated first by the authoritarian Rally for the Togolese People, and later by its successor party, Union for the Republic.

==Eyadéma presidency==

In the early 1990s, the international community began putting pressure on authoritarian president Gnassingbé Eyadéma to democratize, a notion he strongly resisted. Pro-democracy activists - mainly southern Mina and Ewé - were met with armed troops, killing scores of protesters in several clashes. The people of France and Togo were furious, and under their backlash Eyadéma gave in. He was summarily stripped of all powers and made president in name only. An interim prime minister was elected to take over command, but not four months later his residence was shelled with heavy artillery by Eyadéma&#x27;s army.

Terror strikes against the independent press and political assassination attempts became commonplace, while the promised &#x27;transition&#x27; to democracy came to a standstill. The opposition continued to call general strikes, leading to further violence by the army and the exodus of hundreds of thousands of southerners to Ghana and Benin. Using intimidation tactics and clever political machinations that disqualified one opposition party and caused another to refuse to participate, Eyadéma won the 1993 presidential elections with more than 96% of the vote. In the years following, opposition parties have lost most of their steam and Eyadéma&#x27;s control has become almost as firm as before the crisis began.

In August 1996, Prime Minister Edem Kodjo resigned, and the planning minister, Kwassi Klutse, was appointed prime minister. Eyadéma won another five-year term in June 1998 with 52% of the vote, nearly being defeated by Gilchrist Olympio, son of Sylvanus Olympio. Later investigations revealed widespread human rights abuses.

In 2002, in what critics called a &#x27;constitutional coup&#x27;, the national assembly voted unanimously to change the constitution and allow Eyadéma to &#x27;sacrifice himself again&#x27; and run for a third term during the 2003 presidential elections. The constitutional change eliminated presidential term limits. Meanwhile, Gilchrist Olympio&#x27;s attempts to beat the man who overthrew his father were scuppered yet again when he was banned from running on a tax-law technicality.

Despite allegations of electoral fraud, Eyadéma won 57% of the votes in the 2003 elections, which international observers from the African Union described as generally free and transparent. For many Togolese, there was little optimism for the future and a prevailing sense of déjà vu as Eyadéma extended his record as Africa&#x27;s longest-serving ruler.

==Gnassingbé presidency==
On 5 February 2005, Eyadéma died of a heart attack. Shortly afterwards, his son Faure Gnassingbé was named by Togo&#x27;s military as the country&#x27;s leader, raising numerous eyebrows. Army Chief of Staff General Zakari Nandja announced the succession, saying the speaker of parliament (who should have taken over under the constitution) was out of the country. African Union leaders described the naming of Faure Gnassingbé as a military coup. The constitution of Togo declared that in the case of the president&#x27;s death, the speaker of Parliament takes his place, and has 60 days to call new elections. However, on February 6, Parliament retroactively changed the Constitution, declaring that Faure would hold office for the rest of his father&#x27;s term, with elections deferred until 2008.

The African Union described the takeover as a military coup d&#x27;état. International pressure came also from the United Nations. Within Togo, opposition to the takeover culminated in riots in which four people died. In response, Gnassingbé agreed to hold elections in April 2005. On 25 February, Gnassingbé resigned as president, soon after accepting nomination to run for the office in April. Parliament designated Deputy Speaker Bonfoh Abbass as interim president until the inauguration of the election winner. On 3 May 2005, Gnassingbé was sworn in as the new president garnering 60% of the vote according to official results. Disquiet has continued however with the opposition declaring the voting rigged, claiming the military stole ballot boxes from various polling stations in the South, as well as other election irregularities, such as telecommunication shutdown. The European Union has suspended aid in support of the opposition claims, while the African Union and the United States have declared the vote &quot;reasonably fair&quot; and accepted the outcome. The Nigerian president and Chair of the AU, Olusẹgun Ọbasanjọ, sought to negotiate between the incumbent government and the opposition to establish a coalition government, but surprisingly rejected an AU Commission appointment of former Zambian president, Kenneth Kaunda, as special AU envoy to Togo. Later in June, President Gnassingbe named opposition leader Edem Kodjo as the prime Minister.

From April 2006 onwards, reconciliation talks between the government and the opposition were held, which were suspended after Eyadema&#x27;s death in 2005. In August the government and the opposition signed an accord providing for the participation of opposition parties in a transitional government.

In 2017, protests erupted against Faure Gnassingbé&#x27;s continued rule. As the only African country without official presidential term limits, the opposition demands two-term limits for presidents to be applied retroactively in order to prevent Gnassingbe from standing in the 2020 and 2025 elections. Clashes between protesters and police have led to the death of 16 people since the start of the protests in September. International rights groups have called on the government to &quot;end the bloody repression&quot; and engage in dialogue with the opposition. Gnassingbé promised talks with the opposition, but has yet to act on that promise. However, Ghana&#x27;s President Nana Akufo-Addo and Alpha Conde of Guinea are involved as mediators to facilitate the organization of a political dialogue to be held &quot;in a few weeks&quot;.

In February 2020, Faure Gnassingbé was re-elected to a fourth presidential term. The opposition had a lot of accusations of fraud and irregularities. , the Gnassingbé family had ruled Togo since 1967, making it Africa&#x27;s longest lasting dynasty.

==Executive branch==

|President
|Faure Gnassingbé
|Union for the Republic
|4 May 2005
|Prime Minister
|Victoire Tomegah Dogbé
|Union for the Republic
|28 September 2020
The president is indirectly elected by parliament for a four-year term, renewable once. The prime minister is appointed by the president and they can serve a term of six years, renewable indefinitely. The Council of Ministers is appointed by the president on the advice of the prime minister.

==Legislative branch==
The National Assembly (&quot;Assemblée Nationale&quot;) has 91 members, elected for a five-year term in single-seat constituencies. 
Togo is a one party dominant state with the Union for the Republic in power. Opposition parties are allowed, but are widely considered to have no real chance of gaining power.

===Political parties and elections===
==Judicial branch==
The Togolese judiciary is modeled on the French system. There is a Court of Appeal () and a Supreme Court ().

==Administrative divisions==
Togo is divided in five regions: Kara, Plateaux, Savanes, Centrale, Maritime. For administrative purposes, the regions are subdivided into 35 prefectures, each having an appointed prefect.

==International organization participation==
ACCT, ACP, AfDB, Commonwealth of NationsECA, ECOWAS), Entente, FAO, FZ, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, ITUC, MINURSO, MIPONUH, NAM, OAU, OIC, OPCW, UEMOA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WADB, WAEMU, WCO, EFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO.

== Notes and references ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1153838" start="0" end="16" title="Politics of Togo" label="Politics of Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="49" end="62" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="63" end="71" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q866730" start="85" end="94" title="List of presidents of Togo" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="102" end="115" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187629" start="124" end="138" title="List of prime ministers of Togo" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="142" end="160" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="233" end="248" title="Executive power" label="Executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="340" end="357" title="Legislative power" label="Legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="380" end="390" title="government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514253" start="485" end="514" title="Rally for the Togolese People" label="Rally for the Togolese People"/>
<link wikidata="Q22080618" start="550" end="572" title="Union for the Republic (Togo)" label="Union for the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q155385" start="697" end="715" title="Gnassingbé Eyadéma" label="Gnassingbé Eyadéma"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="911" end="917" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q623179" start="1214" end="1220" title="State terrorism" label="Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q961159" start="1965" end="1975" title="Edem Kodjo" label="Edem Kodjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794933" start="2013" end="2026" title="Kwassi Klutse" label="Kwassi Klutse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084503" start="2153" end="2170" title="Gilchrist Olympio" label="Gilchrist Olympio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="2881" end="2894" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4414" start="3212" end="3228" title="Faure Gnassingbé" label="Faure Gnassingbé"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="3990" end="4006" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="4050" end="4064" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586640" start="4192" end="4201" title="Togo presidential election, 2005" label="elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q305669" start="4368" end="4381" title="Bonfoh Abbass" label="Bonfoh Abbass"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155102" start="5011" end="5019" title="Nigerian" label="Nigerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q202006" start="5051" end="5068" title="Olusẹgun Ọbasanjọ" label="Olusẹgun Ọbasanjọ"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="5244" end="5250" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q105480" start="5263" end="5277" title="Kenneth Kaunda" label="Kenneth Kaunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q961159" start="5368" end="5378" title="Edem Kodjo" label="Edem Kodjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="6363" end="6368" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q718601" start="6386" end="6401" title="Nana Akufo-Addo" label="Nana Akufo-Addo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4413" start="6406" end="6417" title="Alpha Condé" label="Alpha Conde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006" start="6421" end="6427" title="Guinea" label="Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q866730" start="6823" end="6832" title="List of presidents of Togo" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q4414" start="6834" end="6850" title="Faure Gnassingbé" label="Faure Gnassingbé"/>
<link wikidata="Q22080618" start="6852" end="6874" title="Union for the Republic (Togo)" label="Union for the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187629" start="6888" end="6902" title="List of prime ministers of Togo" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q16682496" start="6904" end="6926" title="Victoire Tomegah Dogbé" label="Victoire Tomegah Dogbé"/>
<link wikidata="Q22080618" start="6928" end="6950" title="Union for the Republic (Togo)" label="Union for the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176457" start="7175" end="7195" title="Togo Council of Ministers" label="Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969578" start="7291" end="7308" title="National Assembly of Togo" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q192611" start="7403" end="7417" title="constituency" label="constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439061" start="7430" end="7454" title="one party dominant state" label="one party dominant state"/>
<link wikidata="Q22080618" start="7464" end="7486" title="Union for the Republic (Togo)" label="Union for the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192852" start="7497" end="7507" title="Opposition (politics)" label="Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="7508" end="7515" title="political parties" label="parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q671680" start="7696" end="7709" title="Judiciary of France" label="French system"/>
<link wikidata="Q139228" start="7814" end="7826" title="Regions of Togo" label="five regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q316216" start="7828" end="7832" title="Kara Region" label="Kara"/>
<link wikidata="Q316306" start="7834" end="7842" title="Plateaux Region, Togo" label="Plateaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q279945" start="7844" end="7851" title="Savanes Region, Togo" label="Savanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q316220" start="7853" end="7861" title="Centrale Region, Togo" label="Centrale"/>
<link wikidata="Q316291" start="7863" end="7871" title="Maritime (Togolese region)" label="Maritime"/>
<link wikidata="Q828485" start="7934" end="7948" title="Prefectures of Togo" label="35 prefectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826590" start="8030" end="8034" title="Agence de Coopération Culturelle et Technique" label="ACCT"/>
<link wikidata="Q294278" start="8036" end="8039" title="ACP (Lomé Convention)" label="ACP"/>
<link wikidata="Q340195" start="8041" end="8045" title="African Development Bank" label="AfDB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="8047" end="8070" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144508" start="8070" end="8073" title="United Nations Economic Commission for Africa" label="ECA"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="8075" end="8082" title="Economic Community of West African States" label="ECOWAS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q945574" start="8084" end="8091" title="Conseil de l&amp;#x27;Entente" label="Entente"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="8093" end="8096" title="FAO" label="FAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q191511" start="8098" end="8100" title="Franc zone" label="FZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q477328" start="8102" end="8106" title="Group of 77" label="G-77"/>
<link wikidata="Q191384" start="8108" end="8112" title="International Bank for Reconstruction and Development" label="IBRD"/>
<link wikidata="Q125761" start="8114" end="8118" title="International Civil Aviation Organization" label="ICAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q848633" start="8120" end="8123" title="International Chamber of Commerce" label="ICC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="8125" end="8129" title="International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement" label="ICRM"/>
<link wikidata="Q827525" start="8131" end="8134" title="International Development Association" label="IDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q689859" start="8136" end="8140" title="International Fund for Agricultural Development" label="IFAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q656801" start="8142" end="8145" title="International Finance Corporation" label="IFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="8147" end="8152" title="International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement" label="IFRCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="8154" end="8157" title="International Labour Organization" label="ILO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="8159" end="8162" title="International Monetary Fund" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q201054" start="8164" end="8167" title="International Maritime Organization" label="IMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q778126" start="8169" end="8177" title="Intelsat" label="Intelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8475" start="8179" end="8187" title="Interpol (organization)" label="Interpol"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="8189" end="8192" title="IOC" label="IOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="8194" end="8197" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="ITU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071706" start="8199" end="8203" title="International Trade Union Confederation" label="ITUC"/>
<link wikidata="Q695186" start="8205" end="8212" title="United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara" label="MINURSO"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8214" end="8221" title="MIPONUH" label="MIPONUH"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="8223" end="8226" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="NAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q191703" start="8228" end="8231" title="Organisation of African Unity" label="OAU"/>
<link wikidata="Q47543" start="8233" end="8236" title="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation" label="OIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q842490" start="8238" end="8242" title="OPCW" label="OPCW"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8244" end="8249" title="Union Economique et Monetaire de l&amp;#x27;Afrique de l&amp;#x27;Ouest" label="UEMOA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="8251" end="8253" title="United Nations" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q182000" start="8255" end="8261" title="United Nations Conference on Trade and Development" label="UNCTAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="8263" end="8269" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q386120" start="8271" end="8276" title="United Nations Industrial Development Organization" label="UNIDO"/>
<link wikidata="Q17495" start="8278" end="8281" title="Universal Postal Union" label="UPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883427" start="8283" end="8287" title="West African Development Bank" label="WADB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929699" start="8289" end="8294" title="WAEMU" label="WAEMU"/>
<link wikidata="Q605326" start="8296" end="8299" title="World Customs Organization" label="WCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q748999" start="8301" end="8305" title="World Federation of Trade Unions" label="EFTU"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="8307" end="8310" title="World Health Organization" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q177773" start="8312" end="8316" title="World Intellectual Property Organization" label="WIPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q170424" start="8318" end="8321" title="World Meteorological Organization" label="WMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q61923" start="8323" end="8327" title="World Tourism Organization" label="WToO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="8329" end="8333" title="World Trade Organization" label="WTrO"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30143" wikidata="Q2477620" url="?curid=30143" title="Economy of Togo">
<text>The economy of [[Togo]] has struggled greatly. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) ranks it as the tenth poorest country in the world, with development undercut by political instability, lowered commodity prices, and external debts. While industry and services play a role, the economy is dependent on subsistence agriculture, with industrialization and regional banking suffering major setbacks.

In January 2017, the IMF signed an Extended Credit Facility arrangement, consisting of a three-year $238 million loan package. Progress depends on follow through on privatization, increased transparency in government financial operations, progress toward legislative elections, and continued support from foreign donors.

==Agriculture==
The majority of the Togolese population depends on subsistence agriculture. Its agricultural products includes coffee, cocoa, cotton, yams, cassava (tapioca), corn, beans, rice, pearl millet, sorghum and livestock such as fish. Food and cash crop production employs the majority of the labor force and contributes about 42% to the gross domestic product (GDP). Coffee and cocoa are traditionally the major cash crops for export, but cotton cultivation increased rapidly in the 1990s, with 173,000 metric tons produced in 1999.

After a disastrous harvest in 2001 (113,000 metric tons), cash crops production rebounded to 168,000 metric tons in 2002. Despite insufficient rainfall in some areas, the Togolese Government has achieved its goal of self-sufficiency in food crops — maize, cassava, yams, sorghum, pearl millet, and groundnut. Small and medium-sized farms produce most of the food crop; the average farm size is one to three hectares.

Togo produced in 2018:

* 1 million tons of cassava;
* 886 thousand tons of maize;
* 858 thousand tons of yam;
* 277 thousand tons of sorghum;
* 207 thousand tons of beans;
* 156 thousand tons of palm oil;
* 143 thousand tons of vegetable;
* 145 thousand tons of rice;
* 127 thousand tons of cotton;
* 43 thousand tons of peanut;
* 41 thousand tons of cocoa;
* 26 thousand tons of millet;
* 26 thousand tons of banana;
* 21 thousand tons of coffee;

In addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products.

Choco Togo is the country&#x27;s first bean-to-bar chocolate manufacturer.

==Industry==

===Mining===

In the industrial sector, phosphates are Togo&#x27;s most important commodity, and the country has an estimated 60 million metric tons of phosphate reserves. From a high point of 2.7 million tons in 1997, production dropped to approximately 1.1 million tons in 2002. The fall in production is partly the result of the depletion of easily accessible deposits and the lack of funds for new investment. The formerly state-run company Société Nouvelle des Phosphates du Togo (New Phosphate Company of Togo) appears to have benefited from private management, which took over in 2001. Togo also has substantial limestone and marble deposits.

Encouraged by the commodity boom of the mid-1970s, which resulted in a fourfold increase in phosphate prices and sharply increased government revenues, Togo embarked on an overly ambitious program of large investments in infrastructure while pursuing industrialization and development of state enterprises in manufacturing, textiles, and beverages. However, following declines in world prices for commodities, its economy became burdened with fiscal imbalances, heavy borrowing, and unprofitable state enterprises.

=== Other ===
While Togo itself produces no crude oil, it is the namesake of an illegal market for stolen oil off the Niger Delta, called the Togo Triangle.

== IMF relationship ==
Togo turned to the IMF for assistance in 1979, while simultaneously implementing a stringent adjustment effort with the help of a series of IMF standby programs, World Bank loans, and Paris Club debt rescheduling. Under these programs, the Togolese Government introduced a series of austerity measures and major restructuring goals for the state enterprise and rural development sectors. These reforms were aimed at eliminating most state monopolies, simplifying taxes and customs duties, curtailing public employment, and privatizing major state enterprises. Togo made good progress under the international financial institutions&#x27; programs in the late 1980s, but movement on reforms ended with the onset of political instability in 1990. With a new, elected government in place, Togo negotiated new 3-year programs with the World Bank and IMF in 1994.

Togo returned to the Paris Club in 1995 and received Naples terms, the club&#x27;s most concessionary rates. With the economic downturn associated with Togo&#x27;s political problems, scheduled external debt service obligations for 1994 were greater than 100% of projected government revenues (excluding bilateral and multilateral assistance). By 2001, Togo was embarked on an IMF Staff Monitored Program designed to restore macroeconomic stability and financial discipline but without any new IMF resources pending new legislative elections. New IMF, World Bank and Africa Development Bank (ADB) lending must await the willingness of Togo&#x27;s traditional donors – the European Union, principally, but the US also – to resume aid flows. So far, Togo&#x27;s problematic legislative and presidential elections and the government&#x27;s continued unwillingness to transition from an Eyadéma-led autocracy to democracy have deterred these donors from providing Togo with more aid. As of the fall 2002, Togo was $15 million in arrears to the World Bank and owed $3 million to the ADB.

Togo is one of 16 members of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS). The ECOWAS development fund is based in Lomé. Togo also is a member of the West African Economic and Monetary Union (UEMOA), which groups seven West African countries using the CFA franc. The West African Development Bank (BOAD), which is associated with UEMOA, is based in Lomé. Togo long served as a regional banking center, but that position has been eroded by the political instability and economic downturn of the early 1990s. Historically, France has been Togo&#x27;s principal trading partner, although other European Union countries are important to Togo&#x27;s economy. Total United States trade with Togo amounts to about $16 million annually.

==Open Market==
Trade is extremely important to Togo&#x27;s economy; the combined value of exports and imports equals 105 percent of GDP. The average applied tariff rate is 11.4 percent. Non-tariff barriers impede some trade. Government openness to foreign investment is above average. Capital transactions are subject to some controls or government approval. The evolving banking system continues to expand but lacks liquidity.

==Statistics==
The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980–2024.
==See also==
* Economy of Africa
* Economy of Ghana
* List of Ghanaian companies
* List of banks in Togo
* List of companies based in Togo
* Togo
* United Nations Economic Commission for Africa

==References==

==External links==
* Togo latest trade data on ITC Trade Map
* West African Agricultural Market Observer/Observatoire du Marché Agricole (RESIMAO), a project of the West-African Market Information Network (WAMIS-NET), provides live market and commodity prices from fifty seven regional and local public agricultural markets across Benin, Burkina Faso, Ivory Coast, Guinea, Niger, Mali, Senegal, Togo, and Nigeria. Sixty commodities are tracked weekly. The project is run by the Benin Ministry of Agriculture, and a number of European, African, and United Nations agencies.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2477620" start="4" end="23" title="Economy of Togo" label="economy of [[Togo]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="51" end="78" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787508" start="304" end="327" title="subsistence agriculture" label="subsistence agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q932139" start="975" end="984" title="cash crop" label="cash crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="1069" end="1091" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q8486" start="1099" end="1105" title="Coffee" label="Coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q208008" start="1110" end="1115" title="Cocoa bean" label="cocoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="1171" end="1177" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="1235" end="1246" title="metric tons" label="metric tons"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1437" end="1456" title="Togolese Government" label="Togolese Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="1515" end="1520" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q83124" start="1522" end="1529" title="cassava" label="cassava"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047551" start="1531" end="1535" title="yam (vegetable)" label="yams"/>
<link wikidata="Q332062" start="1537" end="1544" title="sorghum" label="sorghum"/>
<link wikidata="Q50840653" start="1546" end="1558" title="pearl millet" label="pearl millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q37383" start="1564" end="1573" title="peanut" label="groundnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q35852" start="1673" end="1680" title="hectare" label="hectare"/>
<link wikidata="Q83124" start="1728" end="1735" title="cassava" label="cassava"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="1760" end="1765" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047551" start="1790" end="1793" title="Yam (vegetable)" label="yam"/>
<link wikidata="Q332062" start="1818" end="1825" title="sorghum" label="sorghum"/>
<link wikidata="Q379813" start="1850" end="1855" title="beans" label="beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q231458" start="1880" end="1888" title="palm oil" label="palm oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q11004" start="1913" end="1922" title="vegetable" label="vegetable"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="1947" end="1951" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="1976" end="1982" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q37383" start="2006" end="2012" title="peanut" label="peanut"/>
<link wikidata="Q208008" start="2036" end="2041" title="Cocoa bean" label="cocoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q259438" start="2065" end="2071" title="millet" label="millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="2095" end="2101" title="banana" label="banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8486" start="2125" end="2131" title="coffee" label="coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q128536970" start="2202" end="2212" title="Choco Togo" label="Choco Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607424" start="2241" end="2275" title="List of bean-to-bar chocolate manufacturers" label="bean-to-bar chocolate manufacturer"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="2332" end="2342" title="phosphates" label="phosphates"/>
<link wikidata="Q317088" start="2374" end="2383" title="commodity" label="commodity"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="2911" end="2920" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="2925" end="2931" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q121359" start="3164" end="3178" title="infrastructure" label="infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="3194" end="3211" title="industrialization" label="industrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="3252" end="3265" title="manufacturing" label="manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="3267" end="3275" title="textiles" label="textiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q40050" start="3281" end="3289" title="beverage" label="beverage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3439" end="3456" title="state enterprises" label="state enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q29412" start="3577" end="3588" title="Niger Delta" label="Niger Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="3802" end="3812" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q461736" start="3824" end="3834" title="Paris Club" label="Paris Club"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4353" end="4382" title="History of Togo#Opposition" label="political instability in 1990"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4552" end="4564" title="Naples terms" label="Naples terms"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4876" end="4903" title="IMF Staff Monitored Program" label="IMF Staff Monitored Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q340195" start="5066" end="5089" title="Africa Development Bank" label="Africa Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="5171" end="5185" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q155385" start="5382" end="5389" title="Gnassingbé Eyadéma" label="Eyadéma"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="5616" end="5657" title="Economic Community of West African States" label="Economic Community of West African States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929699" start="5743" end="5783" title="West African Economic and Monetary Union" label="West African Economic and Monetary Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q191511" start="5845" end="5854" title="CFA franc" label="CFA franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883427" start="5860" end="5889" title="West African Development Bank" label="West African Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q3792" start="5942" end="5946" title="Lomé" label="Lomé"/>
<link wikidata="Q580864" start="6852" end="6869" title="Economy of Africa" label="Economy of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q777007" start="6872" end="6888" title="Economy of Ghana" label="Economy of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6612404" start="6891" end="6917" title="List of Ghanaian companies" label="List of Ghanaian companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607201" start="6920" end="6941" title="List of banks in Togo" label="List of banks in Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243006" start="6944" end="6975" title="List of companies based in Togo" label="List of companies based in Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q945" start="6978" end="6982" title="Togo" label="Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144508" start="6985" end="7030" title="United Nations Economic Commission for Africa" label="United Nations Economic Commission for Africa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30144" wikidata="Q7696042" url="?curid=30144" title="Telecommunications in Togo">
<text>Telecommunications in Togo include radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet.

==Radio and television==

Radio stations:
state-owned radio network with multiple stations; several dozen private radio stations and a few community radio stations; transmissions of multiple international broadcasters are available (2007).

Television stations:
two state-owned TV stations with multiple transmission sites; 5 private TV stations broadcast locally; cable TV service is available (2007).

Private media in Togo have proliferated, with dozens of commercial and community radios and a handful of private TV stations in operation. Radio is the most popular medium, particularly in rural areas. The main TV station is the government-owned Television Togolaise.

The radio services of the BBC World Service, Gabon&#x27;s Africa No. 1, and Radio France Internationale (RFI) are all available.

==Telephone==
Calling code: +228

International call prefix: 00
Main lines:
* 225,000 lines in use, 127th in the world (2012);
* 213,800 lines in use, 126th in the world (2010).

Mobile cellular:
* 3.5 million lines, 124th in the world (2012);
* 2.5 million lines, 129th in the world (2010).

Telephone system: fair system based on network of microwave radio relay routes supplemented by open-wire lines and cellular system; combined fixed-line and mobile-cellular teledensity roughly 50 telephones per 100 persons with mobile-cellular use predominating (2010).

Satellite earth stations: 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean) and 1 Symphonie (satellite) (2010).

Communications cables: West Africa Cable System (WACS), a submarine cable linking countries along the west coast of Africa with each other and with Portugal and the United Kingdom; GLO-1 which links countries along the west coast of Africa to each other and to Portugal, Spain, and the United Kingdom.

==Internet==

Top-level domain: .tg

Internet users:
* 278,442 users, 144th in the world; 4.0% of the population, 191st in the world (2012);
* 356,300 users, 123rd in the world (2009).

Fixed broadband: 5,560 subscriptions, 158th in the world; 0.1% of the population, 170th in the world (2012).

Wireless broadband: 47,892 subscribers, 125th in the world; 0.7% of the population, 135th in the world (2012).

Internet hosts:
* 1,168 hosts, 170th in the world (2012);
* 1,165 hosts, 169th in the world (2011).

IPv4: 13,312 addresses allocated, less than 0.05% of the world total, 1.9 addresses per 1000 people (2012).

===Internet censorship and surveillance===
There are no known government restrictions on access to the Internet or reports that the government monitors e-mail or Internet chat rooms without judicial oversight. Although the constitution provides for freedom of speech and press, the government restricts these rights.

The constitution and law prohibit arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, or correspondence, and the government generally respects these prohibitions. In criminal cases a judge or senior police official may authorize searches of private residences. Citizens believe the government monitors telephones and correspondence, although such surveillance has not been confirmed.

==See also==
* Media of Togo
* Télévision Togolaise, the national broadcaster of Togo.
* List of terrestrial fibre optic cable projects in Africa
* Economy of Togo

==References==
* 
==External links==
* CAFE , C.A.F.E. Informatique et Telecommunications.
* NetMaster.tg , by NIC.tg.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7696042" start="0" end="26" title="Telecommunications in Togo" label="Telecommunications in Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="128" end="142" title="Radio broadcasting" label="Radio stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254874" start="343" end="362" title="Television broadcasting" label="Television stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546725" start="752" end="772" title="Television Togolaise" label="Television Togolaise"/>
<link wikidata="Q423289" start="801" end="818" title="BBC World Service" label="BBC World Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q19912" start="851" end="878" title="Radio France Internationale" label="Radio France Internationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q34768" start="919" end="931" title="Calling code" label="Calling code"/>
<link wikidata="Q3190395" start="939" end="964" title="List of international call prefixes" label="International call prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q747066" start="1248" end="1269" title="microwave radio relay" label="microwave radio relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q149918" start="1468" end="1492" title="Communications satellite" label="Satellite earth stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q778126" start="1496" end="1504" title="Intelsat" label="Intelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="1506" end="1520" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q291270" start="1528" end="1549" title="Symphonie (satellite)" label="Symphonie (satellite)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248959" start="1559" end="1580" title="List of international submarine communications cables" label="Communications cables"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946336" start="1582" end="1606" title="WACS (cable system)" label="West Africa Cable System"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="1707" end="1715" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1724" end="1738" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513631" start="1740" end="1745" title="GLO-1 (cable system)" label="GLO-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="1820" end="1828" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="1830" end="1835" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1845" end="1859" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q14296" start="1876" end="1892" title="Top-level domain" label="Top-level domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q42860" start="1894" end="1897" title=".tg" label=".tg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622451" start="1899" end="1913" title="List of countries by number of Internet users" label="Internet users"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992993" start="2048" end="2063" title="List of countries by number of broadband Internet subscriptions" label="Fixed broadband"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992993" start="2158" end="2176" title="List of countries by number of broadband Internet subscriptions" label="Wireless broadband"/>
<link wikidata="Q8215105" start="2270" end="2284" title="List of countries by number of Internet hosts" label="Internet hosts"/>
<link wikidata="Q13211867" start="2371" end="2375" title="List of countries by IPv4 address allocation" label="IPv4"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="2632" end="2638" title="e-mail" label="e-mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q574577" start="2651" end="2661" title="chat rooms" label="chat rooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="2729" end="2746" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="2751" end="2756" title="freedom of the press" label="press"/>
<link wikidata="Q30682391" start="3197" end="3210" title="Media of Togo" label="Media of Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546725" start="3213" end="3233" title="Télévision Togolaise" label="Télévision Togolaise"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642859" start="3271" end="3327" title="List of terrestrial fibre optic cable projects in Africa" label="List of terrestrial fibre optic cable projects in Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477620" start="3330" end="3345" title="Economy of Togo" label="Economy of Togo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30145" wikidata="Q3997839" url="?curid=30145" title="Transport in Togo">
<text>Transportation in the country of Togo is by road, rail, water or air.

== Railways ==

&quot;total:&quot;
568 km (2008)
&lt;br&gt;&quot;narrow gauge:&quot;
568 km of gauge

==Roadways==
&quot;total:&quot;
7,520 km
&lt;br&gt;&quot;paved:&quot;
2,376 km
&lt;br&gt;&quot;unpaved:&quot;
5,144 km (2000)

The Trans–West African Coastal Highway crosses Togo, connecting it to Benin and Nigeria to the east, and Ghana and Ivory Coast to the west. When construction in Liberia and Sierra Leone is finished, the highway will continue west to seven other Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) nations. A paved highway also connects Togo northwards to Burkina Faso and from there north-west to Mali and north-east to Niger.

== Waterways ==
50 km (seasonally navigable by small craft on the Mono River depending on rainfall. (2011))

== Ports and harbours ==
* Kpémé
* Lomé - railhead

== Merchant marine ==
&lt;br&gt;&quot;total:&quot;
62 ships 
&lt;br&gt;&quot;ships by type:&quot;
bulk carrier 6, cargo 38, carrier 3, chemical tanker 5, container 3, passenger/cargo 1, petroleum tanker 3, refrigerated cargo 1, roll on/roll off 1 (2010)

== Airports ==

8 (2012)

=== Airports - with paved runways ===
&lt;br&gt;&quot;total:&quot;
2
&lt;br&gt;&quot;2,438 to 3,047 m:&quot;
2 (2012)
* Lomé-Tokoin Airport
* Niamtougou International Airport

=== Airports - with unpaved runways ===
&lt;br&gt;&quot;total:&quot;
6
&lt;br&gt;&quot;914 to 1,523 m:&quot;
4
&lt;br&gt;&quot;under 914 m:&quot;
2 (2012)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q945" start="33" end="37" title="Togo" label="Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157731" start="304" end="338" title="Trans–West African Coastal Highway" label="Trans–West African Coastal Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="370" end="375" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="380" end="387" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="405" end="410" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="415" end="426" title="Ivory Coast" label="Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="461" end="468" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="473" end="485" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="545" end="586" title="Economic Community of West African States" label="Economic Community of West African States"/>
<link wikidata="Q965" start="654" end="666" title="Burkina Faso" label="Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="696" end="700" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="719" end="724" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q268624" start="793" end="803" title="Mono River" label="Mono River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="863" end="868" title="Kpémé" label="Kpémé"/>
<link wikidata="Q3792" start="871" end="875" title="Lomé" label="Lomé"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="878" end="886" title="railhead" label="railhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431925" start="1289" end="1308" title="Lomé-Tokoin Airport" label="Lomé-Tokoin Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q956152" start="1311" end="1343" title="Niamtougou International Airport" label="Niamtougou International Airport"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30146" wikidata="Q718167" url="?curid=30146" title="Togolese Armed Forces">
<text>The Togolese Armed Forces (, FAT) is the national military of the Republic of Togo which consists of the Army, Navy, Air Force, and the National Gendarmerie. The total military expenditure during the fiscal year of 2005 was 1.6% of the country&#x27;s GDP. Military bases exist in Lomé, Temedja, Kara, Niamtougou, and Dapaong. The current Chief of the General Staff is Brigadier General Dimini Allaharé, who took office on May 28, 2024.

== Army ==
The current chief of staff of the army is Colonel Blakimwé Wiyao Balli. The elite presidential bodyguards of the Republic of Togo Armed Forces are reportedly trained by Benjamin Yeaten, an internationally wanted Liberian military commander and war criminal.

===Equipment===

====Armor====
== Air Force ==
The Republic of Togo Air Force () was established in 1964, and French influence remains in the choice of aircraft used. Since 2020, the air force&#x27;s chief of staff is Colonel Tassounti Djato.
The C-47 Skytrain was the first aircraft used; it was part of the force from 1960 to 1976. Replacing the C-47s were two DHC-5D Buffalo STOL transports in 1976. Also in the same year, Togo acquired five ex-German Air Force Fouga Magister armed jet trainers and seven EMB.326GBs from Brazil to form the Escadrille de Chasse. Togo&#x27;s armed jet trainer fleet was upgraded in 1981 by the deliveries of five Alpha jets and by three piston engine Aerospatiale TB-30 Epsilons in 1986. The Fouga Magisters were returned to France in 1985.
During its existence the official name changed from &quot;Section Air der Forces armées&quot; in 1964 to &quot;Escadrille Nationale D Togolaise&quot; (ENT) in 1973, to &quot;Groupement Aerienne Togolais&quot; (GAT) in 1980, and finally to &quot;Armée de l&#x27;Air Togolaise&quot; in 1997.
At present its operations are concentrated in the Lomé Transport Base at Lomé Tokoin Airport, where the transport aircraft are based, and the Niamtougou Fighter Base at Niamtougou International Airport, where the combat units are located.

It acquired the Bayraktar TB2 UCAV from Turkish company Baykar in August 2022.

===Aircraft===
==== Current inventory ====

== Navy ==

The National Navy () was created on May 1, 1976, to guard the roughly of Republic of Togo coast and the seaport of Lomé. It currently has 2 wooden-hulled patrol boats, the &quot;Kara&quot; (P 761), and the &quot;Mono&quot; (P 762), which have both been in service since 1976. On 7 July 2014, the Republic of Togo navy received a RPB 33 patrol boat that was named &quot;Agou&quot; (P 763). Currently, the navy&#x27;s chief of staff is ship captain Atiogbé Ametsipe.

===Equipment===
==References==
*Aircraft information files Brightstar publishing File 338 sheet 4
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q718167" start="4" end="25" title="Togolese Armed Forces" label="Togolese Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q718167" start="29" end="32" title="Togolese Armed Forces" label="FAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q945" start="66" end="82" title="Republic of Togo" label="Republic of Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100410" start="136" end="156" title="Gendarmerie Nationale Togolaise" label="National Gendarmerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q191891" start="200" end="211" title="fiscal year" label="fiscal year"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="251" end="254" title="GDP" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3792" start="280" end="284" title="Lomé" label="Lomé"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="286" end="293" title="Temedja" label="Temedja"/>
<link wikidata="Q860729" start="295" end="299" title="Kara, Togo" label="Kara"/>
<link wikidata="Q201342" start="301" end="311" title="Niamtougou" label="Niamtougou"/>
<link wikidata="Q970904" start="317" end="324" title="Dapaong" label="Dapaong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813432" start="351" end="364" title="Staff (military)" label="General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q945" start="561" end="577" title="Republic of Togo" label="Republic of Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q30105914" start="617" end="632" title="Benjamin Yeaten" label="Benjamin Yeaten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="660" end="667" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q945" start="758" end="774" title="Republic of Togo" label="Republic of Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q714326" start="954" end="967" title="C-47 Skytrain" label="C-47 Skytrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q832489" start="1085" end="1089" title="STOL" label="STOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q56013" start="1155" end="1171" title="German Air Force" label="German Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q169438" start="1172" end="1186" title="Fouga Magister" label="Fouga Magister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431925" start="1847" end="1866" title="Lomé Airport" label="Lomé Tokoin Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q956152" start="1943" end="1975" title="Niamtougou Airport" label="Niamtougou International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q945" start="2223" end="2239" title="Republic of Togo" label="Republic of Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q163500" start="2584" end="2596" title="Ship-of-the-Line Captain" label="ship captain"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30147" wikidata="Q5468559" url="?curid=30147" title="Foreign relations of Togo">
<text>Although Togo&#x27;s foreign policy is nonaligned, it has strong historical and cultural ties with western Europe, especially France and Germany. Togo is a member of the Commonwealth of Nations, exchanging high commissioners with other Commonwealth countries. It recognizes the People&#x27;s Republic of China, North Korea, and Cuba, and re-established relations with Israel in 1987.

Togo pursues an active foreign policy and participates in many international organizations. It is particularly active in West African regional affairs and in the African Union. Relations between Togo and neighboring states are generally good.

==Diplomatic relations==
List of countries which Togo maintains diplomatic relations with:
==Bilateral relations==
== See also==
* List of diplomatic missions in Togo
* List of diplomatic missions of Togo

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5468559" start="9" end="35" title="Foreign relations of Togo" label="Togo&amp;#x27;s foreign policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="126" end="132" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="137" end="144" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="170" end="193" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q123695" start="206" end="224" title="High commissioner (Commonwealth)" label="high commissioners"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="278" end="309" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="311" end="322" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="328" end="332" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="368" end="374" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="506" end="517" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="547" end="560" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616577" start="760" end="795" title="List of diplomatic missions in Togo" label="List of diplomatic missions in Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4433630" start="798" end="833" title="List of diplomatic missions of Togo" label="List of diplomatic missions of Togo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30148" wikidata="Q36823" url="?curid=30148" title="Tokelau">
<text>Tokelau (; ; known previously as the Union Islands, and, until 1976, known officially as the Tokelau Islands) is a dependent territory of New Zealand in the southern Pacific Ocean. It consists of three tropical coral atolls: Atafu, Nukunonu, and Fakaofo. They have a combined land area of . In addition to these three, Swains Island (), which forms part of the same archipelago, is the subject of an ongoing territorial dispute; it is currently administered by the United States as part of American Samoa. Tokelau lies north of the Samoan Islands, east of Tuvalu, south of the Phoenix Islands, southwest of the more distant Line Islands, and northwest of the Cook Islands.

Tokelau has a population of approximately 1,500 people; it has the fourth-smallest population of any sovereign state or dependency in the world. As of the 2016 census, around 45% of its residents had been born overseas, mostly in Samoa or New Zealand. The populace has a life expectancy of 69, which is comparable to that of other Oceanian island nations. Approximately 94% of the population speak Tokelauan as their first language. Tokelau has the smallest economy of any nation. It is a leader in renewable energy, being the first 100% solar-powered nation in the world.

Tokelau is officially referred to as a &quot;nation&quot; by both the New Zealand government and the Tokelauan government. It is a free and democratic nation with elections every three years. However, in 2007, the United Nations General Assembly included Tokelau on its list of non-self-governing territories. Its inclusion on this list is controversial, as Tokelauans have twice narrowly failed to vote for further self-determination, and the islands&#x27; small population makes the viability of self-government challenging. The basis of Tokelau&#x27;s legislative, administrative and judicial systems is the Tokelau Islands Act 1948, which has been amended several times. Since 1993, the territory has annually elected its own head of government, the &quot;Ulu-o-Tokelau&quot;. Before 1993, the administrator of Tokelau was the highest official in the government and the territory was directly administered by a New Zealand government department.

==Etymology==
 is a word meaning &quot;north wind&quot; in the native Tokelau language. The Tokelau islands were named the &quot;Union Islands&quot; and &quot;Union Group&quot; by European explorers at an earlier time. &quot;Tokelau Islands&quot; was adopted as the islands’ official name in 1946. The name was officially shortened to &quot;Tokelau&quot; on 9 December 1976.

==History==
===Pre-history===
Archaeological evidence indicates that the atolls of Tokelau – Atafu, Nukunonu, and Fakaofo – were settled about 1,000 years ago from Samoa and may have been a gateway into Eastern Polynesia. The inhabitants embrace Polynesian mythology and the local god, Tui Tokelau. Over time, they developed distinctive musical and art forms. The three atolls have historically functioned separately politically, while maintaining social and linguistic cohesion. Tokelauan society has been governed by chiefly clans, and there have been occasional skirmishes and wars between the atolls, as well as inter-marriage. Fakaofo, the &quot;chiefly island&quot;, held some dominion over Atafu and Nukunonu after the dispersal of Atafu. Life on the atolls was historically subsistence-based, with a diet that relied mainly on fish and coconut.

===Contact with other cultures===

The first European to sight Atafu was British Navy officer Commodore John Byron, on 24 June 1765. He called the island &quot;Duke of York&#x27;s Island&quot;. Parties from his expedition who landed ashore reported that there were no signs of current or previous inhabitants. Captain Edward Edwards, having learned of Byron&#x27;s discovery, visited Atafu on 6 June 1791 in search of the &quot;Bounty&quot; mutineers. They found no inhabitants, but saw that there were houses containing canoes and fishing gear, which suggested to them that the island was being used as a temporary residence by fishing parties from other, nearby islands. On 12 June 1791, Edwards sailed farther south, and sighted Nukunonu, naming it &quot;Duke of Clarence&#x27;s Island&quot;. A landing party that went ashore was unable to make contact with the inhabitants, but saw &quot;&quot;morai&quot;s&quot;, burying places, and canoes with &quot;stages in their middle&quot; sailing across the island&#x27;s lagoons.

On 29 October 1825, August R. Strong of the USS &quot;Dolphin&quot; and his crew arrived at the atoll Nukunonu. He wrote: Upon examination, we found they had removed all the women and children from the settlement, which was quite small, and put them in canoes lying off a rock in the lagoon. They would frequently come near the shore, but when we approached they would pull off with great noise and precipitation.

On 14 February 1835, Captain Smith, of the United States whaling ship the &quot;General Jackson&quot;, wrote of having sighted Fakaofo, which he chose to call &quot;D&#x27;Wolf&#x27;s Island&quot;. On 25 January 1841, the United States Exploring Expedition visited Atafu, and discovered a small population living on the island. The residents appeared to be there only temporarily, because there was no chief among them, and they had the kind of double canoes that were typically used for inter-island travel. They appeared to have interacted with foreigners in the past, because they expressed a desire to engage in barter with the expedition crew, and they possessed items that were apparently of foreign origin: blue beads and a plane-iron. A few days later, French explorer Captain Morvan sighted Fakaofo. The American expedition reached Nukunonu on 28 January 1841, but did not record any information about inhabitants. On 29 January 1841, the expedition sighted Fakaofo and named it &quot;Bowditch&quot;. The Fakaofo islanders were found to be similar in appearance and behavior to the Atafu islanders.

Missionaries preached Christianity in Tokelau from 1845 to the 1870s. French Catholic missionaries on Wallis Island (also known as &#x27;Uvea) and missionaries of the Protestant London Missionary Society in Samoa used native teachers to convert the Tokelauans. Atafu was converted to Protestantism by the London Missionary Society, Nukunonu was converted to Catholicism and Fakaofo was converted to both denominations. The Rev. Samuel James Whitmee, of the London Missionary Society, visited Tokelau in 1870.

Helped by Swains Island-based Eli Jennings senior, Peruvian &quot;blackbird&quot; slave traders arrived in 1863 and kidnapped nearly all (253) of the able-bodied men to work as labourers, depopulating the atolls. The Tokelauan men died of dysentery and smallpox, and very few returned. With that loss, the system of governance became based on the &quot;Taupulega&quot;, or &quot;Councils of Elders&quot;, on which individual families on each atoll were represented. During that time, Polynesian immigrants settled, followed by American, Scottish, French, Portuguese and German beachcombers, marrying local women and repopulating the atolls.

In 1856 the United States claimed that it held sovereignty over the island and the other Tokelauan atolls under the Guano Islands Act. In 1979, the U.S. conceded that Tokelau was under New Zealand sovereignty, and a maritime boundary between Tokelau and American Samoa was established by the Treaty of Tokehega.

In 1889, Tokelau became a protectorate of the United Kingdom. This lasted until 1916, when it was annexed and incorporated into the Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony. In 1926, it was incorporated into New Zealand.

===Tropical cyclones===
Cyclone Percy struck and severely damaged Tokelau in late February and early March 2005. Forecasters underestimated the cyclone&#x27;s strength and the length of time it would be in vicinity to Tokelau. It coincided with a spring tide which put most of the area of the two villages on Fakaofo and Nukunonu under a metre of seawater. The cyclone also caused major erosion on several islets of all three atolls, damaging roads and bridges and disrupting electric power and telecommunications systems. The cyclone did significant and widespread damage to food crops including bananas, coconuts and pandanus. It did not seriously injure anyone but villagers lost significant amounts of property.

No significant land is more than above high water of ordinary tides. This means Tokelau is particularly vulnerable to future sea level rise.

===Time zone===
Until December 2011, Tokelau was 11 hours behind Coordinated Universal Time (UTC). At midnight 29 December 2011 Tokelau shifted to UTC+13:00 in response to Samoa&#x27;s decision to switch sides of the International Dateline. This brought Tokelau closer to New Zealand time (and in the process omitted 30 December).

The Time&amp;Date website states that &quot;the international time zone community has apparently been listing the wrong local time for Tokelau since 1901&quot; and that &quot;most sources, including the commonly referred to International Atlas by Shanks/Pottenger, claim that the UTC offset is +14 hours, or equivalent.&quot;

==Government==

In 1877, the islands were included under the protection of the United Kingdom by an Order in Council that claimed jurisdiction over all unclaimed Pacific Islands. Commander C. F. Oldham on HMS &quot;Egeria&quot; landed at each of the three atolls in June 1889 and officially raised the Union Flag, declaring the group a British protectorate. In conformity with desire expressed by &quot;the Native government&quot; they were annexed by the United Kingdom and included in the Gilbert Islands by the Tokelau Islands (Union Islands) Order in Council, 1916. The annexation took place on 29 February 1916. From the point in time that the islands were annexed, their people had the status of British subjects. Tokelau was removed from the Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony and placed under the jurisdiction of the Governor-General of New Zealand in 1925, two Orders in Council being made for the purpose on the same day. This step meant that New Zealand took over administration of Tokelau from the British on 11 February 1926. At this point, Tokelau was still a territory under the sovereignty of the United Kingdom but administered by New Zealand.

The Union Islands (Revocation) Order in Council, 1948 after reciting the agreement by the governments of the United Kingdom and New Zealand that the islands should become part of New Zealand, revoked the Union Islands (No. 2) Order in Council, 1925, with effect from a date fixed by the Governor-General of New Zealand after he was satisfied that the New Zealand Parliament had provided for the incorporation of the islands with New Zealand, as it did by the &quot;Tokelau Islands Act 1948&quot;. Tokelau formally became part of New Zealand on 1 January 1949.

The Dominion of New Zealand, of which Tokelau formerly was a part, has since been superseded by the Realm of New Zealand, of which Tokelau remains a part. When the &quot;British Nationality and New Zealand Citizenship Act 1948&quot; came into effect on 1 January 1949, Tokelauans who were British subjects gained New Zealand citizenship; a status they still hold.

Villages are entitled to enact their own laws regulating their daily lives and New Zealand law only applies where it has been extended by specific enactment. Serious crime is rare and there are no prisons, and offenders are publicly rebuked, fined or made to work.

==Politics==
The head of state is , the in right of New Zealand, who also reigns over the other Commonwealth realms. The is represented in the territory by the Administrator – currently Don Higgins. The current head of government () is Alapati Tavite, who presides over the Council for the Ongoing Government of Tokelau, which functions as a cabinet. The Council consists of the &quot;faipule&quot; (leader) and &quot;pulenuku&quot; (village mayor) of each of the three atolls. The administrator is appointed by the minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade of New Zealand, and the role of head of government rotates between the three &quot;faipule&quot; for a one-year term.

The Tokelau Amendment Act of 1996 confers legislative power on the General Fono, a unicameral body. The number of seats each atoll receives in the Fono is determined by population – at present, Fakaofo and Atafu each have seven and Nukunonu has six. &quot;Faipule&quot; and &quot;pulenuku&quot; also sit in the Fono.

On 11 November 2004, Tokelau and New Zealand took steps to formulate a treaty that would turn Tokelau from a non-self-governing territory to a self-governing state in free association with New Zealand. Besides the treaty, a United Nations-sponsored referendum on self-determination took place, with the three islands voting on successive days starting 13 February 2006. (Tokelauans in Apia, Samoa, voted on 11 February.) Out of 581 votes cast, 349 were for Free Association, being short of the two-thirds majority required for the measure to pass. The referendum was profiled (somewhat light-heartedly) in the 1 May 2006 issue of &quot;The New Yorker&quot; magazine. A repeat referendum took place on 20–24 October 2007, again narrowly failing to approve self-government. This time the vote was short by just 16 votes or 3%.

In May 2008, the United Nations&#x27; Secretary General Ban Ki-moon urged colonial powers &quot;to complete the decolonization process in every one of the remaining 16 non-self-governing territories&quot;, including Tokelau. This led &quot;The New Zealand Herald&quot; to comment that the United Nations was &quot;apparently frustrated by two failed attempts to get Tokelau to vote for independence&quot;. In April 2008, speaking as leader of the National Party, future New Zealand Prime Minister John Key stated that New Zealand had &quot;imposed two referenda on the people of the Tokelau Islands&quot;, and questioned &quot;the accepted wisdom that small states should undergo a de-colonisation process&quot;.

==Defence and police==
Consistent with the principles of partnership with New Zealand, defence is the responsibility of the New Zealand Government. The New Zealand Defence Force has responsibilities for protecting the territory as well as its offshore exclusive economic zone (EEZ). The total offshore EEZ is about 300,000 km2. Vessels of the Royal New Zealand Navy are employed for this task including its s. Tokelau has its own customs regulations.

Given Tokelau&#x27;s limited wharf facilities, the Navy&#x27;s multi-role ship, , has been employed to provide logistics support to the territory.

Little crime has been reported in Tokelau and a total of nine police officers were reported as present as of the early 2020s: three each on Fakaofo, Nukunonu and Atafu. According to the Government they are responsible to the village authorities for the enforcement of law and order and to the public service for their various civil duties.

==Geography==
Tokelau includes three atolls in the South Pacific Ocean between longitudes 171° W and 173° W and between latitudes 8° S and 10° S, about midway between Hawaii and New Zealand. From Atafu in the north to Fakaofo in the south, Tokelau extends for less than 200 km. The atolls lie about north of Samoa. The atolls are Atafu and Nukunonu, both in an island group once called the Duke of Clarence Group, and Fakaofo, once Bowditch Island. Their combined land area is . The atolls each have a number of coral islands, where the villages are situated. The highest point of Tokelau is just above sea level. There are no ports or harbours for large vessels, however, all three atolls have a jetty to and from which supplies and passengers are shipped. Tokelau lies in the Pacific tropical cyclone belt. A fourth island that is culturally, historically, and geographically, but not politically, a part of the Tokelau Islands is Swains Island (Olohega), under United States control since about 1900 and administered as a part of American Samoa since 1925.

Swains Island was claimed by the United States pursuant to the Guano Islands Act, as were the other three islands of Tokelau; the latter three claims were ceded to Tokelau by treaty in 1979. In the draft constitution of Tokelau subject to the Tokelauan self-determination referendum in 2006, Olohega (Swains Island) was also claimed as a part of Tokelau, though the claim was surrendered in the same 1979 treaty. This established a clearly defined boundary between American Samoa and Tokelau.

Tokelau&#x27;s claim to Swains is generally comparable to the Marshall Islands&#x27; claim to U.S.-administered Wake Island, but the re-emergence of this somewhat dormant issue has been an unintended result of the United Nations&#x27; recent efforts to promote decolonisation in Tokelau. Tokelauans have proven somewhat reluctant to push their national identity in the political realm: recent decolonisation moves have mainly been driven from outside for ideological reasons. But at the same time, Tokelauans are reluctant to disown their common cultural identity with Swains Islanders who speak their language.

==Environment==

Tokelau is located in the Western Polynesian tropical moist forests ecoregion. Most of the original vegetation has been replaced by coconut plantations, some of which have been abandoned and became scrubby forests. The atolls of Tokelau provide habitat for 38 indigenous plant species, over 150 insect species and 10 land crab species. One of the greatest threats to biodiversity is posed by introduced mammalian predators such as the Polynesian Rat.

In 2011 Tokelau declared its entire exclusive economic zone of a shark sanctuary.

==Economy==

According to the US Central Intelligence Agency&#x27;s list of countries by GDP (PPP) Tokelau has the smallest economy in the world. Tokelau has an annual purchasing power of about US$1,000 (€674) per capita. The government is almost entirely dependent on subsidies from New Zealand. It has annual revenues of less than US$500,000 (€336,995) against expenditures of some US$2.8 million (€1.9 million). The deficit is made up by aid from New Zealand.

Tokelau annually exports around US$100,000 (€67,000) of stamps, copra and woven and carved handicrafts and imports over US$300,000 (€202,000) of foodstuffs, building materials, and fuel to, and from, New Zealand. New Zealand also pays directly for the cost of medical and education services. Local industries include small-scale enterprises for copra production, wood work, plaited craft goods, stamps, coins, and fishing. Agriculture and livestock produces coconuts, copra, breadfruit, papayas, bananas, figs, pigs, poultry and a few goats. Many Tokelauans live in New Zealand and support their families in Tokelau through remittances.

===Solar power===
The goal of 100% renewable electricity was met on 7 November 2012, according to the Foreign Affairs Minister of New Zealand, Murray McCully. Previously electricity was generated using diesel generators and was only available about 16 hours/day.

Three solar power stations with a total generation capacity of 930kWp were installed to provide 100% of current electrical demand from photovoltaics, with lead acid battery backup able to store around 8MWh. The first power station was completed in August 2012. In total, 4,032 solar panels are used and 1,344 batteries weighing  each. The systems are designed to withstand winds of . By 2011, Tokelau&#x27;s electricity was 93% generated by photovoltaics, with the remainder generated from coconut oil. As of 2019, increased demand and degradation of batteries had led to increased need for backup power. Plans were made for an additional 210 kW of PV and close to 2MWh of lithium-ion battery capacity.

===Internet domain name===

Tokelau has increased its GDP by more than 10% through registrations of domain names under its top-level domain, .tk. Registrations can be either free, in which case the user owns only usage rights and not the domain itself, or paid, which grants full rights. Free domains are pointed to Tokelau name servers, which redirects the domain via HTML frames to a specified address or to a specified A or NS record, and the redirection of up to 250 email addresses to an external address (not at a .tk domain).

In September 2003, Fakaofo became the first part of Tokelau with a high-speed Internet connection. Foundation Tokelau financed the project. Tokelau gave most domain names under its authority away to anyone for free to gain publicity for the territory. This has allowed the nation to gain enhanced telecommunications technologies, such as more computers and Internet access for Tokelauan residents. By 2012, there were about 120 computers, mostly laptops, and 1/6th of the economy consisted of income from .tk domain names.

According to a 2016 analysis of domain name registration performed by the .uk registrar Nominet using data from ZookNIC, tk domains are the &quot;world&#x27;s largest country-code domain ... almost as large as second and third place holders China (.cn) and Germany (.de) combined&quot;.

On 3 March 2023, Meta sued Freenom for cybersquatting and trademark infringement, leading to a halt in new domain registrations, and in November 2023, ICANN terminated Freenom&#x27;s registrar accreditation due to unresolved breaches. By February 2024, Freenom settled the lawsuit with Meta, announced its exit from the domain business, and by March 2024, 99% of Freenom domains became inaccessible, significantly affecting Cloudflare&#x27;s hosted domains.

==Demographics==
According to the 2016 Tokelau Census, Tokelau has a &quot;de jure&quot; usually resident population of 1,499 people. The census shows a 6.2% increase in the de jure usually resident population between 2011 and 2016.

The nationals of Tokelau are called Tokelauans, and the major ethnic group is Polynesian; it has no recorded minority groups. About 84% of inhabitants are of wholly or partly Tokelauan ethnicity; people of Samoan ethnicity make up 6.7% of the population, and Tuvaluans 2.8%. The main language—spoken by over 90% of inhabitants—is Tokelauan, but almost 60% also speak English.

The less than 1,500 Polynesian inhabitants live in three villages. Their isolation and lack of resources greatly limits economic development and confines agriculture to the subsistence level. The very limited natural resources and overcrowding are contributing to emigration to New Zealand and Samoa. In the 2013 New Zealand census, more than 7,000 people identified as Tokelauan, almost five times as many as live in Tokelau itself. Depletion of tuna has made fishing for food more difficult.

A significant proportion (44.9% in 2016) of the population were born overseas, mostly in Samoa (15.3% of total population) and New Zealand (11.5%).

While slightly more females than males live on Atafu and Fakaofo, males make up 57% of Nukunonu residents. Only 9% of Tokelauans aged 40 or more have never been married. One-quarter of the population were born overseas; almost all the rest live on the same atoll they were born on. Most households own five or more pigs.

Despite its low income, Tokelau has a life expectancy of 69 years, comparable with other Oceania islands.

===Structure of the population===



=== Religion ===

Tokelau is predominantly Christian with majority belonging to either Congregational Christian Church (Ekalehia Fakalapotopotoga Kelihiano Tokelau) or Roman Catholic.

In 2016, 50.4% of responents belonged to Congregational Christian Church, 38.7% were Roman Catholic, 5.9% were Presbyterian, 4.2% were other Christian and 0.8% were unspecified. Majority of resident population of Atafu (78.3%) and Fakaofo (62.7%) identified as Congregational Christians. While the majority of residents in Nukunonu (81.8%) identified as Roman Catholic.

== Culture ==
===Healthcare and education===

Each atoll has a school and hospital. The health services have a Director of Health in Apia and a Chief Clinical Advisor who moves from atoll to atoll as required to assist the doctors attached to each hospital. In 2007, there was not always a doctor on each island and locums were appointed to fill the gaps.

Many Tokelauan youth travel to New Zealand to further their education, with students returning home and then heading off for another year of study.

===Sport===

Due to its small size, Tokelau is unaffiliated to most international sports organisations, and rarely takes part in international events. The only significant international competition Tokelau takes part in is the Pacific Games. Tokelau won its first-ever gold medals at the 2007 Pacific Games in Apia, winning a total of five medals (three gold, a silver and a bronze), all in lawn bowls, and finishing 12th (out of 22) on the overall medal table. This included two gold medals for Violina Linda Pedro (in the women&#x27;s pairs and the women&#x27;s singles), making her Tokelau&#x27;s most successful individual athlete to date.

In October 2010, table tennis became &quot;the first sport in Tokelau to be granted membership at a Continental or World level&quot;, when the Tokelau Table Tennis Association was formally established and became the 23rd member of the Oceania Table Tennis Federation. Tokelau is also a member of United World Wrestling.

Tokelau was due to take part, for the first time, in the 2010 Commonwealth Games, in Delhi, but, for unknown reasons, ultimately did not do so. In 2018, Tokelau was noted to be ineligible for the Commonwealth Games until it became affiliated to at least five international sport federations.

Tokelau has a National Sports Federation, and a significant sporting event is the Tokelau Games, which are held yearly. When they are held, &quot;all of Tokelau virtually stands still&quot;, as &quot;[i]n excess of 50% of the population take part and all work and school stops at the time&quot;. The 2010 Games included competitions in rugby sevens, netball and kilikiti, alongside &quot;a cultural evening [...] where each atoll showcases their traditional songs and dances&quot;.

Netball is thought to have been introduced to Tokelau by the British, but became more popular when New Zealand&#x27;s government took over the territory. The sport is often played during inter-island sport competitions, alongside other sports like rugby league and volleyball.

In Tokelau, there are two levels to the football league. From Fale, Fakaofo, two of the best clubs are Hakava Club and Matalele Club.

==Telecommunications==

Tokelau has a radio telephone service between the islands and to Samoa. In 1997, a government-regulated telephone service (TeleTok) with three satellite earth stations was established, making Tokelau the last place in the world connected via phone. Each atoll has a radio-broadcast station that broadcasts shipping and weather reports and every household has a radio or access to one. News is disseminated through the government newsletter &quot;Te Vakai&quot;.

In 2019, Tokelau agreed to connect to Southern Cross Cable&#x27;s 60 Tbps &quot;NEXT&quot; subsea cable stretching between Australia, New Zealand, and the United States In September 2021, the island was connected to the new cable and services were launched in July 2022, granting it access to a network of 400GbE telecommunications service to datacenters around the world.

Tokelau has the international calling code of 690, and has had five-digit telephone numbers from November 2015 (the existing four-digit numbers were prefixed by the digit &quot;2&quot;).

Tokelau administers the .tk country code top-level domain, which is one of the most popular domains on the Web.

==Transportation==
Tokelau is served by the MV &quot;Mataliki&quot;, delivered new in 2016 as a replacement of the smaller MV &quot;Tokelau&quot; and jointly managed by the Tokelau Transport Department and the company Transport and Marine. The vessel, which has a capacity of 60 passengers on international cruises and 120 for transport between the atolls of Tokelau, operates fortnightly between Tokelau and Apia, with the trip taking a little over a day. A dedicated cargo vessel, the MV &quot;Kalopaga&quot;, entered service in 2018 and replaced chartered freight vessels.

Ships load and unload cargo by motoring up to the down-wind (leeward) side of the islet where the people live and maintaining station, by intermittent use of engines, close to the reef edge so that a landing barge can be motored out to transfer cargo to or from the shore. On returning to shore, the barge negotiates a narrow channel through the reef to the beach. Usually this landing is subject to ocean swell and beaching requires considerable skill and, often, coral abrasions to bodies. When bad weather prevents the barge making the trip, the ship stands off to wait for suitable weather or goes off to one of the other atolls to attempt to load or unload its passengers or cargo, or both.

There is no airport in Tokelau, so boats are the main means of travel and transport. Some seaplanes and amphibious aircraft are able to land in the island&#x27;s lagoons. An airstrip was considered by the New Zealand Government in 2010. In 2016, plans to link the atolls with Samoa by helicopter had to be abandoned because of high costs, leading in the following years to renewed calls to the New Zealand government for help with establishing air services. As of 2022, it was reported that the airport project – funded by the New Zealand government – was moving forward.

==See also==
* Badge of Tokelau
* Outline of Tokelau
== Notes ==
== References ==
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==

* Tokelau. &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
* Tokelau from &quot;UCB Libraries GovPubs&quot;
* Ethnology of Tokelau Islands
* Tokelau Council of Ongoing Government, executive branch of the government
* The Administrator of Tokelau, Tokelau website of the NZ Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q36823" start="0" end="7" title="Tokelau" label="Tokelau"/>
<link wikidata="Q36823" start="37" end="50" title="Tokelau" label="Union Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q36823" start="93" end="108" title="Tokelau" label="Tokelau Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q161243" start="115" end="134" title="dependent territory" label="dependent territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="138" end="149" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="166" end="179" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q42523" start="217" end="222" title="atoll" label="atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q642787" start="225" end="230" title="Atafu" label="Atafu"/>
<link wikidata="Q656709" start="232" end="240" title="Nukunonu" label="Nukunonu"/>
<link wikidata="Q650847" start="246" end="253" title="Fakaofo" label="Fakaofo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128488" start="319" end="332" title="Swains Island" label="Swains Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="366" end="377" title="archipelago" label="archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="465" end="478" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16641" start="490" end="504" title="American Samoa" label="American Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q162126" start="532" end="546" title="Samoan Islands" label="Samoan Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q672" start="556" end="562" title="Tuvalu" label="Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q271674" start="577" end="592" title="Phoenix Islands" label="Phoenix Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q234796" start="624" end="636" title="Line Islands" label="Line Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q26988" start="659" end="671" title="Cook Islands" label="Cook Islands"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="741" end="767" title="List of countries and dependencies by population#Sovereign states and dependencies by population" label="fourth-smallest population"/>
<link wikidata="Q20717478" start="870" end="892" title="List of sovereign states and dependent territories by immigrant population" label="had been born overseas"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="945" end="960" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="1005" end="1012" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q34097" start="1072" end="1081" title="Tokelauan language" label="Tokelauan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12705" start="1173" end="1189" title="renewable energy" label="renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483757" start="1212" end="1223" title="solar-power" label="solar-power"/>
<link wikidata="Q6266" start="1293" end="1299" title="nation" label="nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225358" start="1411" end="1438" title="Politics of Tokelau" label="elections every three years"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="1462" end="1493" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="United Nations General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q900119" start="1518" end="1556" title="United Nations list of non-self-governing territories" label="list of non-self-governing territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q156595" start="1664" end="1682" title="self-determination" label="self-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q16827820" start="1859" end="1883" title="Tokelau Islands Act 1948" label="Tokelau Islands Act 1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775997" start="2002" end="2027" title="Head of Government of Tokelau" label="&amp;quot;Ulu-o-Tokelau&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824538" start="2046" end="2070" title="administrator of Tokelau" label="administrator of Tokelau"/>
<link wikidata="Q34097" start="2269" end="2285" title="Tokelau language" label="Tokelau language"/>
<link wikidata="Q642787" start="2668" end="2673" title="Atafu" label="Atafu"/>
<link wikidata="Q656709" start="2675" end="2683" title="Nukunonu" label="Nukunonu"/>
<link wikidata="Q650847" start="2689" end="2696" title="Fakaofo" label="Fakaofo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306159" start="2821" end="2841" title="Polynesian mythology" label="Polynesian mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643578" start="2861" end="2872" title="Tui Tokelau" label="Tui Tokelau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4306580" start="2912" end="2919" title="Music of Tokelau" label="musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q211503" start="3102" end="3106" title="clan" label="clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="3419" end="3426" title="coconut" label="coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q507665" start="3533" end="3543" title="John Byron" label="John Byron"/>
<link wikidata="Q966744" start="3739" end="3761" title="Edward Edwards (Royal Navy officer)" label="Captain Edward Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q749811" start="3851" end="3879" title="Mutiny on the Bounty" label="&amp;quot;Bounty&amp;quot; mutineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015131" start="4501" end="4524" title="USS Dolphin (1821)" label="USS &amp;quot;Dolphin&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q42767" start="4929" end="4941" title="Whaling" label="whaling ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q119129" start="5094" end="5128" title="United States Exploring Expedition" label="United States Exploring Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q171529" start="5324" end="5329" title="canoe" label="canoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q18167631" start="6003" end="6026" title="Christianity in Tokelau" label="Christianity in Tokelau"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="6058" end="6066" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q489003" start="6083" end="6096" title="Wallis Island" label="Wallis Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="6148" end="6158" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869031" start="6159" end="6184" title="London Missionary Society" label="London Missionary Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869031" start="6438" end="6463" title="London Missionary Society" label="London Missionary Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128488" start="6501" end="6514" title="Swains Island" label="Swains Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="6542" end="6546" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q880704" start="6551" end="6572" title="blackbirding" label="&amp;quot;blackbird&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q12981973" start="6573" end="6585" title="slave trader" label="slave trader"/>
<link wikidata="Q129279" start="6730" end="6739" title="dysentery" label="dysentery"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="6744" end="6752" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q35942" start="6975" end="6984" title="Polynesia" label="Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q181634" start="7028" end="7036" title="Scottish people" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q178630" start="7046" end="7056" title="Portuguese people" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7068" end="7080" title="Beachcombing#Historical usage" label="beachcombers"/>
<link wikidata="Q513470" start="7249" end="7266" title="Guano Islands Act" label="Guano Islands Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089219" start="7349" end="7366" title="maritime boundary" label="maritime boundary"/>
<link wikidata="Q16641" start="7387" end="7401" title="American Samoa" label="American Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536897" start="7425" end="7443" title="Treaty of Tokehega" label="Treaty of Tokehega"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="7472" end="7484" title="protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050859" start="7578" end="7611" title="Gilbert and Ellice Islands" label="Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q5198863" start="7685" end="7698" title="Cyclone Percy" label="Cyclone Percy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="7915" end="7919" title="tide" label="tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="8048" end="8055" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="8267" end="8274" title="coconut" label="coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q471914" start="8280" end="8288" title="pandanus" label="pandanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="8417" end="8427" title="high water" label="high water"/>
<link wikidata="Q841083" start="8503" end="8517" title="sea level rise" label="sea level rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536" start="8585" end="8611" title="Coordinated Universal Time" label="Coordinated Universal Time"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8667" end="8676" title="UTC+13:00" label="UTC+13:00"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="8792" end="8803" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="9258" end="9272" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q899485" start="9279" end="9295" title="Order in Council" label="Order in Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q19617380" start="9341" end="9356" title="Pacific Islands" label="Pacific Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5632271" start="9384" end="9406" title="HMS Egeria (1873)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Egeria&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173323" start="9481" end="9491" title="Union Flag" label="Union Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="9523" end="9535" title="protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q271876" start="9670" end="9685" title="Gilbert Islands" label="Gilbert Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971466" start="9881" end="9897" title="British subjects" label="British subjects"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050859" start="9928" end="9961" title="Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony" label="Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q455690" start="10003" end="10034" title="Governor-General of New Zealand" label="Governor-General of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594990" start="10905" end="10928" title="Dominion of New Zealand" label="Dominion of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q889033" start="11001" end="11021" title="Realm of New Zealand" label="Realm of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016282" start="11214" end="11237" title="New Zealand citizenship" label="New Zealand citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="11549" end="11562" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q4296" start="11572" end="11595" title="Monarchy in New Zealand" label="in right of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q202686" start="11628" end="11646" title="Commonwealth realm" label="Commonwealth realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824538" start="11692" end="11705" title="Administrator of Tokelau" label="Administrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775997" start="11743" end="11761" title="Head of Government of Tokelau" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q125145901" start="11768" end="11782" title="Alapati Tavite" label="Alapati Tavite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015568" start="11806" end="11851" title="Council for the Ongoing Government of Tokelau" label="Council for the Ongoing Government of Tokelau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866148" start="12048" end="12085" title="Minister of Foreign Affairs (New Zealand)" label="minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775997" start="12118" end="12136" title="List of heads of government of Tokelau" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q683421" start="12272" end="12284" title="General Fono" label="General Fono"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="12288" end="12298" title="Unicameralism" label="unicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138279" start="12690" end="12706" title="Associated state" label="free association"/>
<link wikidata="Q740185" start="12772" end="12804" title="2006 Tokelauan self-determination referendum" label="referendum on self-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q36260" start="12908" end="12919" title="Apia, Samoa" label="Apia, Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="13159" end="13173" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749351" start="13199" end="13242" title="2007 Tokelauan self-determination referendum" label="referendum took place on 20–24 October 2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253" start="13405" end="13416" title="Ban Ki-moon" label="Ban Ki-moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q900119" start="13517" end="13547" title="non-self-governing territories" label="non-self-governing territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199207" start="13589" end="13611" title="The New Zealand Herald" label="The New Zealand Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q204716" start="13796" end="13810" title="New Zealand National Party" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q57783" start="13846" end="13854" title="John Key" label="John Key"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051650" start="14215" end="14240" title="New Zealand Defence Force" label="New Zealand Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="14315" end="14338" title="exclusive economic zone" label="exclusive economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q575932" start="14406" end="14428" title="Royal New Zealand Navy" label="Royal New Zealand Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628909" start="15094" end="15100" title="171st meridian west" label="171° W"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628808" start="15105" end="15111" title="173rd meridian west" label="173° W"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390337" start="15134" end="15138" title="8th parallel south" label="8° S"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390214" start="15143" end="15148" title="10th parallel south" label="10° S"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="15312" end="15317" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q642787" start="15334" end="15339" title="Atafu" label="Atafu"/>
<link wikidata="Q656709" start="15344" end="15352" title="Nukunonu" label="Nukunonu"/>
<link wikidata="Q650847" start="15422" end="15429" title="Fakaofo" label="Fakaofo"/>
<link wikidata="Q21068225" start="15504" end="15529" title="list of islands of Tokelau" label="a number of coral islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q14943376" start="15537" end="15549" title="list of villages in Tokelau" label="the villages"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="15601" end="15616" title="height above mean sea level" label="above sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="15790" end="15806" title="tropical cyclone" label="tropical cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128488" start="15937" end="15950" title="Swains Island" label="Swains Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q16641" start="16037" end="16051" title="American Samoa" label="American Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q513470" start="16128" end="16145" title="Guano Islands Act" label="Guano Islands Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q709" start="16621" end="16637" title="Marshall Islands" label="Marshall Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q43296" start="16671" end="16682" title="Wake Island" label="Wake Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q102398172" start="17215" end="17256" title="Western Polynesian tropical moist forests" label="Western Polynesian tropical moist forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q4283819" start="17257" end="17266" title="List of terrestrial ecoregions (WWF)" label="ecoregion"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="17321" end="17328" title="coconut" label="coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q339418" start="17624" end="17638" title="Polynesian Rat" label="Polynesian Rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="17677" end="17700" title="exclusive economic zone" label="exclusive economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3471765" start="17706" end="17721" title="shark sanctuary" label="shark sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="17757" end="17784" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q11000322" start="17792" end="17822" title="list of countries by GDP (PPP)" label="list of countries by GDP (PPP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q271969" start="17892" end="17908" title="purchasing power" label="purchasing power"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="17918" end="17921" title="United States dollar" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="17928" end="17929" title="Euro" label="€"/>
<link wikidata="Q193219" start="17993" end="18002" title="Subsidy" label="subsidies"/>
<link wikidata="Q37930" start="18244" end="18250" title="Postage stamp" label="stamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q193726" start="18252" end="18257" title="copra" label="copra"/>
<link wikidata="Q193726" start="18533" end="18538" title="copra" label="copra"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="18646" end="18653" title="coconut" label="coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q14677" start="18663" end="18673" title="breadfruit" label="breadfruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q34887" start="18675" end="18681" title="papaya" label="papaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q36146" start="18693" end="18696" title="Common fig" label="fig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351807" start="18812" end="18822" title="remittance" label="remittance"/>
<link wikidata="Q14367588" start="18856" end="18882" title="100% renewable energy" label="100% renewable electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866148" start="18928" end="18967" title="Foreign Affairs Minister of New Zealand" label="Foreign Affairs Minister of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q58291" start="18969" end="18983" title="Murray McCully" label="Murray McCully"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483757" start="19096" end="19107" title="solar power" label="solar power"/>
<link wikidata="Q192127" start="19225" end="19238" title="photovoltaics" label="photovoltaics"/>
<link wikidata="Q192127" start="19531" end="19543" title="photovoltaic" label="photovoltaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q216235" start="19580" end="19591" title="coconut oil" label="coconut oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q32635" start="19894" end="19905" title="domain name" label="domain name"/>
<link wikidata="Q14296" start="19917" end="19933" title="top-level domain" label="top-level domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q43098" start="19935" end="19938" title=".tk" label=".tk"/>
<link wikidata="Q41494" start="20118" end="20129" title="name server" label="name server"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440657" start="20163" end="20174" title="HTML frames" label="HTML frames"/>
<link wikidata="Q716511" start="20216" end="20217" title="A record" label="A"/>
<link wikidata="Q716511" start="20221" end="20230" title="NS record" label="NS record"/>
<link wikidata="Q650847" start="20347" end="20354" title="Fakaofo" label="Fakaofo"/>
<link wikidata="Q37913" start="20926" end="20929" title=".uk" label=".uk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3343226" start="20940" end="20947" title="Nominet" label="Nominet"/>
<link wikidata="Q38900" start="21100" end="21103" title=".cn" label=".cn"/>
<link wikidata="Q37251" start="21118" end="21121" title=".de" label=".de"/>
<link wikidata="Q862581" start="21179" end="21193" title="cybersquatting" label="cybersquatting"/>
<link wikidata="Q485750" start="21291" end="21296" title="ICANN" label="ICANN"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778915" start="21564" end="21574" title="Cloudflare" label="Cloudflare"/>
<link wikidata="Q132555" start="21674" end="21681" title="de jure" label="de jure"/>
<link wikidata="Q56271585" start="21869" end="21878" title="Tokelauan people" label="Tokelauan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042001" start="21911" end="21921" title="Polynesian people" label="Polynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135531" start="22039" end="22045" title="Samoans" label="Samoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044350" start="22092" end="22101" title="Demographics of Tuvalu" label="Tuvaluans"/>
<link wikidata="Q34097" start="22163" end="22172" title="Tokelauan language" label="Tokelauan"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="22488" end="22499" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="22504" end="22509" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146274" start="22657" end="22661" title="tuna" label="tuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q20717478" start="22764" end="22782" title="List of sovereign states and dependent territories by immigrant population" label="were born overseas"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="23590" end="23604" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="23616" end="23628" title="Presbyterianism" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q642787" start="23718" end="23723" title="Atafu atoll" label="Atafu"/>
<link wikidata="Q650847" start="23736" end="23743" title="Fakaofo" label="Fakaofo"/>
<link wikidata="Q656709" start="23828" end="23836" title="Nukunonu" label="Nukunonu"/>
<link wikidata="Q36260" start="24009" end="24013" title="Apia" label="Apia"/>
<link wikidata="Q100329140" start="24192" end="24197" title="locum" label="locum"/>
<link wikidata="Q114699" start="24609" end="24622" title="Pacific Games" label="Pacific Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q113590" start="24670" end="24688" title="2007 Pacific Games" label="2007 Pacific Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q36260" start="24692" end="24696" title="Apia" label="Apia"/>
<link wikidata="Q895471" start="24773" end="24783" title="lawn bowls" label="lawn bowls"/>
<link wikidata="Q531553" start="24878" end="24897" title="Violina Linda Pedro" label="Violina Linda Pedro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930" start="25044" end="25056" title="table tennis" label="table tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813535" start="25170" end="25202" title="Tokelau Table Tennis Association" label="Tokelau Table Tennis Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091512" start="25262" end="25293" title="Oceania Table Tennis Federation" label="Oceania Table Tennis Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q688489" start="25323" end="25345" title="United World Wrestling" label="United World Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q695233" start="25405" end="25428" title="2010 Commonwealth Games" label="2010 Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="25433" end="25438" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346006" start="25607" end="25638" title="international sport federations" label="international sport federations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25723" end="25736" title="Tokelau Games" label="Tokelau Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q270102" start="25977" end="25989" title="rugby sevens" label="rugby sevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q231200" start="25991" end="25998" title="netball" label="netball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291258" start="26003" end="26011" title="kilikiti" label="kilikiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q231200" start="26124" end="26131" title="Netball" label="Netball"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962" start="26372" end="26384" title="rugby league" label="rugby league"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="26389" end="26399" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="26442" end="26450" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503088" start="26464" end="26468" title="Fale, Tokelau" label="Fale"/>
<link wikidata="Q650847" start="26470" end="26477" title="Fakaofo" label="Fakaofo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26505" end="26516" title="Hakava Club" label="Hakava Club"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26521" end="26534" title="Matalele Club" label="Matalele Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="26626" end="26631" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q264238" start="26990" end="27000" title="newsletter" label="newsletter"/>
<link wikidata="Q18167660" start="27007" end="27015" title="Te Vakai" label="Te Vakai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569826" start="27062" end="27082" title="Southern Cross Cable" label="Southern Cross Cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q7701491" start="27330" end="27336" title="Terabit Ethernet" label="400GbE"/>
<link wikidata="Q34768" start="27414" end="27440" title="international calling code" label="international calling code"/>
<link wikidata="Q43098" start="27610" end="27613" title=".tk" label=".tk"/>
<link wikidata="Q42032" start="27614" end="27643" title="country code top-level domain" label="country code top-level domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q36260" start="28108" end="28112" title="Apia" label="Apia"/>
<link wikidata="Q372001" start="28337" end="28344" title="leeward" label="leeward"/>
<link wikidata="Q171446" start="28741" end="28746" title="coral" label="coral"/>
<link wikidata="Q115940" start="29063" end="29071" title="seaplane" label="seaplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q474709" start="29077" end="29096" title="amphibious aircraft" label="amphibious aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q536644" start="29561" end="29577" title="Badge of Tokelau" label="Badge of Tokelau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112488" start="29580" end="29598" title="Outline of Tokelau" label="Outline of Tokelau"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="29689" end="29707" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="29715" end="29742" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30158" wikidata="Q678" url="?curid=30158" title="Tonga">
<text>Tonga ( , ; ), officially the Kingdom of Tonga (), is an island country in Polynesia, part of Oceania. The country has 171 islands – of which 45 are inhabited. Its total surface area is about , scattered over in the southern Pacific Ocean. according to Johnson&#x27;s Tribune, Tonga has a population of 104,494, 70% of whom reside on the main island, Tongatapu. The country stretches approximately north-south. It is surrounded by Fiji and Wallis and Futuna (France) to the northwest, Samoa to the northeast, New Caledonia (France) and Vanuatu to the west, Niue (the nearest foreign territory) to the east and Kermadec (New Zealand) to the southwest. Tonga is about from New Zealand&#x27;s North Island.

Tonga was first inhabited roughly 2,500 years ago by the Lapita civilization, Polynesian settlers who gradually evolved a distinct and strong ethnic identity, language, and culture as the Tongan people. They quickly established a powerful footing across the South Pacific, and this period of Tongan expansionism and colonization is known as the Tuʻi Tonga Empire. From the rule of the first Tongan king, ʻAhoʻeitu, Tonga grew into a regional power. It was a thalassocracy that conquered and controlled unprecedented swathes of the Pacific, from parts of the Solomon Islands and the whole of New Caledonia and Fiji in the west to Samoa and Niue and even as far as parts of modern-day French Polynesia in the east. Tuʻi Tonga became renowned for its economic, ethnic, and cultural influence over the Pacific, which remained strong even after the Samoan revolution of the 13th century and Europeans&#x27; discovery of the islands in 1616.

From 1900 to 1970, Tonga had British protected-state status. The United Kingdom looked after Tonga&#x27;s foreign affairs under a Treaty of Friendship, but Tonga never relinquished its sovereignty to any foreign power. In 2010, Tonga took a decisive step away from its traditional absolute monarchy and became a semi-constitutional monarchy, after legislative reforms paved the way for its first partial representative elections.

Tonga is a member of the Commonwealth of Nations, the United Nations, the Pacific Islands Forum, and the Alliance of Small Island States.

==Etymology==
In many Polynesian languages, including Tongan, the word (), comes from , which means &#x27;southwards&#x27;, and the archipelago is so named because it is the southernmost group among the island groups of western Polynesia. The word is cognate to the Hawaiian word meaning &#x27;leeward&#x27;, which is the origin of the name for the Kona District in Hawaii.

Tonga became known in the West as the &quot;Friendly Islands&quot; because of the congenial reception accorded to Captain James Cook on his first visit in 1773. He arrived at the time of the annual festival, which centres on the donation of the First Fruits to the Tuʻi Tonga (the islands&#x27; monarch), so he received an invitation to the festivities. Ironically, according to the writer William Mariner, the political leaders actually wanted to kill Cook during the gathering, but did not go through with it because they could not agree on a plan of action for accomplishing it.

==History==

According to Tongan mythology, the demigod Maui drew up a group of islands from the ocean, first appearing Tongatapu, the Ha&#x27;apai Islands and Vava&#x27;u, integrating into what became modern-day Tonga.

An Austronesian-speaking group linked to what archaeologists call the Lapita culture covered from Island Melanesia to Samoa, and then on to inhabit Tonga sometime between 1500 and 1000 BC. Scholars still debate exactly when Tonga was first settled, but thorium dating confirms that settlers had arrived in the earliest known inhabited town, Nukuleka, by 888 BC, ± 8 years. Tonga&#x27;s precontact history was shared via oral history, which was passed down from generation to generation.

By the 12th century, Tongans and the Tongan monarch, the Tuʻi Tonga, had acquired a reputation across the central Pacificfrom Niue, Samoa, Rotuma, Wallis and Futuna, New Caledonia to Tikopia, leading some historians to speak of a Tuʻi Tonga Empire having existed during that period. Civil wars are known to have occurred in Tonga in the 15th and 17th centuries.

The Tongan people first encountered Europeans in 1616, when the Dutch vessel &quot;Eendracht&quot;, captained by Willem Schouten, made a short visit to the islands for the purpose of engaging in trade. Later, other Dutch explorers arrived, including Jacob Le Maire (who visited the northern island of Niuatoputapu); and Abel Tasman (who visited Tongatapu and Haʻapai) in 1643. Later noteworthy European visitors included James Cook, of the British Royal Navy, in 1773, 1774, and 1777; Spanish Navy explorers Francisco Mourelle de la Rúa in 1781; Alessandro Malaspina in 1793; the first London missionaries in 1797; and a Wesleyan Methodist minister, Reverend Walter Lawry, in 1822.

Whaling vessels were among the earliest regular Western visitors. The first of these on record is the &quot;Ann and Hope&quot;, which was reported to have been seen among the islands of Tonga in June 1799. The last known whaling visitor was the &quot;Albatross&quot; in 1899. That ship arrived in Tonga seeking a resupply of water, food, and wood. The islands most regularly visited by Westerners were Ata, &#x27;Eua, Ha&#x27;apai, Tongatapu, and Vava&#x27;u. Sometimes, Tongan men were recruited to serve as crewmen on these vessels.
The United States Exploring Expedition visited Tonga in 1840.

In 1845, an ambitious young Tongan warrior, strategist, and orator named Tāufaʻāhau united Tonga into a kingdom. He held the chiefly title of Tuʻi Kanokupolu, but had been baptised by Methodist missionaries with the name &quot;Siaosi&quot; (&quot;George&quot;) in 1831. In 1875, with the help of missionary Shirley Waldemar Baker, he declared Tonga a constitutional monarchy, formally adopted the Western royal style, emancipated the &quot;serfs&quot;, enshrined a code of law, land tenure, and freedom of the press, and limited the power of the chiefs.

Tonga became a protected state under a Treaty of Friendship with Britain on 18 May 1900, when European settlers and rival Tongan chiefs unsuccessfully tried to oust the man who had succeeded Tāufaʻāhau as king. The treaty posted no higher permanent representative on Tonga than a British consul (1901–1970). Under the protection of Britain, Tonga maintained its sovereignty and remained the only Pacific nation to retain its monarchical government. The Tongan monarchy follows an uninterrupted succession of hereditary rulers from one family.

The 1918 flu pandemic, brought to Tonga by a ship from New Zealand, killed 1,800 Tongans, a mortality rate of about 8%.

The Treaty of Friendship and Tonga&#x27;s protection status ended in 1970 under arrangements that had been established by Tonga&#x27;s Queen Salote Tupou III before her death in 1965. Owing to its British ties, Tonga joined the Commonwealth in 1970 (atypically as a country that had its own monarch, rather than having the United Kingdom&#x27;s monarch, along with Malaysia, Brunei, Lesotho, and Eswatini). Tonga became a member of the United Nations in September 1999. While exposed to colonial pressures, Tonga has always governed itself, which makes it unique in the Pacific.

In January 2022, the Hunga Tonga–Hunga Haʻapai volcano, north of the main island of Tongatapu, erupted, causing a tsunami which inundated parts of the archipelago, including the capital Nukualofa. The eruption affected the kingdom heavily, cutting off most communications and killing four people in Tonga. In Peru, two women drowned due to abnormal tsunami waves. It took around five weeks to repair a submarine fiber optic cable used in the Tonga Cable System for internet and telephone connectivity.

==Politics==

Tonga is a constitutional monarchy. It is the only extant indigenous monarchy in the Pacific islands (see also Hawaiʻi). Reverence for the monarch replaces that held in earlier centuries for the sacred paramount chief, the Tuʻi Tonga. Criticism of the monarch is held to be contrary to Tongan culture and etiquette. Tonga provides for its citizens a free and mandatory education for all, secondary education with only nominal fees, and foreign-funded scholarships for postsecondary education.

The pro-democracy movement in Tonga promotes reforms, including better representation in the Parliament for the majority of commoners, and better accountability in matters of state. An overthrow of the monarchy is not part of the movement, and the institution of monarchy continues to hold popular support, even while reforms are advocated. Until recently, the governance issue was generally ignored by the leaders of other countries, but major aid donors and neighbours New Zealand and Australia are now expressing concerns about some Tongan government actions.

Following the precedents of Queen Sālote and the counsel of numerous international advisors, the government of Tonga under King Tāufaʻāhau Tupou IV (reigned 1965–2006) monetised the economy, internationalised the medical and education systems, and enabled access by commoners to increasing forms of material wealth (houses, cars, and other commodities), education, and overseas travel.

Male homosexuality is illegal in Tonga, with a maximum penalty of 10 years&#x27; imprisonment, but the law is not enforced. Tongans have universal access to a national health care system. The Constitution of Tonga protects land ownership; land cannot be sold to foreigners (although it may be leased).

===Political culture===
King Tāufaʻāhau Tupou IV and his government made some problematic economic decisions and were accused by democracy activists, including former prime minister ʻAkilisi Pōhiva, of wasting millions of dollars on unwise investments. The problems have mostly been driven by attempts to increase national revenue through a variety of schemes – considering making Tonga a nuclear waste disposal site (an idea floated in the mid 1990s by the current crown prince), and selling Tongan Protected Persons Passports (which eventually forced Tonga to naturalise the purchasers, sparking ethnicity-based concerns within Tonga).

Schemes also included the registering of foreign ships (which proved to be engaged in illegal activities, including shipments for al-Qaeda), claiming geo-orbital satellite slots (the revenue from which seems to belong to the Princess Royal, not the state), holding a long-term charter on an unusable Boeing 757 that was sidelined in Auckland Airport, leading to the collapse of Royal Tongan Airlines, and approving a factory for exporting cigarettes to China (against the advice of Tongan medical officials and decades of health-promotion messaging).

The king proved vulnerable to speculators with big promises and lost reportedly US$26 million to Jesse Bogdonoff, a financial adviser who called himself the king&#x27;s court jester. The police imprisoned pro-democracy leaders, and the government repeatedly confiscated the newspaper &quot;The Tongan Times&quot; (printed in New Zealand and sold in Tonga) because the editor had been vocally critical of the king&#x27;s mistakes. Notably, the &quot;Keleʻa&quot;, produced specifically to critique the government and printed in Tonga by pro-democracy leader ʻAkilisi Pōhiva, was not banned during that time. Pōhiva, however, had been subjected to harassment in the form of barratry (frequent lawsuits).

In mid-2003, the government passed a radical constitutional amendment to &quot;Tonganize&quot; the press, by licensing and limiting freedom of the press, so as to protect the image of the monarchy. The amendment was defended by the government and by royalists on the basis of traditional cultural values. Licensure criteria include 80% ownership by Tongans living in the country. , those papers denied licenses under the new act included the &quot;Taimi ʻo Tonga&quot; (&quot;Tongan Times&quot;), the &quot;Keleʻa,&quot; and the &quot;Matangi Tonga&quot;while those permitted licenses were uniformly church-based or pro-government.

The bill was opposed in a several-thousand-strong protest march in the capital, a call by the Tuʻi Pelehake (a prince, nephew of the king and elected member of parliament) for Australia and other nations to pressure the Tongan government to democratise the electoral system, and a legal writ calling for a judicial investigation of the bill. The latter was supported by some 160 signatures, including seven of the nine elected &quot;People&#x27;s Representatives&quot;.

The then-Crown Prince Tupoutoʻa and Pilolevu, the Princess Royal, remained generally silent on the issue. In total, the changes threatened to destabilise the polity, fragment support for the status quo, and place further pressure on the monarchy.

In 2005, the government spent several weeks negotiating with striking civil-service workers before reaching a settlement. The civil unrest that ensued was not limited to Tonga; protests outside the King&#x27;s New Zealand residence made headlines.

Prime Minister Prince ʻAhoʻeitu ʻUnuakiʻotonga Tukuʻaho (Lavaka Ata ʻUlukālala) (now King Tupou VI) resigned suddenly on 11 February 2006 and also gave up his other cabinet portfolios. The elected minister of labour, Feleti Sevele, replaced him in the interim.

On 5 July 2006, a driver in Menlo Park, California, caused the deaths of Prince Tuʻipelehake ʻUluvalu, his wife, and their driver. Tuʻipelehake, 55, was the cochairman of the constitutional reform commission and a nephew of the king.

The public expected some changes when George Tupou V succeeded his father in September 2006. On 16 November 2006, rioting broke out in the capital city of Nukuʻalofa when it seemed that the parliament would adjourn for the year without having made any advances in increasing democracy in government. Pro-democracy activists burned and looted shops, offices, and government buildings. As a result, more than 60% of the downtown area was destroyed and as many as six people died. The disturbances were ended by action from Tongan Security Forces and troops from New Zealand-led Joint Task Force.

On 29 July 2008, the Palace announced that King George Tupou V would relinquish much of his power and would surrender his role in day-to-day governmental affairs to the Prime Minister. The royal chamberlain said that this was being done to prepare the monarchy for 2010, when most of the first parliament would be elected, and added: &quot;The Sovereign of the only Polynesian kingdom ... is voluntarily surrendering his powers to meet the democratic aspirations of many of his people.&quot; The previous week, the government said the king had sold state assets that had contributed to much of the royal family&#x27;s wealth.

On 15 March 2012, King George Tupou V contracted pneumonia and was brought to Queen Mary Hospital in Hong Kong. He was later diagnosed with leukaemia. His health deteriorated significantly shortly thereafter, and he died at 3:15 pm on 18 March 2012. He was succeeded by his brother Tupou VI, who was crowned on 4 July 2015.

===Foreign relations===
Tonga&#x27;s foreign policy was described by Matangi Tonga as &quot;Look East&quot;specifically, as establishing closer diplomatic and economic relations with Asia (which actually lies to the north-west of the Pacific kingdom). As of 2021, China has attained great influence in Tonga, financing infrastructure projects, including a new royal palace and holding two thirds of the country&#x27;s foreign debt.

Tonga retains cordial relations with the United States. Although it remains on good terms with the United Kingdom, the two countries do not maintain particularly close relations. The United Kingdom closed its High Commission in Tonga in 2006, although it was re-established in January 2020 after a 14-year absence. Tonga&#x27;s relations with Oceania&#x27;s regional powers, Australia and New Zealand, are good.

Tonga maintains strong regional ties in the Pacific. It is a full member of the Pacific Islands Forum, the South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission, the South Pacific Tourism Organisation, the Pacific Regional Environment Programme, and the Secretariat of the Pacific Community.

In 2023, the governments of Tonga and other islands vulnerable to climate change (Fiji, Niue, the Solomon Islands, Tuvalu and Vanuatu) launched the &quot;Port Vila Call for a Just Transition to a Fossil Fuel Free Pacific&quot;, calling for the phase out fossil fuels and the &quot;rapid and just transition&quot; to renewable energy and strengthening environmental law, including introducing the crime of ecocide.

===Military===
The Tongan government supported the American &quot;coalition of the willing&quot; action in Iraq and deployed more than 40 soldiers (as part of an American force) in late 2004. The contingent returned home on 17 December 2004. In 2007, a second contingent went to Iraq, and two more were sent during 2008 as part of continued support for the coalition. Tongan involvement concluded at the end of 2008 with no reported loss of life.

In 2010, Brigadier General Tauʻaika ʻUtaʻatu, commander of the Tonga Defence Services, signed an agreement in London committing a minimum of 200 troops to co-operate with Britain&#x27;s International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan. The task was completed in April 2014, and the UK presented Operational Service Medals to each of the soldiers involved during a parade held in Tonga.

Tonga has contributed troops and police to the Bougainville conflict in Papua-New Guinea and to the Australian-led RAMSI force in the Solomon Islands.

=== Administrative divisions ===

Tonga is subdivided into five administrative divisions: ʻEua, Haʻapai, Niuas, Tongatapu, and Vavaʻu.

== Geography ==

Located in Oceania, Tonga is an archipelago in the South Pacific Ocean, directly south of Samoa and about two-thirds of the way from Hawai&#x27;i to New Zealand. Its 171 islands, 45 of them inhabited, are divided into three main groups – Vava&#x27;u, Ha&#x27;apai, and Tongatapu – and cover an -long north–south line.

The largest island, Tongatapu, on which the capital city of Nukuʻalofa is located, covers . Geologically, the Tongan islands are of two types: most have a limestone base formed from uplifted coral formations; others consist of limestone overlaying a volcanic base.

=== Climate ===
Tonga has a tropical rainforest climate (&quot;Af&quot;) with a distinct warm period (December–April), during which the temperatures rise above , and a cooler period (May–November), with temperatures rarely rising above . The temperature and rainfall range from and on Tongatapu in the south to and on the more northerly islands closer to the Equator.

The average wettest period is around March, with on average . The average daily humidity is 80%. The highest temperature recorded in Tonga was on 11 February 1979 in Vava&#x27;u. The coldest temperature recorded in Tonga was on 8 September 1994 in Fua&#x27;amotu. Temperatures of or lower are usually measured in the dry season and are more frequent in southern Tonga than in the northern islands. The tropical cyclone season currently runs from 1 November to 30 April, though tropical cyclones can form and affect Tonga outside of the season. According to the WorldRiskReport 2021, Tonga ranks third among the countries with the highest disaster risk worldwide – mainly due to the country&#x27;s exposure to multiple natural hazards.

=== Ecology ===
Tonga contains the Tongan tropical moist forests terrestrial ecoregion.

In Tonga, dating back to Tongan legend, flying bats are considered sacred and are the property of the monarchy. Thus, they are protected and cannot be harmed or hunted. As a result, flying fox bats have thrived in many of the islands of Tonga.

The bird life of Tonga includes a total of 73 species, of which two are endemic, the Tongan whistler and the Tongan megapode. Five species have been introduced by humans, and eight are rare or accidental. Seven species are globally threatened.

== Economy ==

Tonga&#x27;s economy is characterised by a large nonmonetary sector and a heavy dependence on remittances from the half of the country&#x27;s population who live abroad (chiefly in Australia, New Zealand, and the United States). The royal family and the nobles dominate and largely own the monetary sector of the economy – particularly the telecommunications and satellite services. Tonga was named the sixth-most corrupt country in the world by &quot;Forbes&quot; magazine in 2008.

Tonga was ranked the 165th-safest investment destination in the world in the March 2011 &quot;Euromoney&quot; Country Risk rankings.

The manufacturing sector consists of handicrafts and a few other very small-scale industries, which contribute only about 5% of GDP. Commercial business activities also are inconspicuous, and to a large extent, are dominated by the same large trading companies found throughout the South Pacific. In September 1974, the country&#x27;s first commercial trading bank, the Bank of Tonga, opened.

Tonga&#x27;s development plans emphasise a growing private sector, upgrading agricultural productivity, revitalising the squash and vanilla-bean industries, developing tourism, and improving communications and transport. Substantial progress has been made, but much work remains to be done. A small, growing construction sector is developing in response to the inflow of aid money and remittances from Tongans abroad. In recognition of such a crucial contribution, the government has created a new department in the Prime Minister&#x27;s Office with the purpose of catering for the needs of Tongans living abroad. In 2007, the Tongan Parliament amended citizenship laws to allow Tongans to hold dual citizenship.
The tourist industry is relatively undeveloped. The government recognises that tourism can play a major role in economic development, and efforts are being made to increase this source of revenue. Cruise ships often stop in Vavaʻu, with a reputation for its whale watching, game fishing, surfing, beaches, and is increasingly becoming a major player in the South Pacific tourism market.

Tonga&#x27;s postage stamps, featuring colourful and often unusual designs (including heart-shaped and banana-shaped stamps), are popular with philatelists.

In 2005, the country became eligible to become a member of the World Trade Organization. After an initial voluntary delay, Tonga became a full member of the WTO on 27 July 2007.

The Tonga Chamber of Commerce and Industry, incorporated in 1996, endeavours to represent the interests of its members, private sector businesses, and to promote economic growth in the Kingdom.

Tonga is home to some 106,000 people. More than double that number live overseas, mainly in the US, New Zealand, and Australia. Remittances from the overseas population have been declining since the onset of the 2008 global economic crisis. The tourism industry is improving, but remains modest at under 90,000 tourists per year.

=== Agriculture ===
In Tonga, agriculture and forestry (together with fisheries) provide the majority of employment, foreign exchange earnings, and food. Rural Tongans rely on both plantation and subsistence agriculture. Plants grown for both market cash crops and home use include bananas, coconuts, coffee beans, vanilla beans, and root crops such as cassava, sweet potato, and taro. , two-thirds of agricultural land was in root crops.

The processing of coconuts into copra and desiccated (dried) coconut was once the only significant industry, and only commercial export. Deteriorating prices on the world market and lack of replanting brought this once vibrant industry, as in most island nations of the South Pacific, to a complete standstill.

Swine and poultry are the major types of livestock. Horses are kept for draft purposes, primarily by farmers working their&quot; ʻapi ʻuta&quot; (a plot of bushland). More cattle are being raised, and beef imports are declining.

The traditional feudal land ownership system meant that farmers had no incentive to invest in planting long-term tree crops on land they did not own. In the late 20th century, kava and vanilla from larger plantations became the main agricultural exports, together with squash. The export of squash to Japan, beginning in 1987, once brought relief to Tonga&#x27;s struggling economy, but local farmers became increasingly wary of the Japanese market due to price fluctuations, and the huge financial risks involved.

=== Energy ===
Energy in Tonga mostly comes from imported diesel. Energy consumption in Tonga is projected to reach around 66 gigawatt hours by 2020. The country aimed to reach 50% of renewable energy by 2020. In 2019, Tonga announced the construction of a 6-megawatt solar farm on Tongatapu. The plant will be the second-largest solar plant in the Pacific upon completion.

In view of the decreasing reliability of fossil-fuel electricity generation, its increasing costs, and negative environmental side effects, renewable energy solutions have attracted the government&#x27;s attention. Together with IRENA, Tonga has planned a renewable energy based strategy to power the main and outer islands. The strategy focuses on solar home systems that turn individual households into small power plants. It calls for the involvement of local operators, finance institutions, and technicians to provide sustainable business models and strategies to ensure the effective operation, management, and maintenance once the systems are installed.

The Pacific Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency was established in Tonga in 2016 to advise the private sector on related policy matters, provide capacity development and promote business investment. The centre facilitates a financial mechanism offering competitive grants for start-ups to spur the adoption of renewable energy by the business sector. The centre is part of the Global Network of Regional Sustainable Energy Centres and SIDS DOCK framework designed to attract international investment in the renewable energy sector.

With the assistance of IRENA, Tonga has developed the 2010–2020 Tonga Energy Road Map, which aims for a 50% reduction of diesel importation. This was to be accomplished through a range of appropriate renewable technologies, including wind and solar, as well as innovative efficiencies. As of 2018, Tonga was generating 10% of its electricity from renewable sources.

== Demographics ==

Over 70% of the inhabitants live on its main island, Tongatapu. Although an increasing number of Tongans have moved into the only urban and commercial centre, Nukuʻalofa, where European and indigenous cultural and living patterns have blended, village life and kinship ties remain influential throughout the country. Despite emigration, Tonga grew in population from about 32,000 in the 1930s to more than 90,000 by 1976.

=== Ethnic groups ===

According to the government portal, Tongans, Polynesian by ethnicity with a mixture of Melanesian, represent more than 98% of the inhabitants. About 1.5% are mixed Tongans and the rest are European (the majority are British), mixed European, and other Pacific Islanders. In 2001, about 3,000 to 4,000 Chinese lived there, comprising 3 to 4% of the total Tongan population. The 2006 Nukuʻalofa riots mainly targeted Chinese-owned businesses, leading to the emigration of several hundred Chinese so that only about 300 remain.

=== Languages ===
Tongan is the official language, along with English. Tongan is a Polynesian language of the Tongic branch so is closely related to other languages of the Tongic branch, those being: Niuean and Niuafoʻouan. Tongan is more distantly related to other Polynesian languages such as Hawaiian, Samoan, Māori, and Tahitian, among others.

=== Religion ===

Tonga does not have an official state religion. The Constitution of Tonga (Revised 1998) provides for freedom of religion.

In 1928, Queen Salote Tupou III, who was a member of the Free Wesleyan Church of Tonga, established the Free Wesleyan Church as the state religion of Tonga. The chief pastor of the Free Wesleyan Church serves as the representative of the people of Tonga and of the church at the coronation of a king or queen of Tonga, where he anoints and crowns the monarch. In opposition to the establishment of the Free Wesleyan Church as a state religion, the Church of Tonga separated from the Free Wesleyan Church in 1928.

Islam in Tonga is a small minority religion in the country. Muslims in Tonga belong to Sunni denomination. Al-Khadeejah Mosque is a prominent mosque in Tonga.

Everyday life is heavily influenced by Polynesian traditions and by the Christian faith; for example, all commerce and entertainment activities cease on Sunday, from the beginning of the day at midnight, to the end of the day at midnight. The constitution declares the Sabbath sacred forever. The official figures from the latest government census show that 90% of the population are affiliated with a Christian church or sect, with the four major church affiliations in the kingdom:
* Free Wesleyan Church of Tonga (36,592 or 36%)
* The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (18,554 or 18%)
* Roman Catholics (15,441 or 15%)
* Free Church of Tonga (11,863 or 12%)

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints sent missionaries in 1891 to visit King Siaosi (George) Tupo, where they obtained permission to preach.

=== Health ===
By some published surveys, Tonga has one of the highest obesity rates in the world. World Health Organization data published in 2014 indicate that Tonga stands fourth overall in terms of countries listed by mean body mass index data. In 2011, 90% of the adult population were considered overweight using NIH interpretation of body mass index (BMI) data, with more than 60% of those obese. 70% of Tongan females aged 15–85 are obese. Tonga and Nauru have the world&#x27;s highest overweight and obese populations.

In late October 2021, Tonga reported its first case of COVID-19 based on a New Zealand air passenger&#x27;s positive test.

=== Education ===
Primary education between ages 6 and 14 is compulsory and free in state schools. Mission schools provide about 8% of the primary and 90% of the secondary level of education. State schools make up for the rest. Higher education includes teacher training, nursing, and medical training, a small private university, a woman&#x27;s business college, and a number of private agricultural schools. Most levels of higher education are pursued overseas.

Tongans enjoy a relatively high level of education, with a 98.9% literacy rate, and higher education up to and including medical and graduate degrees (pursued mostly overseas). They hold the body of academic knowledge created by their scholars in high esteem and the Kukū Kaunaka Collection, which comprises every doctoral and master&#x27;s dissertation written by any Tongan in any country is archived by Seu&#x27;ula Johansson-Fua at the Institute for Education in Tonga.

=== Emigration ===
Contemporary Tongans often have strong ties to overseas lands. Many Tongans have emigrated to Australia, New Zealand, or the United States to seek employment and a higher standard of living.

In 2018, 82,389 Tongans lived in New Zealand. As of 2000, 36,840 Tongans were living in the US. More than 8,000 Tongans live in Australia. The Tongan diaspora retains close ties to relatives at home, and a significant portion of Tonga&#x27;s income derives from remittances to family members (often aged) who prefer to remain in Tonga.

== Culture ==

Humans have lived in Tonga for nearly 3,000 years since settlement in late Lapita times. Before the arrival of European explorers in the late 17th and early 18th centuries, Tongans had frequent contacts with their nearest Oceanic neighbours, Fiji and Niue. In the 19th century, with the arrival of Western traders and missionaries, Tongan culture changed, especially in religion. , almost 98% of residents profess Christianity. The people discarded some old beliefs and habits and adopted others.

=== Fahu ===
Fahu is a form of social organization practiced by the people of Tonga, built upon a relationship between a person and their father’s sister and paternal cousins. There are a few key superiorities in the social structure of fahu:

# One&#x27;s paternal side is superior to their maternal side of a family unit, and
# Sisters are situated as superordinate and sacred counterparts to their brothers, thus
# The sister of one&#x27;s father is the highest ranking family member

Prior to Western contact, the inner dynamics between the chiefly kinship groups were governed by this social convention. Although fahu rights do not hold the same political strength and implications they historically did, they remain, to a notable degree, a part of the contemporary social practices in Tonga.

==== Socio-environmental impact of fahu ====
Similar social structures to fahu have been cited as significantly beneficial for human adaptation to environmental threats, especially those situated in hurricane-prone regions such as Tonga. The benefit stems from the fahu&#x27;s ability to provide a network and capacity to allow for relocation or people and resources during environmental events, such as hurricanes or droughts.

However, there have been environmental consequences of note due to the fahu structure, or rather, a disturbance of the structure. In the 1980s, Tonga saw a severe depletion of its sandalwood tree due a disruption of the fahu social hierarchy, which was incited by market demand for the resource. This led to heightened local competition and eventually an overharvest of the tree. Nearly all of the sandalwood resources were depleted over the span of two years.

=== Sport ===
====Rugby union====

Rugby union is the national sport, and the national team (ʻIkale Tahi, or Sea Eagles) has performed quite well on the international stage. Tonga has competed in six Rugby World Cups since 1987. The 2007 and 2011 Rugby World Cups were Tonga&#x27;s most successful to date, both winning two out of four matches and in a running chance for the quarterfinals. In the 2007 Rugby World Cup, Tonga won its first two matches, against the USA 25–15, and Samoa 19–15. They came very close to upsetting the eventual winners of the 2007 tournament, the South African Springboks, losing 30–25. A defeat by England, 36–20 in their last pool game ended their hopes of making the knockout stages. Nevertheless, by picking up third place in their pool games behind South Africa and England, Tonga earned automatic qualification for the 2011 Rugby World Cup in New Zealand. In Pool A of the 2011 Rugby World Cup, Tonga beat both Japan 31–18 and 5th ranked eventual finalist France 19–14 in the latter pool stages. However, a previous heavy defeat by the All Blacks at the tournament&#x27;s opener (41–10) and a subsequent tight defeat by Canada (25–20) meant that Tonga lost out to France (who also lost to NZ) for the quarter finals due to 2 bonus points and a points difference of 46.

Tonga&#x27;s best result before 2007 came in 1995, when they beat Côte d&#x27;Ivoire 29–11, and 1999 when they beat Italy 28–25 (although with only 14 men they lost heavily to England, 101–10). Tonga perform the Ikale Tahi war dance or Sipi Tau (a form of Kailao) before all their matches. Tonga used to compete in the Pacific Tri-Nations against Samoa and Fiji, which has now been replaced by the World Rugby Pacific Nations Cup, which now involves Japan, Canada, and the United States. At club level, there are the Datec Cup Provincial Championship and the Pacific Rugby Cup. Rugby union is governed by the Tonga Rugby Football Union, which was a member of the Pacific Islands Rugby Alliance and contributed to the Pacific Islanders rugby union team, before they were disbanded in 2009.

Many players of Tongan descent – e.g., Jonah Lomu, Israel Folau, Viliami &quot;William&quot; ʻOfahengaue, Malakai Fekitoa, Ben Afeaki, Charles Piutau, Frank Halai, Sekope Kepu, George Smith, Wycliff Palu, Sitaleki Timani, Salesi Ma&#x27;afu, Anthony and Saia Fainga&#x27;a, Mark Gerrard, Cooper Vuna, Doug Howlett, Toutai Kefu and Tatafu Polota-Nau – have played for either the All Blacks or the Wallabies. British and Irish Lion and Welsh international player Taulupe &quot;Toby&quot; Faletau is Tongan born and the son of Tongan international Kuli Faletau. Taulupe&#x27;s cousins and England international players Billy and Mako Vunipola (who is also a British and Irish Lion), are sons of former Tonga rugby captain Fe&#x27;ao Vunipola. Rugby is popular among the nation&#x27;s schools, and students from schools such as Tonga College and Tupou College are regularly offered scholarships in New Zealand, Australia and Japan.

====Rugby league====

Rugby league has gained some success. Tonga made their first appearance at a Rugby League World Cup in the 1995 edition where they went out in the first stage but narrowly lost to New Zealand. They have since appeared in each subsequent Rugby League World Cup tournament. In the 2008 Rugby League World Cup Tonga recorded wins against Ireland and Scotland. Just before the 2017 World Cup, various high-profile players, led by Jason Taumalolo and Andrew Fifita, defected from their tier one nations to represent their nation of heritage. This led to them defeating New Zealand in Hamilton at Waikato Stadium on 11 November at that tournament. The national team has since also recorded victories against Great Britain and the world number one Australia. In addition to the success of the national team, many players of Tongan descent make it big in the Australian National Rugby League competition. These include Jason Taumalolo, Israel Folau, Tyson Frizell, Tevita Pangai Junior, Konrad Hurrell, David Fusitua, Tuimoala Lolohea, Sio Siua Taukeiaho, Jorge Taufua, William Hopoate, Andrew Fifita, Ben Murdoch-Masila, Felise Kaufusi, Willie Mason, Manu Vatuvei, Brent Kite, Fuifui Moimoi, Willie Tonga, Anthony Tupou, Antonio Kaufusi, Michael Jennings, Tony Williams, Feleti Mateo. Subsequently, some Tongan rugby league players have established successful careers in the Super League such as Antonio Kaufusi.

==== Olympics ====
Aside from rugby, Tonga has also produced athletes who have competed at both the Summer and Winter Olympics. Tonga&#x27;s only Olympic medal came from the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta, where Paea Wolfgramm won silver in super heavyweight boxing. One athlete, Pita Taufatofua, attended the 2018 Winter Olympics in Pyeongchang, South Korea.

==== American football ====
Several Tongans have been football players in the National Football League, including Tuineau Alipate, Sione Takitaki, Spencer Folau, Lakei Heimuli, Steve Kaufusi, Ma&#x27;ake Kemoeatu, Deuce Lutui, Siupeli Malamala, Tim Manoa, Stan Mataele, Vili Maumau, Alfred Pupunu, Vai Sikahema, Star Lotulelei, Vita Vea, Talanoa Hufanga, Peter Tuipulotu, Marlon Tuipulotu, and Tuli Tuipulotu.

=== Media ===
* &quot;Matangi Tonga&quot; – online newspaper
* &quot;Taimi o Tonga&quot; (&quot;Times of Tonga&quot;) – controversial newspaper 
* &quot;Keleʻa&quot; – newspaper
* &quot;Talaki&quot; – newspaper
* &quot;Kalonikali&quot; – newspaper
* &quot;Tauʻataina&quot; – newspaper
* &quot;Kakalu&quot; – newspaper
* Tonga Broadcasting Commission (Television Tonga, Television Tonga 2, Radio Tonga 1, Radio Tonga 2 – Kool 90FM, 103FM)

=== Contemporary Tongan art ===
There has been a huge surge of contemporary Tongan artists in the past decade, the majority based in New Zealand. Tanya Edwards works with ngatu (bark cloths), Benjamin Work, Telly Tuita, and Sione Monū are widely exhibited internationally, Sēmisi Fetokai Potauaine built a five-storey Tongan sculpture in central Christchurch. In 2023, Bergman Gallery hosted &quot;Tukufakaholo, Tongan Contemporary&quot; in Auckland, New Zealand, featuring eight Tongan artists.

== See also ==

* Outline of Tonga
* List of islands and towns in Tonga
== Notes ==
== References ==

== Further reading ==
===Ethnography, culture, and history===
* &quot;On the Edge of the Global: Modern Anxieties in a Pacific Island Nation&quot; (2011) by Niko Besnier. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 
* &quot;Islanders of the South: Production, Kinship and Ideology in the Polynesian Kingdom of Tonga&quot; (1993) by Paul van der Grijp. Leiden: KITLV Press. 
* &quot;Identity and Development: Tongan Culture, Agriculture, and the Perenniality of the Gift&quot; (2004) by Paul van der Grijp. Leiden: KITLV Press. 
* &quot;Manifestations of Mana: Political Power and Divine Inspiration in Polynesia&quot; (2014) by Paul van der Grijp. Vienna and Berlin: LIT Verlag. 
* &quot;Becoming Tongan: An Ethnography of Childhood&quot; by Helen Morton
* &quot;Queen Salote of Tonga: The Story of an Era, 1900–65&quot; by Elizabeth Wood-Ellem
* &quot;Tradition Versus Democracy in the South Pacific: Fiji, Tonga and Western Samoa&quot; by Stephanie Lawson
* &quot;Voyages: From Tongan Villages to American Suburbs&quot; Cathy A. Small
* &quot;Friendly Islands: A History of Tonga&quot; (1977). Noel Rutherford. Melbourne: Oxford University Press. 
* &quot;Tonga and the Tongans: Heritage and Identity&quot; (2007) Elizabeth Wood-Ellem. Alphington, Vic.: Tonga Research Association, 
* &quot;Early Tonga: As the Explorers Saw it 1616–1810&quot;. (1987). Edwin N Ferdon. Tucson: University of Arizona Press; 
* &quot;The Art of Tonga&quot; (Ko e ngaahi&#x27;aati&#x27;o Tonga) by Keith St Cartmail. (1997) Honolulu : University of Hawai`i Press. 
* &quot;The Tonga Book&quot; by Paul. W. Dale
* &quot;Tonga&quot; by James Siers

===Wildlife and environment===
* &quot;Birds of Fiji, Tonga and Samoa&quot; by Dick Watling
* &quot;A Guide to the Birds of Fiji and Western Polynesia: Including American Samoa, Niue, Samoa, Tokelau, Tonga, Tuvalu and Wallis and Futuna&quot; by Dick Watling
* &quot;Guide to the Birds of the Kingdom of Tonga&quot; by Dick Watling

===Travel guides===
* &quot;Lonely Planet Guide: Samoan Islands and Tonga&quot; by Susannah Farfor and Paul Smitz
* &quot;Moon Travel Guide: Samoa-Tonga&quot; by David Stanley

===Bibliography===

===Fiction===


== External links ==

* Tonga. &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
* Tonga from UCB Libraries GovPubs (archived 7 June 2008)
* J. Edward Hoffmeister Films from the J. Edward Hoffmeister Papers. MSS 231. Special Collections &amp; Archives, UC San Diego</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q678" start="0" end="5" title="Tonga" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q678" start="30" end="46" title="Tonga" label="Kingdom of Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q112099" start="57" end="71" title="island country" label="island country"/>
<link wikidata="Q35942" start="75" end="84" title="Polynesia" label="Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="94" end="101" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q502914" start="119" end="130" title="List of islands and towns in Tonga" label="171 islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="225" end="238" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q620452" start="351" end="360" title="Tongatapu" label="Tongatapu"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="431" end="435" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q35555" start="440" end="457" title="Wallis and Futuna" label="Wallis and Futuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="485" end="490" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="509" end="522" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q686" start="536" end="543" title="Vanuatu" label="Vanuatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q34020" start="557" end="561" title="Niue" label="Niue"/>
<link wikidata="Q114935" start="610" end="618" title="Kermadec Islands" label="Kermadec"/>
<link wikidata="Q118863" start="690" end="702" title="North Island" label="North Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021436" start="762" end="768" title="Lapita culture" label="Lapita"/>
<link wikidata="Q34094" start="864" end="872" title="Tongan language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="878" end="885" title="culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q26085464" start="893" end="906" title="Tongans" label="Tongan people"/>
<link wikidata="Q842390" start="1050" end="1067" title="Tuʻi Tonga Empire" label="Tuʻi Tonga Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q836240" start="1096" end="1107" title="List of monarchs of Tonga" label="Tongan king"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245849" start="1109" end="1118" title="ʻAhoʻeitu" label="ʻAhoʻeitu"/>
<link wikidata="Q288587" start="1163" end="1176" title="thalassocracy" label="thalassocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="1263" end="1278" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="1296" end="1309" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="1314" end="1318" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q30971" start="1388" end="1404" title="French Polynesia" label="French Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23022146" start="1671" end="1701" title="Kingdom of Tonga (1900–1970)" label="British protected-state status"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1772" end="1792" title="#History" label="Treaty of Friendship"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="1827" end="1838" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="1923" end="1940" title="absolute monarchy" label="absolute monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="1954" end="1982" title="semi-constitutional monarchy" label="semi-constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3587258" start="2032" end="2037" title="2010 Tongan general election" label="first"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="2046" end="2069" title="representative election" label="representative election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="2098" end="2121" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="2127" end="2141" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q757276" start="2147" end="2168" title="Pacific Islands Forum" label="Pacific Islands Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q496967" start="2178" end="2209" title="Alliance of Small Island States" label="Alliance of Small Island States"/>
<link wikidata="Q390979" start="2234" end="2254" title="Polynesian languages" label="Polynesian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33569" start="2478" end="2486" title="Hawaiian language" label="Hawaiian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4260402" start="2561" end="2584" title="Kona District, Hawaii" label="Kona District in Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="2709" end="2719" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362381" start="2832" end="2844" title="First Fruits" label="First Fruits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232525" start="2852" end="2862" title="Tuʻi Tonga" label="Tuʻi Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015116" start="2977" end="2992" title="William Mariner (writer)" label="William Mariner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821030" start="3196" end="3212" title="Tongan mythology" label="Tongan mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791456" start="3226" end="3230" title="Maui (mythology)" label="Maui"/>
<link wikidata="Q620452" start="3290" end="3299" title="Tongatapu" label="Tongatapu"/>
<link wikidata="Q612098" start="3305" end="3325" title="Ha&amp;#x27;apai Islands" label="Ha&amp;#x27;apai Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q859666" start="3330" end="3341" title="Vava&amp;#x27;u" label="Vava&amp;#x27;u"/>
<link wikidata="Q49228" start="3394" end="3406" title="Austronesian languages" label="Austronesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021436" start="3461" end="3475" title="Lapita culture" label="Lapita culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6083292" start="3489" end="3505" title="Island Melanesia" label="Island Melanesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="3509" end="3514" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115" start="3644" end="3651" title="thorium" label="thorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q209815" start="3811" end="3823" title="oral tradition" label="oral history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232525" start="3936" end="3946" title="Tuʻi Tonga" label="Tuʻi Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q34020" start="4005" end="4009" title="Niue" label="Niue"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="4011" end="4016" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q459763" start="4018" end="4024" title="Rotuma" label="Rotuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q35555" start="4026" end="4043" title="Wallis and Futuna" label="Wallis and Futuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="4045" end="4058" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q889519" start="4062" end="4069" title="Tikopia" label="Tikopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q951904" start="4319" end="4340" title="Eendracht (1615 ship)" label="&amp;quot;Eendracht&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q316391" start="4355" end="4370" title="Willem Schouten" label="Willem Schouten"/>
<link wikidata="Q438156" start="4492" end="4506" title="Jacob Le Maire" label="Jacob Le Maire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144842" start="4543" end="4555" title="Niuatoputapu" label="Niuatoputapu"/>
<link wikidata="Q42188" start="4562" end="4573" title="Abel Tasman" label="Abel Tasman"/>
<link wikidata="Q612098" start="4601" end="4608" title="Haʻapai" label="Haʻapai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317782" start="4750" end="4778" title="Francisco Mourelle" label="Francisco Mourelle de la Rúa"/>
<link wikidata="Q459906" start="4788" end="4808" title="Alessandro Malaspina" label="Alessandro Malaspina"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="4835" end="4847" title="missionaries" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="4863" end="4881" title="Methodism" label="Wesleyan Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q42767" start="4925" end="4932" title="Whaling" label="Whaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q119129" start="5464" end="5498" title="United States Exploring Expedition" label="United States Exploring Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q379840" start="5596" end="5606" title="Tāufaʻāhau" label="Tāufaʻāhau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469921" start="5665" end="5680" title="Tuʻi Kanokupolu" label="Tuʻi Kanokupolu"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="5707" end="5716" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q204358" start="5830" end="5852" title="Shirley Waldemar Baker" label="Shirley Waldemar Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q21479969" start="6093" end="6108" title="British Protectorate" label="protected state"/>
<link wikidata="Q207978" start="6366" end="6372" title="Consul (representative)" label="consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q178275" start="6626" end="6643" title="1918 flu pandemic" label="1918 flu pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q541570" start="6884" end="6900" title="Salote Tupou III" label="Salote Tupou III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="6971" end="6983" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="7066" end="7095" title="Monarchy of the United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom&amp;#x27;s monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="7108" end="7116" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="7118" end="7124" title="Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013" start="7126" end="7133" title="Lesotho" label="Lesotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050" start="7139" end="7147" title="Eswatini" label="Eswatini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143318" start="7344" end="7369" title="Hunga Tonga–Hunga Haʻapai" label="Hunga Tonga–Hunga Haʻapai"/>
<link wikidata="Q110567218" start="7418" end="7425" title="2022 Hunga Tonga–Hunga Ha&amp;#x27;apai eruption and tsunami" label="erupted"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070" start="7437" end="7444" title="tsunami" label="tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="7632" end="7636" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q506572" start="7725" end="7752" title="Submarine communications cable" label="submarine fiber optic cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q16258444" start="7765" end="7783" title="Tonga Cable System" label="Tonga Cable System"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="7851" end="7874" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q156418" start="7951" end="7958" title="Hawaiian Kingdom" label="Hawaiʻi"/>
<link wikidata="Q273739" start="9026" end="9045" title="Tāufaʻāhau Tupou IV" label="Tāufaʻāhau Tupou IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6458214" start="9290" end="9303" title="LGBT rights in Tonga" label="homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q12718550" start="9395" end="9407" title="Unenforced law" label="not enforced"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164236" start="9477" end="9498" title="Constitution of Tonga" label="Constitution of Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3594634" start="9770" end="9785" title="ʻAkilisi Pōhiva" label="ʻAkilisi Pōhiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q3591841" start="10253" end="10281" title="Flag state" label="registering of foreign ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="10357" end="10365" title="al-Qaeda" label="al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q14752666" start="10368" end="10404" title="TONGASAT" label="claiming geo-orbital satellite slots"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418" start="10527" end="10537" title="Boeing 757" label="Boeing 757"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="10560" end="10568" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446054" start="10605" end="10626" title="Royal Tongan Airlines" label="Royal Tongan Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186158" start="10876" end="10891" title="Jesse Bogdonoff" label="Jesse Bogdonoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q215548" start="10948" end="10960" title="jester" label="court jester"/>
<link wikidata="Q807282" start="11451" end="11459" title="Barratry (common law)" label="barratry"/>
<link wikidata="Q227716" start="12608" end="12617" title="George Tupou V" label="Tupoutoʻa"/>
<link wikidata="Q208497" start="13105" end="13162" title="Tupou VI" label="ʻAhoʻeitu ʻUnuakiʻotonga Tukuʻaho (Lavaka Ata ʻUlukālala)"/>
<link wikidata="Q319953" start="13300" end="13313" title="Feleti Sevele" label="Feleti Sevele"/>
<link wikidata="Q74195" start="13373" end="13395" title="Menlo Park, California" label="Menlo Park, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485126" start="13425" end="13446" title="Tuʻipelehake (ʻUluvalu)" label="Tuʻipelehake ʻUluvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q580640" start="13676" end="13711" title="2006 Tonga riots" label="16 November 2006, rioting broke out"/>
<link wikidata="Q38834" start="13735" end="13745" title="Nukuʻalofa" label="Nukuʻalofa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597333" start="14101" end="14123" title="His Majesty&amp;#x27;s Armed Forces (Tonga)" label="Tongan Security Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270465" start="14880" end="14899" title="Queen Mary Hospital (Hong Kong)" label="Queen Mary Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="14903" end="14912" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q208497" start="15084" end="15092" title="Tupou VI" label="Tupou VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6304394" start="15196" end="15209" title="Matangi Tonga" label="Matangi Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q757276" start="16053" end="16074" title="Pacific Islands Forum" label="Pacific Islands Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568102" start="16080" end="16123" title="South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission" label="South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568120" start="16129" end="16163" title="South Pacific Tourism Organisation" label="South Pacific Tourism Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3922764" start="16169" end="16207" title="Pacific Regional Environment Programme" label="Pacific Regional Environment Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q871511" start="16217" end="16253" title="Secretariat of the Pacific Community" label="Secretariat of the Pacific Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="16338" end="16342" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q34020" start="16344" end="16348" title="Niue" label="Niue"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="16354" end="16369" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q672" start="16371" end="16377" title="Tuvalu" label="Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q686" start="16382" end="16389" title="Vanuatu" label="Vanuatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="16510" end="16521" title="fossil fuel" label="fossil fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6316391" start="16547" end="16562" title="just transition" label="just transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q12705" start="16572" end="16588" title="renewable energy" label="renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q328798" start="16607" end="16624" title="environmental law" label="environmental law"/>
<link wikidata="Q296486" start="16661" end="16668" title="ecocide" label="ecocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342140" start="16737" end="16761" title="Coalition of the willing (Iraq War)" label="coalition of the willing"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="16778" end="16782" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597333" start="17182" end="17204" title="Tonga Defence Services" label="Tonga Defence Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="17348" end="17359" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18826" start="17559" end="17571" title="Bougainville Province" label="Bougainville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800679" start="17627" end="17632" title="RAMSI" label="RAMSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="17646" end="17661" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q423528" start="17754" end="17758" title="ʻEua" label="ʻEua"/>
<link wikidata="Q612098" start="17760" end="17767" title="Haʻapai" label="Haʻapai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200954" start="17769" end="17774" title="Niuas" label="Niuas"/>
<link wikidata="Q620452" start="17776" end="17785" title="Tongatapu" label="Tongatapu"/>
<link wikidata="Q859666" start="17791" end="17797" title="Vavaʻu" label="Vavaʻu"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="17828" end="17835" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="17849" end="17860" title="archipelago" label="archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="17868" end="17887" title="South Pacific Ocean" label="South Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q620452" start="18156" end="18165" title="Tongatapu" label="Tongatapu"/>
<link wikidata="Q38834" start="18196" end="18206" title="Nukuʻalofa" label="Nukuʻalofa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="18386" end="18394" title="volcanic" label="volcanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q209531" start="18430" end="18457" title="tropical rainforest climate" label="tropical rainforest climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="18459" end="18473" title="Köppen climate classification" label="&amp;quot;Af&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q111954452" start="19332" end="19347" title="WorldRiskReport" label="WorldRiskReport"/>
<link wikidata="Q102078715" start="19542" end="19571" title="Tongan tropical moist forests" label="Tongan tropical moist forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241332" start="19778" end="19793" title="pteropus" label="flying fox bats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3252784" start="19845" end="19863" title="List of birds of Tonga" label="bird life of Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591879" start="19926" end="19941" title="Tongan whistler" label="Tongan whistler"/>
<link wikidata="Q961967" start="19950" end="19965" title="Tongan megapode" label="Tongan megapode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351807" start="20195" end="20206" title="remittances" label="remittances"/>
<link wikidata="Q4038310" start="20679" end="20688" title="Euromoney" label="Euromoney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543799" start="20756" end="20767" title="cottage industry" label="handicrafts"/>
<link wikidata="Q591763" start="21164" end="21178" title="private sector" label="private sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366963" start="22084" end="22098" title="whale watching" label="whale watching"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204976" start="22214" end="22241" title="Postage stamps and postal history of Tonga" label="Tonga&amp;#x27;s postage stamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q131026" start="22357" end="22369" title="Philately" label="philatelists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="22435" end="22459" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q188913" start="23258" end="23268" title="plantation" label="plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787508" start="23273" end="23296" title="subsistence agriculture" label="subsistence agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q932139" start="23327" end="23336" title="cash crop" label="cash crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="23368" end="23375" title="coconut" label="coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q153697" start="23378" end="23389" title="coffee bean" label="coffee bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q13241" start="23392" end="23404" title="vanilla bean" label="vanilla bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q20136" start="23411" end="23421" title="root crops" label="root crops"/>
<link wikidata="Q83124" start="23430" end="23437" title="cassava" label="cassava"/>
<link wikidata="Q37937" start="23439" end="23451" title="sweet potato" label="sweet potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q227997" start="23457" end="23461" title="taro" label="taro"/>
<link wikidata="Q193726" start="23549" end="23554" title="copra" label="copra"/>
<link wikidata="Q903071" start="23559" end="23569" title="desiccation" label="desiccated"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="24991" end="25014" title="fossil-fuel electricity" label="fossil-fuel electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12705" start="25090" end="25106" title="renewable energy" label="renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q392739" start="25179" end="25184" title="IRENA" label="IRENA"/>
<link wikidata="Q26085464" start="26643" end="26650" title="Tongans" label="Tongans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042001" start="27037" end="27047" title="Polynesians" label="Polynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q37394" start="27079" end="27088" title="Melanesia" label="Melanesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464982" start="27181" end="27189" title="European ethnic groups" label="European"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065556" start="27244" end="27261" title="Pacific Islanders" label="Pacific Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100814" start="27293" end="27312" title="Chinese in Tonga" label="Chinese lived there"/>
<link wikidata="Q580640" start="27369" end="27390" title="2006 Nukuʻalofa riots" label="2006 Nukuʻalofa riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q34094" start="27536" end="27542" title="Tongan language" label="Tongan"/>
<link wikidata="Q390979" start="27601" end="27620" title="Polynesian language" label="Polynesian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33790" start="27718" end="27724" title="Niuean language" label="Niuean"/>
<link wikidata="Q36173" start="27729" end="27740" title="Niuafo&amp;#x27;ou language" label="Niuafoʻouan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33569" start="27813" end="27821" title="Hawaiian language" label="Hawaiian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34011" start="27823" end="27829" title="Samoan language" label="Samoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36451" start="27831" end="27836" title="Māori language" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q34128" start="27842" end="27850" title="Tahitian language" label="Tahitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q541570" start="28024" end="28040" title="Salote Tupou III" label="Salote Tupou III"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500150" start="28066" end="28095" title="Free Wesleyan Church of Tonga" label="Free Wesleyan Church of Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q5117757" start="28457" end="28472" title="Church of Tonga" label="Church of Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q6082019" start="28523" end="28537" title="Islam in Tonga" label="Islam in Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="28610" end="28615" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q109535973" start="28630" end="28649" title="Al-Khadeejah Mosque" label="Al-Khadeejah Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500150" start="29169" end="29198" title="Free Wesleyan Church of Tonga" label="Free Wesleyan Church of Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="29217" end="29264" title="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q3668020" start="29283" end="29298" title="Roman Catholicism in Tonga" label="Roman Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499780" start="29317" end="29337" title="Free Church of Tonga" label="Free Church of Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="29607" end="29632" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q25214343" start="29710" end="29755" title="List of countries by Body Mass Index (BMI)" label="countries listed by mean body mass index data"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="29905" end="29910" title="obesity" label="obese"/>
<link wikidata="Q697" start="29966" end="29971" title="Nauru" label="Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="30092" end="30100" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q92257759" start="31032" end="31058" title="Seu&amp;#x27;ula Johansson-Fua" label="Seu&amp;#x27;ula Johansson-Fua"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821010" start="31214" end="31223" title="Tongan Australians" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39054502" start="31225" end="31236" title="Tongan New Zealanders" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821008" start="31245" end="31258" title="Tongan Americans" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q133004" start="31462" end="31470" title="diaspora" label="diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021436" start="31739" end="31745" title="Lapita" label="Lapita"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="33887" end="33898" title="Rugby union" label="Rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134659" start="33930" end="33943" title="Tonga national rugby union team" label="national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q16640" start="34052" end="34067" title="Rugby World Cup" label="Rugby World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322777" start="34075" end="34079" title="1987 Rugby World Cup" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q124753" start="34085" end="34089" title="2007 Rugby World Cup" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q270736" start="34094" end="34114" title="2011 Rugby World Cup" label="2011 Rugby World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143805" start="34317" end="34320" title="United States national rugby union team" label="USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138539" start="34332" end="34337" title="Samoa national rugby union team" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q498478" start="34442" end="34452" title="Springboks" label="Springboks"/>
<link wikidata="Q378628" start="34480" end="34487" title="England National Rugby Union Team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330318" start="34746" end="34752" title="2011 Rugby World Cup Pool A" label="Pool A"/>
<link wikidata="Q270736" start="34760" end="34780" title="2011 Rugby World Cup" label="2011 Rugby World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122433" start="34798" end="34803" title="Japan national rugby union team" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q518116" start="34843" end="34849" title="France national rugby union team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q55801" start="34923" end="34933" title="All Blacks" label="All Blacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q774221" start="35007" end="35013" title="Canada national rugby union team" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q55801" start="35076" end="35078" title="All Blacks" label="NZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130017" start="35202" end="35206" title="1995 Rugby World Cup" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675853" start="35223" end="35241" title="Ivory Coast national rugby union team" label="Côte d&amp;#x27;Ivoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141048" start="35253" end="35257" title="1999 Rugby World Cup" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q113135" start="35273" end="35278" title="Italy national rugby union team" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540967" start="35369" end="35389" title="Kailao" label="Ikale Tahi war dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540967" start="35413" end="35419" title="Kailao" label="Kailao"/>
<link wikidata="Q11096285" start="35476" end="35495" title="Pacific Tri-Nations" label="Pacific Tri-Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q339784" start="35555" end="35586" title="World Rugby Pacific Nations Cup" label="World Rugby Pacific Nations Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122433" start="35607" end="35612" title="Japan national rugby union team" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q774221" start="35614" end="35620" title="Canada national rugby union team" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143805" start="35630" end="35643" title="United States national rugby union team" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227628" start="35674" end="35707" title="Datec Cup Provincial Championship" label="Datec Cup Provincial Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360199" start="35716" end="35733" title="Pacific Rugby Cup" label="Pacific Rugby Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092209" start="35766" end="35792" title="Tonga Rugby Football Union" label="Tonga Rugby Football Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q638027" start="35820" end="35850" title="Pacific Islands Rugby Alliance" label="Pacific Islands Rugby Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q247246" start="35874" end="35908" title="Pacific Islanders rugby union team" label="Pacific Islanders rugby union team"/>
<link wikidata="Q363717" start="35986" end="35996" title="Jonah Lomu" label="Jonah Lomu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155646" start="35998" end="36010" title="Israel Folau" label="Israel Folau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569098" start="36012" end="36051" title="Viliami Ofahengaue" label="Viliami &amp;quot;William&amp;quot; ʻOfahengaue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6741136" start="36053" end="36068" title="Malakai Fekitoa" label="Malakai Fekitoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885195" start="36070" end="36080" title="Ben Afeaki" label="Ben Afeaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081683" start="36082" end="36096" title="Charles Piutau" label="Charles Piutau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487066" start="36098" end="36109" title="Frank Halai" label="Frank Halai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064248" start="36111" end="36122" title="Sekope Kepu" label="Sekope Kepu"/>
<link wikidata="Q370059" start="36124" end="36136" title="George Smith (rugby union)" label="George Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410678" start="36138" end="36150" title="Cliff Palu" label="Wycliff Palu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7531622" start="36152" end="36167" title="Sitaleki Timani" label="Sitaleki Timani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065222" start="36169" end="36187" title="Salesi Ma&amp;#x27;afu" label="Salesi Ma&amp;#x27;afu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080039" start="36189" end="36196" title="Anthony Fainga&amp;#x27;a" label="Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063763" start="36201" end="36219" title="Saia Fainga&amp;#x27;a" label="Saia Fainga&amp;#x27;a"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294092" start="36221" end="36233" title="Mark Gerrard" label="Mark Gerrard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167835" start="36235" end="36246" title="Cooper Vuna" label="Cooper Vuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251763" start="36248" end="36260" title="Doug Howlett" label="Doug Howlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988054" start="36262" end="36273" title="Toutai Kefu" label="Toutai Kefu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066416" start="36278" end="36295" title="Tatafu Polota-Nau" label="Tatafu Polota-Nau"/>
<link wikidata="Q733600" start="36354" end="36376" title="British and Irish Lions" label="British and Irish Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401755" start="36408" end="36440" title="Taulupe Faletau" label="Taulupe &amp;quot;Toby&amp;quot; Faletau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6442960" start="36492" end="36504" title="Kuli Faletau" label="Kuli Faletau"/>
<link wikidata="Q15119090" start="36563" end="36568" title="Billy Vunipola" label="Billy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14372315" start="36573" end="36586" title="Mako Vunipola" label="Mako Vunipola"/>
<link wikidata="Q733600" start="36602" end="36624" title="British and Irish Lion" label="British and Irish Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439275" start="36666" end="36685" title="Fe&amp;#x27;ao Vunipola" label="Fe&amp;#x27;ao Vunipola"/>
<link wikidata="Q7853578" start="36789" end="36802" title="Tupou College" label="Tupou College"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962" start="36898" end="36910" title="Rugby league" label="Rugby league"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639293" start="36975" end="36997" title="Rugby League World Cup" label="Rugby League World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000715" start="37005" end="37009" title="1995 Rugby League World Cup" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590290" start="37078" end="37089" title="New Zealand national rugby league team" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000722" start="37177" end="37204" title="2008 Rugby League World Cup" label="2008 Rugby League World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590551" start="37205" end="37210" title="Tonga national rugby league team" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589812" start="37233" end="37240" title="Ireland national rugby league team" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589862" start="37245" end="37253" title="Scotland national rugby league team" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000720" start="37271" end="37285" title="2017 Rugby League World Cup" label="2017 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q6163603" start="37324" end="37339" title="Jason Taumalolo" label="Jason Taumalolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756949" start="37344" end="37357" title="Andrew Fifita" label="Andrew Fifita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752309" start="37489" end="37504" title="Waikato Stadium" label="Waikato Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590223" start="37600" end="37613" title="Great Britain national rugby league team" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589757" start="37639" end="37648" title="Australia national rugby league team" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140630" start="37760" end="37781" title="National Rugby League" label="National Rugby League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6163603" start="37809" end="37824" title="Jason Taumalolo" label="Jason Taumalolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155646" start="37826" end="37838" title="Israel Folau" label="Israel Folau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7861773" start="37840" end="37853" title="Tyson Frizell" label="Tyson Frizell"/>
<link wikidata="Q24450805" start="37855" end="37875" title="Tevita Pangai Junior" label="Tevita Pangai Junior"/>
<link wikidata="Q6429722" start="37877" end="37891" title="Konrad Hurrell" label="Konrad Hurrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q16236145" start="37893" end="37906" title="David Fusitua" label="David Fusitua"/>
<link wikidata="Q17466153" start="37908" end="37924" title="Tuimoala Lolohea" label="Tuimoala Lolohea"/>
<link wikidata="Q16235001" start="37926" end="37944" title="Sio Siua Taukeiaho" label="Sio Siua Taukeiaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q6278680" start="37946" end="37958" title="Jorge Taufua" label="Jorge Taufua"/>
<link wikidata="Q16234636" start="37960" end="37975" title="William Hopoate" label="William Hopoate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756949" start="37977" end="37990" title="Andrew Fifita" label="Andrew Fifita"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886201" start="37992" end="38010" title="Ben Murdoch-Masila" label="Ben Murdoch-Masila"/>
<link wikidata="Q19589762" start="38012" end="38026" title="Felise Kaufusi" label="Felise Kaufusi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569088" start="38028" end="38040" title="Willie Mason" label="Willie Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286713" start="38042" end="38054" title="Manu Vatuvei" label="Manu Vatuvei"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924480" start="38056" end="38066" title="Brent Kite" label="Brent Kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090574" start="38068" end="38081" title="Fuifui Moimoi" label="Fuifui Moimoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569106" start="38083" end="38095" title="Willie Tonga" label="Willie Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773620" start="38097" end="38110" title="Anthony Tupou" label="Anthony Tupou"/>
<link wikidata="Q4776717" start="38112" end="38127" title="Antonio Kaufusi" label="Antonio Kaufusi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308273" start="38129" end="38145" title="Michael Jennings (rugby league)" label="Michael Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823682" start="38147" end="38160" title="Tony Williams (rugby league)" label="Tony Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441661" start="38162" end="38174" title="Feleti Mateo" label="Feleti Mateo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142995" start="38266" end="38278" title="Super League" label="Super League"/>
<link wikidata="Q8531" start="38479" end="38499" title="1996 Summer Olympics" label="1996 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q742756" start="38518" end="38532" title="Paea Wolfgramm" label="Paea Wolfgramm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951836" start="38547" end="38564" title="Boxing at the 1996 Summer Olympics – Super heavyweight" label="super heavyweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882057" start="38586" end="38601" title="Pita Taufatofua" label="Pita Taufatofua"/>
<link wikidata="Q9680" start="38616" end="38636" title="2018 Winter Olympics" label="2018 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="38745" end="38769" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q24259926" start="38781" end="38796" title="Tuineau Alipate" label="Tuineau Alipate"/>
<link wikidata="Q63347277" start="38798" end="38812" title="Sione Takitaki" label="Sione Takitaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872650" start="38814" end="38827" title="Spencer Folau" label="Spencer Folau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6478747" start="38829" end="38842" title="Lakei Heimuli" label="Lakei Heimuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612988" start="38844" end="38857" title="Steve Kaufusi" label="Steve Kaufusi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287333" start="38859" end="38879" title="Ma&amp;#x27;ake Kemoeatu" label="Ma&amp;#x27;ake Kemoeatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2202831" start="38881" end="38892" title="Deuce Lutui" label="Deuce Lutui"/>
<link wikidata="Q7532230" start="38894" end="38910" title="Siupeli Malamala" label="Siupeli Malamala"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803890" start="38912" end="38921" title="Tim Manoa" label="Tim Manoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597784" start="38923" end="38935" title="Stan Mataele" label="Stan Mataele"/>
<link wikidata="Q16215418" start="38937" end="38948" title="Vili Maumau" label="Vili Maumau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798615" start="38950" end="38963" title="Alfred Pupunu" label="Alfred Pupunu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7908678" start="38965" end="38977" title="Vai Sikahema" label="Vai Sikahema"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340557" start="38979" end="38993" title="Star Lotulelei" label="Star Lotulelei"/>
<link wikidata="Q44993579" start="38995" end="39003" title="Vita Vea" label="Vita Vea"/>
<link wikidata="Q104216422" start="39005" end="39020" title="Talanoa Hufanga" label="Talanoa Hufanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177410" start="39022" end="39037" title="Peter Tuipulotu" label="Peter Tuipulotu"/>
<link wikidata="Q104531007" start="39039" end="39055" title="Marlon Tuipulotu" label="Marlon Tuipulotu"/>
<link wikidata="Q114355173" start="39061" end="39075" title="Tuli Tuipulotu" label="Tuli Tuipulotu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806585" start="39147" end="39160" title="Times of Tonga" label="Taimi o Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820957" start="39297" end="39307" title="Tonga Chronicle" label="Kalonikali"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531545" start="39398" end="39427" title="Tonga Broadcasting Commission" label="Tonga Broadcasting Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696979" start="39429" end="39445" title="Television Tonga" label="Television Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696981" start="39447" end="39465" title="Television Tonga 2" label="Television Tonga 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281091" start="39467" end="39478" title="Radio Tonga" label="Radio Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281091" start="39482" end="39493" title="Radio Tonga" label="Radio Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281091" start="39509" end="39514" title="Radio Tonga" label="103FM"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39663" end="39676" title="Tanya Edwards" label="Tanya Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q111017932" start="39709" end="39722" title="Benjamin Work" label="Benjamin Work"/>
<link wikidata="Q117087221" start="39724" end="39735" title="Telly Tuita" label="Telly Tuita"/>
<link wikidata="Q110706277" start="39741" end="39751" title="Sione Monū" label="Sione Monū"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39790" end="39814" title="Sēmisi Fetokai Potauaine" label="Sēmisi Fetokai Potauaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q79990" start="39863" end="39875" title="Christchurch" label="Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q123010244" start="39886" end="39901" title="Bergman Gallery" label="Bergman Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="39958" end="39966" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="39968" end="39979" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112489" start="40032" end="40048" title="Outline of Tonga" label="Outline of Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q502914" start="40051" end="40085" title="List of islands and towns in Tonga" label="List of islands and towns in Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363748" start="40937" end="40957" title="Elizabeth Wood-Ellem" label="Elizabeth Wood-Ellem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460820" start="41821" end="41833" title="Dick Watling" label="Dick Watling"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="42324" end="42342" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="42350" end="42377" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30159" wikidata="Q1075000" url="?curid=30159" title="History of Tonga">
<text>The history of Tonga is recorded since the ninth century BC, when seafarers associated with the Lapita diaspora first settled the islands which now make up the Kingdom of Tonga. Along with Fiji and Samoa, the area served as a gateway into the rest of the Pacific region known as Polynesia. Ancient Tongan mythologies recorded by early European explorers report the islands of &#x27;Ata and Tongatapu as the first islands having been hauled to the surface from the deep ocean by Maui.

==Pre-contact==
The dates of the initial settlement of Tonga are still subject to debate; nonetheless, one of the oldest occupied sites is found in the village of Pea on Tongatapu. Radiocarbon dating of a shell found at the site reportedly dates the occupation at 3180 ± 100 BP (Before Present). Some of the oldest sites pertaining to the first occupants of the Tongan Islands are found on Tongatapu which is also where the first Lapita ceramics were found by WC McKern in 1921. Nonetheless, reaching the Tongan islands (without Western navigational tools and techniques) was a remarkable feat accomplished by the Lapita peoples. Not much is known about Tonga before European contact because of the lack of a writing system during prehistoric times other than the oral history told to the early European explorers. The first time the Tongan people encountered Europeans was in April 1616 when Jacob Le Maire and Willem Schouten made a short visit to the islands to trade with them.

==Early culture==

Centuries before Westerners arrived, Tongans created megalithic stoneworks. Most notably, these are the Haʻamonga ʻa Maui and the Langi terraced tombs. The Haʻamonga is 5 meters high and made of three coral-lime stones that weigh more than 40 tons each. The Langi are low, very flat, two or three tier pyramids that mark the graves of former kings.

What is known about Tonga before European contact comes from myths, stories, songs, poems (as there was no writing system), as well as from archaeological excavations. Many ancient sites, kitchens and refuse heaps, have been found in Tongatapu and Haʻapai, and a few in Vavaʻu and the Niuas that provide insights into old Tongan settlement patterns, diet, economy, and culture.

===The Old Tonga===
The Haʻapai of three thousand years ago was a bit different from the Haʻapai of today. Large flightless birds called megapodes bounded through the tropical rain forest while giant iguanas and various other lizards rested on tree limbs. The skies hosted three different species of fruit bats, three different species of pigeon, and more than two dozen other types of birds. There were no pigs, horses, dogs, cows, or rats.

The South Pacific, meanwhile, was almost completely uninhabited. Any present humans existed on the western fringes of the Solomon Islands. Then, around that time, these islanders were suddenly replaced by a new branch of humanity that originated from the Bismarck Archipelago off Papua New Guinea. They intrepidly stormed through the region, rapidly colonizing and pushing east. They brought with them new plant and animal species, as well as a distinct pottery design. Today these people are named the Lapita, after the location in New Caledonia where they were first noticed archaeologically.

===The Lapita Period===
Around 3000 B.P., the Lapita people reached Tonga, and carbon dating places their landfall first in Tongatapu and then in Haʻapai soon after. The newcomers were already well adapted to the resource-scarce island life and settled in small communities of a few households on beaches just above high tide line that faced open lagoons or reefs. Through continued interaction with Lapita relatives of the west, the Haʻapaians obtained domesticated animals and cultivatable plants, but it seems that both of these possible food sources contributed minimally towards their diet for at least the first two hundred years. Instead, they feasted mainly on life in the sea: parrotfish, wrasses, turtles, surgeonfish, jacks, eels, emperors, bottom-dwellers, shellfish, and the occasional deep water tuna. Just as their Polynesian descendants do today.

Sea food was inexhaustible, so reefs then were not very different from reefs today, except for the marked decline in sea turtle populations. Fauna didn&#x27;t fare as well, however, and soon the giant iguanas, the megapodes, twenty four bird species, almost all pigeons, and all but one species of fruit bat were all extinct.

They hunted and cooked these animals with the most basic of technologies. When shell pieces were too brittle for tools, they utilized volcanic soils for “andesite/basalt used for adze manufacture and other artifacts such as oils as hammerstones, weaving weights, cooking stones, and decorative pebbles for grave decoration.” If they were lucky, they obtained harder obsidian shards from the far northern fringe volcano of Tafahi in the Niuas.

Another useful technology was their eponymous pottery with “dentate” impressions and simple designs that were characteristic of all Lapita settlements in the South Pacific. Tongan Lapita designs were simpler than western Lapita designs, evolving from ornate curvilinear and rectilinear patterns into simple rectilinear forms. The pottery was “slab-built earthenware of andesitic-tephra clay mixed with calcareous or mineral sand tempers and fired at a low temperature.” 

Decades of archaeological excavations of ancient Lapita kitchens and middens (refuse piles) both in Tongatapu and Haʻapai have taught us much about early Tongan settlement. We know what they ate, what tools they used, where they settled (one colony each on ‘Uiha, Kauvai, and Foa, and two on Lifuka), and how large the settlements were. Despite a wealth of archaeological evidence, however, the Lapita people still stifle us with two main mysteries: How did they spread through the South Pacific so quickly, and why did the Lapita settlers in Tonga quickly abandon their ornate pottery tradition?

The Lapitan diaspora began from Papua New Guinea in 1500 BC. By 2850 BP (900 BC) they were already in Tonga, meaning they virtually sprinted east for three hundred years. They travelled in small wooden boats over open ocean to invisible destinations faster than the Europeans colonizers walked across their continent. Archaeologists wonder what would compel people to embark on statistically suicidal missions. It doesn&#x27;t appear that population pressure was a problem, because most Lapitan islands were sparsely inhabited and could have supported much higher populations, especially if they had turned more towards available root crops.

A hypothesis from Kirch is that Lapitan culture encouraged emigration by younger sons. Not just in Tonga, but throughout the South Pacific is a tradition of passing down land to eldest sons. To obtain their own land, younger sons needed to explore. Tangaloa, the chief Tongan god before the arrival of Christianity, was a younger sibling who created Tonga while searching for land from a canoe. His fish hook accidentally caught on a rock on the ocean floor and he was able to pull Tonga to the surface.

The other great mystery is why the ornate pottery tradition disappeared, and with such speed. Only two hundred years after arriving, the Lapitan settlers ceased to decorate their earthenware pots at all, and the only thing the leading contemporary Tongan archaeologist can say about the disappearance is that, “Unfortunately most explanations are based on inferential speculation, and they are difficult to validate with any degree of certainty. What we can say with confidence is that, for whatever reason pottery decoration ceased in Tonga, it did so rather suddenly.”

===The Polynesian Plain Ware Period: 2650–1550 BP (700 BC – 400 AD)===
Life began to change drastically for Haʻapaians at the same time that ornate pottery was replaced by a strictly utilitarian plain ware kit, and it is at this time that the people may be called Polynesian. Of all the linguistically and traditionally similar people who came to inhabit the triangle created by New Zealand, Hawai’i, and Easter Island, they can all trace ancestry to a few original settlers in Tonga.

These original Polynesians in Tonga shifted somewhat away from maritime subsistence towards an increased reliance on agriculture and animal husbandry. Taro, yam, breadfruit, and banana became principal carbohydrate sources, and domesticated animals came to represent much more of the diet. At original Lapita sites, 24% of bird bones came from chickens, which increased after the Polynesian transformation into 81%, marking probably the demise of other bird species as well as an increased reliance on domesticated species.

More energy supportive food sources allowed a population explosion. A 25x40 m Lapitan “hamlet” grew into a village over one kilometer in length. Settlement grew around most of the lagoon in Tongatapu and villages finally reached the interior of the main island. Similar expansions have been identified in the Niuas and in Vava’u.

To archaeologists, these early Polynesians provide a mystery just as perplexing as the Lapitans. By 1550 BP (400 AD), they ceased to produce any pottery at all. They seem to have turned towards more natural materials instead, and therefore the archaeological record enters into a “dark age” of relatively little information until the emergence of chiefly states hundreds of years later. Speculations as to disappearance of the pottery tradition ranges from the use of coconut cups and bowls that are easier to use, a shift away from steaming shellfish in large bowls to baking in underground ovens, and the unsuitability of Tongan clays for pottery. Nothing can be said with certainty except that the same disappearance also occurred in Fiji and Samoa.

===The Formative Dark Age: 1550–750 BP (400–1200 AD)===
Little is known about the period because of the absence of much archaeological evidence. What is clear is that population continued to increase, reaching between 17,000 and 25,000 on Tongatapu, and that chiefdoms arose to protect against the increased competition for resources. Tongatapu may have been politically consolidated by a single individual of the future Tuʻi Tonga familial line, as oral tradition traces the king&#x27;s lineage back through 39 individuals that could have started as early as 1000 bp (950 AD). The maritime empire made famous by oral tradition, however did not begin until after 750 BP (1200 AD).

==Tongan Maritime Empire==

By the 12th century, Tongans, and the Tongan kings named the Tu&#x27;i Tonga, were known across the Pacific, from Niue, Samoa to Tikopia. They ruled these nations for more than 400 years, sparking some historians to refer to a &quot;Tongan Empire&quot;, although it was more of a network of interacting navigators, chiefs, and adventurers. It is unclear whether chiefs of the other islands actually came to Tonga regularly to acknowledge their sovereign. Distinctive pottery and Tapa cloth designs also show that the Tongans have travelled to Fiji and Hawaii.

In 950 AD Tu&#x27;i Tonga &#x27;Aho&#x27;eitu started to expand his rule outside of Tonga. According to leading Tongan scholars, including Okusitino Mahina, the Tongan and Samoan oral traditions indicate that the first Tu&#x27;i Tonga was the son of their god Tangaloa. As the ancestral homeland of the Tu&#x27;i Tonga dynasty and the abode of deities such as Tagaloa &#x27;Eitumatupu&#x27;a, Tonga Fusifonua, and Tavatavaimanuka. By the time it comes to the 10th Tu’i Tonga Momo, and his successor, ‘Tu’itatui, the empire had already stretched from Tikopia in the west to Niue in the east. Their realm contained Wallis and Futuna, Tokelau, Tuvalu, Rotuma, Nauru, parts of Fiji, parts of the Solomon Islands, Kiribati, Niue, and parts of Samoa. However, some islands in Polynesia were left alone by the Tu&#x27;i Tonga such as, parts of Tahiti Nui, The Cook Islands, and the Marquesas. To better govern the large territory, the Tu’i Tongas had their throne moved by the lagoon at Lapaha, Tongatapu. The influence of the Tu’i Tonga was renowned throughout the Pacific, and many of the neighboring islands participated in the widespread trade of resources and new ideas.

Under the 10th Tui Tonga, Momo and his son Tuitātui (11th Tui Tonga) the empire was at its height of expansion, tributes for the Tu&#x27;i Tonga were said to be exacted from all tributary chiefdoms of the empire. This tribute was known as the &quot; &#x27;Inasi &quot; and was conducted annually at Mu&#x27;a following the harvest season when all countries that were subject to the Tu&#x27;i Tonga must bring a gift for the gods, who was recognized as the Tu&#x27;i Tonga. Captain Cook witness an Inasi ceremony in 1777, in which he noticed a lot of foreigners in Tonga, especially the darker people that resembles African descend from Fiji, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu. The finest mats of Samoa (&#x27;ie toga) are incorrectly translated as &quot;Tongan mats;&quot; the correct meaning is &quot;treasured cloth&quot; (&quot;ie&quot; = cloth, &quot;toga&quot; = female goods, in opposition to &quot;oloa&quot; = male goods). Many fine mats came into the possession of the Tongan royal families through chiefly marriages with Samoan noblewomen, such as Tohu&#x27;ia the mother of Tu&#x27;i Kanokupolu Ngata who came from Safata, &#x27;Upolu, Samoa. These mats, including the Maneafaingaa and Tasiaeafe, are considered the crown jewels of the current Tupou line (which is derived matrilineally from Samoa). The success of the Empire was largely based upon the Imperial Navy. The most common vessels were long-distance double-canoes fitted with triangular sails. The largest canoes of the Tongan kalia type could carry up to 100 men. The most notable of these were the &quot;Tongafuesia&quot;, &quot;Ākiheuho&quot;, the &quot;Lomipeau&quot;, and the &quot;Takaipōmana&quot;. It should be mentioned that the Takaipōmana was actually a Samoan kalia; according to Queen Salote and the Palace Records this was the Samoan double-canoe that brought Tohu&#x27;ia Limapō from Samoa to wed the Tu&#x27;i Ha&#x27;atakalaua. The large navy allowed for Tonga to become wealthy with large amounts of trade and tribute flowing into the Royal Treasury.

The Tui Tonga decline began due to numerous wars and internal pressure. In the 13th or 14th century Samoa defeated Tu&#x27;i Tonga Talakaifaiki under the lead of the Malietoa family. In response the falefā was created as political advisors to the Empire. The falefā officials were initially successful in maintaining some hegemony over other subjected islands but increased dissatisfaction led to the assassination of several rulers in succession. The most notable were, Havea I (19th TT), Havea II (22nd TT), and Takalaua (23rd TT), who were all known for their tyrannical rule. In AD 1535, Takalaua was assassinated by two foreigners while swimming in the lagoon of Mu&#x27;a. His successor, Kauulufonua I pursued the killers all the way to Uvea, where he killed them.
Because of so many assassination attempts on the Tu&#x27;i Tonga, Kauulufonua established a new dynasty called Tu&#x27;i Ha&#x27;atakalaua in honor of his father and he gave his brother Mo’ungamotu’a, the title of Tu’i Ha’a Takalaua. This new dynasty was to deal with the everyday decisions of the empire, while the position of Tu’i Tonga was to be the nation&#x27;s spiritual leader, though he still controlled the final say in the life or death of his people. The Tu&#x27;i Tonga &quot;empire&quot; at this period becomes Samoan in orientation as the Tu&#x27;i Tonga kings themselves became ethnic Samoans who married Samoan women and resided in Samoa. Kau&#x27;ulufonua&#x27;s mother was a Samoan from Manu&#x27;a, Tu&#x27;i Tonga Kau&#x27;ulufonua II and Tu&#x27;i Tonga Puipuifatu had Samoan mothers and as they married Samoan women the succeeding Tu&#x27;i Tongas - Vakafuhu, Tapu&#x27;osi, and &#x27;Uluakimata - were allegedly more &quot;Samoan&quot; than &quot;Tongan.&quot;

In 1610, the 6th Tu’i Ha’a Takalaua, Mo&#x27;ungatonga, created the position of Tu’i Kanokupolu for his half-Samoan son, Ngata, which divided regional rule between them, though as time went on the Tu’i Kanokupolu&#x27;s power became more and more dominant over Tonga. The Tu&#x27;i Kanokupolu dynasty oversaw the importation and institution of many Samoan policies and titles and according to Tongan scholars this Samoanized form of government and custom continues today in the modern Kingdom of Tonga Things continued this way for a long time afterward. The first Europeans arrived in 1616, when the Dutch explorers Willem Schouten and Jacob Le Maire spotted Tongans in a canoe off the coast of Niuatoputapu, followed by Abel Tasman who passed by the islands on 20 January 1643. These visits were brief, however, and did not significantly change the island. Captain James Cook observed and recorded his accounts of the Tuʻi Tonga kings during his visits to Tonga.

The dividing line between the two moieties was the old coastal road named &quot;Hala Fonua moa&quot; (dry land road). Still today the chiefs who derive their authority from the Tui Tonga are named the Kau hala uta (inland road people) while those from the Tui Kanokupolu are known as the Kau hala lalo (low road people). Concerning the Tui Haatakalaua supporters: when this division arose, in the 15th century, they were of course the Kauhalalalo. But when the Tui Kanokupolu had overtaken them they shifted their allegiance to the Kauhalauta.

Modern archeology, anthropology and linguistic studies confirm widespread Tongan cultural influence ranging widely through East &#x27;Uvea, Rotuma, Futuna, Samoa and Niue, parts of Micronesia (Kiribati, Pohnpei), Vanuatu, and New Caledonia and the Loyalty Islands, and while some academics prefer the term &quot;maritime chiefdom&quot;, others argue that, while very different from examples elsewhere, &quot;...&quot;empire&quot; is probably the most convenient term.&quot;

==European arrival and Christianization==
In the 15th century and again in the 17th, civil war erupted. It was in this context that the first Europeans arrived, beginning with Dutch explorers Willem Schouten and Jacob Le Maire. Between April 21 to 23, 1616 they moored at the Northern Tongan islands &quot;Cocos Island&quot; (Tafahi) and &quot;Traitors Island&quot; (Niuatoputapu), respectively. The kings of both of these islands boarded the ships and Le Maire drew up a list of Niuatoputapu words, a language now extinct. On April 24, 1616, they tried to moor at the &quot;Island of Good Hope&quot; (Niuafo&#x27;ou), but a less welcoming reception there made them decide to sail on.

On January 21, 1643, the Dutch explorer Abel Tasman was the first European to visit the main island (Tongatapu) and Haapai after rounding Australia and New Zealand while looking for a faster route to Chile. He mapped several islands. Tasman named the island of Tongatapu &quot;t’ Eijlandt Amsterdam&quot; (Amsterdam Island), because of its abundance of supplies. This name is no longer used except by historians.

The most significant impact had the visits of Captain Cook in 1773, 1774, and 1777, followed by the first London missionaries in 1797, and the Wesleyan Methodist Walter Lawry in 1822. Around that time, most Tongans converted en masse to the Wesleyan (Methodist) or Catholic faiths. Other denominations followed, including Pentecostals, Mormons, Seventh-day Adventists, and most recently the Bahá&#x27;í faith.

The islands were also visited by the Spanish under Francisco Antonio Mourelle in 1781 and Alessandro Malaspina (who unsuccessfully claimed Vavau for Spain) in 1793 and by the French under Marc-Joseph Marion du Fresne in 1772, Jean-François de Galaup, comte de Lapérouse in 1787 and Antoine Bruni d&#x27;Entrecasteaux in 1793. Fletcher Christian also led the mutiny on the Bounty while crossing Tongan waters, in 1789.

==Unification==

In 1799, the 14th Tui Kanokupolu, Tukuaho was murdered, which sent Tonga into a civil war for fifty years. Finally, the islands were united into a Polynesian kingdom in 1845 by the ambitious young warrior, strategist, and orator Tāufaʻāhau. He held the chiefly title of Tu&#x27;i Kanokupolu, but was baptised with the name King George Tupou I.

In 1875, with the help of missionary Shirley Baker, he declared Tonga a constitutional monarchy, at which time he emancipated the serfs, enshrined a code of law, land tenure, and freedom of the press, and limited the power of the chiefs. The islands were not fully surveyed until 1898, when the British warships and completed the task.

== 20th century ==

=== Kingdom of Tonga (1900–1970) ===

Tonga became a British protected state under a Treaty of Friendship on May 18, 1900, when European settlers and rival Tongan chiefs tried to oust the second king. The Treaty of Friendship and protected state status ended in 1970 under arrangements established prior to her death by the third monarch, Queen Sālote.

On 18 May 1900, to discourage German advances, the Kingdom of Tonga became a Protected State with the United Kingdom under a Treaty of Friendship signed by George Tupou II after European settlers and rival Tongan chiefs attempted to overthrow him. 
Foreign affairs of the Kingdom of Tonga were conducted through the British Consul. The United Kingdom had veto power over foreign policies and finances of the Kingdom of Tonga.

Tonga was affected by the 1918 flu pandemic, with 1,800 Tongans killed, around eight percent of the residents.

For most of the 20th century Tonga was quiet, inward-looking, and somewhat isolated from developments elsewhere in the world. Tonga&#x27;s complex social structure is essentially broken into three tiers: the king, the nobles, and the commoners. Between the nobles and commoners are Matapule, sometimes called &quot;talking chiefs,&quot; who are associated with the king or a noble and who may or may not hold estates. Obligations and responsibilities are reciprocal, and although the nobility are able to extract favors from people living on their estates, they likewise must extend favors to their people. Status and rank play a powerful role in personal relationships, even within families.

====World War II====
Upon the British declaration of war against Germany in 1939, the government of Tonga issued a declaration &quot;placing all of its resources at the disposal of the British&quot; and formally declared war against Germany in its own right(since the British control Tonga&#x27;s external affairs, it coerce Tonga to declare war on Germany). Queen Sālote directed the re-establishment of the national militia and donated to the British for the construction of an airfield. The people of Tonga subsequently raised enough funds to buy three Spitfires for the Royal Air Force. In August 1941, Sālote proclaimed a national day of prayer for the British war effort.

In mid-1941, the New Zealand Army despatched 70 military advisors to Nuku&#x27;alofa to train the Tongan Defence Force. Following the attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941, Tonga also declared war on Japan. In anticipation of a Japanese invasion, citizens were evacuated from Nuku&#x27;alofa and barbed wire and trenches were erected on the beaches of Tongatapu.

=== Independence (1970) ===


On 4 June 1970, protected state status ended under arrangements established prior to her death in 1965 by the third monarch, Queen Sālote.

Tonga joined the Commonwealth of Nations in 1970, and the United Nations in 1999. While exposed to colonial forces, Tonga has never lost indigenous governance, a fact that makes Tonga unique in the Pacific and boosts confidence in the monarchical system. The British High Commission in Tonga closed in March 2006.

Tonga&#x27;s current king, Tupou VI, traces his line directly back through six generations of monarchs. The previous king, George Tupou V, born in 1946, continued to have ultimate control of the government until August 2008. At that point, concerns over financial irregularities and calls for democracy led to his relinquishing most of his day-to-day powers over the government.

Tongans are beginning to confront the problem of how to preserve their cultural identity and traditions in the wake of the increasing impact of Western technology and culture. Migration and the gradual monetization of the economy have led to the breakdown of the traditional extended family. Some of the poor, once supported by the extended family, are now being left without visible means of support.

Educational opportunities for young commoners have advanced, and their increasing political awareness has stimulated some dissent against the nobility system. In addition, the rapidly increasing population is already too great to provide the constitutionally mandated 8.25 acre (33,000 m2) API for each male at age 16. In mid-1982, the population density was 134 persons per square kilometer. Because of these factors, there is considerable pressure to move to the Kingdom&#x27;s only urban center.

==21st century==

=== 2002 election===
In the March 2002 election, supporters of the Human Rights and Democracy Movement (HRDM) won seven of the nine popularly-elected seats for people&#x27;s representatives, with the remaining two representing &quot;traditionalist&quot; values. Voter turnout was 48.9%. The nine nobles and all the cabinet ministers that sit in the Legislative Assembly generally support the government. 
Following the election, HRDM leader &#x27;Akilisi Pohiva was arrested and charged with sedition over an article published in his newspaper &quot;Kele’a&quot; alleging the king had a secret fortune, but was later acquitted by a jury.

In 2003, the &quot;Taimi &#x27;o Tonga&quot; (Tongan Times), a newspaper published in New Zealand in the Tongan language that had been critical of the government was prohibited from distribution in Tonga due to government objections to its political content. After the newspaper obtained two court orders, it was again distributed freely. A Media Operators Bill and constitutional amendment, intended to restrict media freedom in Tonga, was hotly debated in 2003. The legislation allowed the government to exert control over coverage of &quot;cultural&quot; and &quot;moral&quot; issues, ban publications it deemed offensive, and ban foreign ownership of the media. In October 2003, thousands of Tongans marched peacefully through the streets of the capital city Nukualofa in an unprecedented demonstration against the government&#x27;s plans to limit media freedom. Despite the protests, the Media Operators Bill and constitutional amendment passed the Legislature and as of December 2003 needed only the King&#x27;s signature to become law.

By February 2004, the amendment was passed and licensure of news media was required. Those papers denied licenses under the new act included the Taimi &#x27;o Tonga (Tongan Times), the Kele&#x27;a and the Matangi Tonga, while those permitted licenses were uniformly church based or pro-government. Further opposition to government action included calls by the Tu&#x27;i Pelehake (a prince, nephew of the King and elected member of parliament) for Australia and other nations to pressure the Tongan government to democratize the electoral system, and a legal writ calling for a judicial investigation of the bill. The latter was supported by some 160 people, including 7 of the 9 elected &quot;People&#x27;s Representatives&quot;.

=== 2005 election ===
At the 2005 Tongan general election, the Human Rights and Democracy Movement won seven of the nine popularly-elected seats (the rest of the 30 MPs are appointed by the King or are members of the Tongan aristocracy). &#x27;Aho&#x27;eitu &#x27;Unuaki&#x27;otonga Tuku&#x27;aho, son of the King, initially retained his position as Prime Minister, but he resigned in 2006, after the Tongan Speaker of the House was found guilty of bribery. The position passed to Feleti Sevele, Minister of Labour and one of the two independent candidates elected, as well as the first non-noble Prime Minister of the country.

In 2005 the government spent several weeks negotiating with striking civil service workers before reaching a settlement. A constitutional commission met in 2005–2006 to study proposals to update the constitution. A copy of the commission&#x27;s report was presented to King Taufa&#x27;ahau Tupou IV, shortly before his death in September 2006.

=== 2006 riots===


Tonga did not rate as an &quot;electoral democracy&quot; under the criteria of Freedom House&#x27;s Freedom in the World 2006 report. This is likely because while elections exist, they could only elect nine of 30 Legislative Assembly seats, the remainder being selected either by the nobility or the government; as such the people have a voice in but no control over the government.

The public expected democratic changes from the new monarch. On November 16, 2006, rioting broke out in the capital city of Nukualofa when it seemed that the parliament would adjourn for the year without having made any advances in increasing democracy in government. Government buildings, offices, and shops were looted and burned Eight people died in the riots. The government agreed that elections would be held in 2008 in which a majority of the parliament would be elected by popular vote. A state of emergency was declared on November 17, with emergency laws giving security forces the right to stop and search people without a warrant.

On 18 January 2007 Pōhiva was arrested and charged with sedition over his role in the 2006 Nuku&#x27;alofa riots.

=== 2008 election ===
The April 2008 elections saw a 48% turnout to elect the nobles&#x27; representatives and the 9 people&#x27;s representatives. Most of the pro-democracy MPs were reconfirmed, despite several facing charges of sedition over the 2006 Nuku&#x27;alofa riots All nine elected MPs were pro-democracy activists.
About two weeks before the election, it was announced that the Tonga Broadcasting Commission would henceforth censor candidates&#x27; political broadcasts, and that TBC reporters would be banned from reporting on political matters. 
Tonga Review criticised the decision as an undue restriction on freedom of speech. 
On 29 May 2008, in the speech from the throne at the opening of Parliament, Princess Regent, Salote Mafile&#x27;o Pilolevu Tuita announced that the government would introduce a political reform bill by June 2008, and that the current term of Parliament would be the last one under the current constitution

In July 2008, three days before his coronation, King George Tupou V announced that he would relinquish most of his power and be guided by his Prime Minister&#x27;s recommendations on most matters, following upcoming elections.

In November 2009, a constitutional review panel recommended a ceremonial monarchy stripped of real political power and to invest political power in a completely elected Legislative Assembly of Tonga (the &quot;Fale Alea&quot;) which, up to this point was largely hereditary due to the fact that most of the seats where designated for the nobles. and were preceded by a programme of constitutional reform.

=== Democratisation and 2010 elections ===

In April 2010 the Legislative Assembly enacted a package of political reforms towards a fully representative democracy, increasing the number of directly elected people&#x27;s representatives from 9 to 17, with ten seats for Tongatapu, three for Vavaʻu, two for Haʻapai and one each for Niuas and ʻEua. All of the seats are single-seat constituencies, as opposed to the multi-member constituencies used before. These changes mean that 17 out of 26 representatives (65.4%) would be directly elected, up from 9 out of 30 (30.0%). The aristocracy would still select its nine representatives, while all remaining seats, which were previously appointed by the monarch, would be abolished.

Early general elections under the new electoral law were held on 25 November 2010.
The Taimi Media Network described the 2010 Tongan Legislative Assembly as &quot;Tonga’s first democratically elected Parliament&quot;.
The Democratic Party of the Friendly Islands (DPFI), founded in September 2010 specifically to fight the election and led by veteran pro-democracy campaigner &#x27;Akilisi Pohiva, secured the largest number of seats, with 12 out of the seventeen &quot;people&#x27;s representative&quot; seats.
ʻAkilisi Pohiva, the MP for Tongatapu 1, had sought to become Prime Minister, but the nobles and independent MP entrusted Lord Tuʻivakanō with the task of forming a government, relegating the DPFI to the status of a &quot;de facto&quot; parliamentary opposition. 
The DPFI put forward bills for further democratisation, including the proposal of direct election of the Prime Minister from among the 26 elected MPs, as well as of universal suffrage for all 26 MPs. These proposals were not taken forward by the conservative majority.

At the death of King George Tupou V on 18 March 2012, his son ʻAhoʻeitu ʻUnuakiʻotonga Tukuʻaho became King of Tonga, with the regnal name ʻAhoʻeitu Tupou VI.

New elections in 2014 saw the DPFI lose three seats to independent candidates. Its leader Pohiva was nevertheless appointed as new Prime Minister of Tonga.
On August 25, 2017 Pohiva was dismissed by the King along with the rest of parliament with fresh elections to be held on November 16. The Elections resulted in the DPFI winning 14 seats - enough for Pohivia to form government without relying on nobles&#x27; or independent MPs.

=== 2022 tsunami ===
On 15 January 2022 a tsunami caused by an eruption of the Hunga Tonga–Hunga Haʻapai volcano swept through many parts of Tonga. It killed four people in Tonga and two others in Peru. Many places in Australia and other countries were also put on high alert.

==See also==
*History of Oceania
*List of monarchs of Tonga
*Prime Minister of Tonga
*Politics of Tonga
*Kingdom of Tonga (1900–1970)

==References==
==Further reading==
* Corbett, Jack, Wouter Veenendaal, and Lhawang Ugyel. &quot;Why monarchy persists in small states: the cases of Tonga, Bhutan and Liechtenstein.&quot; &quot;Democratization&quot; 24.4 (2017): 689–706. online
* James, Kerry. &quot;Is there a Tongan middle class? Hierarchy and protest in contemporary Tonga.&quot; &quot;Contemporary Pacific&quot; (2003): 309–336. online
* Latukefu, S. (1974)&quot;Church and State in Tonga&quot;, ANU Press, Canberra
* Lawson, Stephanie. &quot;Tradition Versus Democracy in the South Pacific: Fiji, Tonga and Western Samoa&quot; (Cambridge University Press, 1996).
* van der Grijp, Paul. &quot;Travelling Gods and Nasty Spirits. Ancient Religious Representations and Missionization in Tonga (Polynesia).&quot; &quot;Paideuma&quot; (2002): 243–260. online
* Wood-Ellem, Elizabeth. &quot;Queen Salote of Tonga: The Story of an Era 1900–1965&quot; (1999)
* Woodcock, George. &quot;Tonga: The Last of the Victorians.&quot; &quot;History Today&quot; (1975) 25#1 pp 31–39.

==External links==
* Tonga Visitors Bureau, Ministry of Tourism, Kingdom of Tonga (archived 7 October 2011)
* Photo of Haʻamonga Trilithon
* The Friendly Islands: 1616–1900</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1075000" start="4" end="20" title="History of Tonga" label="history of Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021436" start="96" end="102" title="Lapita culture" label="Lapita"/>
<link wikidata="Q678" start="160" end="176" title="Tonga" label="Kingdom of Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q35942" start="279" end="288" title="Polynesia" label="Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821030" start="298" end="316" title="Tongan mythology" label="Tongan mythologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791456" start="478" end="482" title="Maui (Tongan mythology)" label="Maui"/>
<link wikidata="Q678" start="540" end="545" title="Tonga" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q438156" start="1378" end="1392" title="Jacob Le Maire" label="Jacob Le Maire"/>
<link wikidata="Q316391" start="1397" end="1412" title="Willem Schouten" label="Willem Schouten"/>
<link wikidata="Q164240" start="1540" end="1548" title="megalith" label="megalith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433433" start="1591" end="1608" title="Ha&amp;#x27;amonga &amp;#x27;a Maui" label="Haʻamonga ʻa Maui"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359181" start="1617" end="1622" title="Langi (burial)" label="Langi"/>
<link wikidata="Q620452" start="2071" end="2080" title="Tongatapu" label="Tongatapu"/>
<link wikidata="Q612098" start="2085" end="2092" title="Haʻapai" label="Haʻapai"/>
<link wikidata="Q859666" start="2107" end="2113" title="Vavaʻu" label="Vavaʻu"/>
<link wikidata="Q612098" start="2240" end="2247" title="Haʻapai" label="Haʻapai"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="2781" end="2796" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q154628" start="2914" end="2934" title="Bismarck Archipelago" label="Bismarck Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="2939" end="2955" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021436" start="3162" end="3168" title="Lapita" label="Lapita"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="3192" end="3205" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021436" start="3301" end="3307" title="Lapita" label="Lapita"/>
<link wikidata="Q620452" start="3379" end="3388" title="Tongatapu" label="Tongatapu"/>
<link wikidata="Q612098" start="3401" end="3408" title="Haʻapai" label="Haʻapai"/>
<link wikidata="Q502220" start="3941" end="3951" title="parrotfish" label="parrotfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q208722" start="3953" end="3959" title="wrasse" label="wrasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q223044" start="3962" end="3968" title="turtle" label="turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q465563" start="3971" end="3982" title="surgeonfish" label="surgeonfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q501728" start="3984" end="3989" title="Carangidae" label="jacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q128685" start="3991" end="3995" title="eels" label="eels"/>
<link wikidata="Q847501" start="3997" end="4005" title="emperor angelfish" label="emperors"/>
<link wikidata="Q686881" start="4007" end="4022" title="Benthic zone" label="bottom-dwellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501235" start="4024" end="4033" title="shellfish" label="shellfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146274" start="4065" end="4069" title="tuna" label="tuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q205531" start="4320" end="4327" title="iguanas" label="iguanas"/>
<link wikidata="Q213536" start="4333" end="4342" title="megapodes" label="megapodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856" start="4381" end="4388" title="pigeons" label="pigeons"/>
<link wikidata="Q185230" start="4417" end="4426" title="fruit bat" label="fruit bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q283712" start="4868" end="4874" title="Tafahi" label="Tafahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200954" start="4882" end="4887" title="Niuas" label="Niuas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021436" start="5022" end="5028" title="Lapita" label="Lapita"/>
<link wikidata="Q65057082" start="5319" end="5326" title="Temper (pottery)" label="tempers"/>
<link wikidata="Q620452" start="5462" end="5471" title="Tongatapu" label="Tongatapu"/>
<link wikidata="Q612098" start="5476" end="5483" title="Haʻapai" label="Haʻapai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5619" end="5624" title="‘Uiha" label="‘Uiha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5626" end="5632" title="Kauvai" label="Kauvai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002246" start="5638" end="5641" title="Foa" label="Foa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309255" start="5654" end="5660" title="Lifuka" label="Lifuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="5992" end="6008" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q678" start="6062" end="6067" title="Tonga" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7147793" start="6621" end="6626" title="Patrick Vinton Kirch" label="Kirch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682799" start="6852" end="6860" title="Tangaloa" label="Tangaloa"/>
<link wikidata="Q227997" start="8317" end="8321" title="Taro" label="Taro"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047551" start="8323" end="8326" title="Yam (vegetable)" label="yam"/>
<link wikidata="Q14677" start="8328" end="8338" title="breadfruit" label="breadfruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="8344" end="8350" title="banana" label="banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q780" start="8510" end="8517" title="chicken" label="chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q620452" start="8881" end="8890" title="Tongatapu" label="Tongatapu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200954" start="9000" end="9005" title="Niuas" label="Niuas"/>
<link wikidata="Q859666" start="9013" end="9019" title="Vava’u" label="Vava’u"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="9759" end="9763" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="9768" end="9773" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q620452" start="10015" end="10024" title="Tongatapu" label="Tongatapu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232525" start="10197" end="10207" title="Tuʻi Tonga" label="Tuʻi Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232525" start="10547" end="10562" title="Tu&amp;#x27;i Tonga" label="Tu&amp;#x27;i Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q34020" start="10600" end="10604" title="Niue" label="Niue"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="10606" end="10611" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q889519" start="10615" end="10622" title="Tikopia" label="Tikopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682799" start="11307" end="11315" title="Tangaloa (Tongan mythology)" label="Tangaloa"/>
<link wikidata="Q35555" start="11660" end="11677" title="Wallis and Futuna" label="Wallis and Futuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q36823" start="11679" end="11686" title="Tokelau" label="Tokelau"/>
<link wikidata="Q672" start="11688" end="11694" title="Tuvalu" label="Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q459763" start="11696" end="11702" title="Rotuma" label="Rotuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q697" start="11704" end="11709" title="Nauru" label="Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="11720" end="11724" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="11739" end="11754" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q710" start="11756" end="11764" title="Kiribati" label="Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q34020" start="11766" end="11770" title="Niue" label="Niue"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="11785" end="11790" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711195" start="12243" end="12247" title="Momo (Tonga)" label="Momo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585035" start="14419" end="14427" title="Malietoa" label="Malietoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q599048" start="14474" end="14491" title="political advisor" label="political advisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q180095" start="14816" end="14826" title="tyrannical" label="tyrannical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359181" start="14921" end="14930" title="Mu&amp;#x27;a (Tongatapu)" label="Mu&amp;#x27;a"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903676" start="14996" end="15000" title="Uvea (Wallis and Futuna)" label="Uvea"/>
<link wikidata="Q316391" start="16626" end="16641" title="Willem Schouten" label="Willem Schouten"/>
<link wikidata="Q438156" start="16646" end="16660" title="Jacob Le Maire" label="Jacob Le Maire"/>
<link wikidata="Q42188" start="16731" end="16742" title="Abel Tasman" label="Abel Tasman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="16876" end="16886" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232525" start="16929" end="16939" title="Tuʻi Tonga" label="Tuʻi Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q316391" start="18187" end="18202" title="Willem Schouten" label="Willem Schouten"/>
<link wikidata="Q438156" start="18207" end="18221" title="Jacob Le Maire" label="Jacob Le Maire"/>
<link wikidata="Q283712" start="18321" end="18327" title="Tafahi" label="Tafahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144842" start="18362" end="18374" title="Niuatoputapu" label="Niuatoputapu"/>
<link wikidata="Q966941" start="18597" end="18611" title="Niuafo&amp;#x27;ou" label="Niuafo&amp;#x27;ou"/>
<link wikidata="Q42188" start="18721" end="18732" title="Abel Tasman" label="Abel Tasman"/>
<link wikidata="Q620452" start="18782" end="18791" title="Tongatapu" label="Tongatapu"/>
<link wikidata="Q612098" start="18797" end="18803" title="Ha&amp;#x27;apai" label="Haapai"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="18881" end="18886" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q620452" start="18942" end="18951" title="Tongatapu" label="Tongatapu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="19141" end="19153" title="James Cook" label="Captain Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="19346" end="19355" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="19417" end="19428" title="Pentecostal" label="Pentecostal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177118" start="19431" end="19438" title="Mormons" label="Mormons"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="19440" end="19462" title="Seventh-day Adventist Church" label="Seventh-day Adventists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4843045" start="19486" end="19503" title="Bahá&amp;#x27;í Faith in Tonga" label="Bahá&amp;#x27;í faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317782" start="19557" end="19583" title="Francisco Antonio Mourelle" label="Francisco Antonio Mourelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q459906" start="19596" end="19616" title="Alessandro Malaspina" label="Alessandro Malaspina"/>
<link wikidata="Q859666" start="19645" end="19650" title="Vavau" label="Vavau"/>
<link wikidata="Q440136" start="19694" end="19722" title="Marc-Joseph Marion du Fresne" label="Marc-Joseph Marion du Fresne"/>
<link wikidata="Q294478" start="19732" end="19775" title="Jean-François de Galaup, comte de Lapérouse" label="Jean-François de Galaup, comte de Lapérouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q550615" start="19788" end="19822" title="Antoine Bruni d&amp;#x27;Entrecasteaux" label="Antoine Bruni d&amp;#x27;Entrecasteaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q316070" start="19832" end="19850" title="Fletcher Christian" label="Fletcher Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q749811" start="19864" end="19884" title="mutiny on the Bounty" label="mutiny on the Bounty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851864" start="19976" end="19983" title="Tuku&amp;#x27;aho" label="Tukuaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469921" start="20212" end="20232" title="Tu&amp;#x27;i Kanokupolu" label="Tu&amp;#x27;i Kanokupolu"/>
<link wikidata="Q379840" start="20270" end="20284" title="George Tupou I" label="George Tupou I"/>
<link wikidata="Q204358" start="20324" end="20337" title="Shirley Waldemar Baker" label="Shirley Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="20359" end="20382" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="20697" end="20720" title="protectorate" label="British protected state"/>
<link wikidata="Q541570" start="20989" end="20995" title="Salote Tupou III" label="Sālote"/>
<link wikidata="Q678" start="21049" end="21065" title="Kingdom of Tonga" label="Kingdom of Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q21479969" start="21075" end="21090" title="British protectorates" label="Protected State"/>
<link wikidata="Q379844" start="21154" end="21169" title="George Tupou II" label="George Tupou II"/>
<link wikidata="Q207978" start="21322" end="21328" title="Consul (representative)" label="Consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q178275" start="21451" end="21468" title="1918 flu pandemic" label="1918 flu pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q678" start="21566" end="21571" title="Tonga" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q836240" start="21745" end="21749" title="King of Tonga" label="king"/>
<link wikidata="Q16824423" start="22261" end="22303" title="United Kingdom declaration of war on Germany (1939)" label="British declaration of war against Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q29190" start="22787" end="22795" title="Spitfire" label="Spitfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="22805" end="22820" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972140" start="22858" end="22880" title="national day of prayer" label="national day of prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630039" start="22927" end="22943" title="New Zealand Army" label="New Zealand Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="23044" end="23066" title="attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q541570" start="23437" end="23443" title="Salote Tupou III" label="Sālote"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="23463" end="23486" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q208497" start="23788" end="23796" title="Tupou VI" label="Tupou VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q227716" start="23884" end="23898" title="George Tupou V" label="George Tupou V"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821027" start="25090" end="25109" title="2002 Tongan general election" label="March 2002 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982691" start="25129" end="25164" title="Human Rights and Democracy Movement" label="Human Rights and Democracy Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3594634" start="25503" end="25523" title="Samuela &amp;#x27;Akilisi Pohiva" label="&amp;#x27;Akilisi Pohiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q544394" start="25554" end="25562" title="sedition" label="sedition"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25747" end="25759" title="Tongan Times" label="Tongan Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="25787" end="25798" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q34094" start="25806" end="25821" title="Tongan language" label="Tongan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q38834" start="26464" end="26473" title="Nukuʻalofa" label="Nukualofa"/>
<link wikidata="Q652604" start="27505" end="27533" title="2005 Tongan general election" label="2005 Tongan general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982691" start="27539" end="27574" title="Human Rights and Democracy Movement" label="Human Rights and Democracy Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q836240" start="27666" end="27670" title="List of monarchs of Tonga" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q208497" start="27714" end="27772" title="&amp;#x27;Aho&amp;#x27;eitu &amp;#x27;Unuaki&amp;#x27;otonga Tuku&amp;#x27;aho" label="&amp;#x27;Aho&amp;#x27;eitu &amp;#x27;Unuaki&amp;#x27;otonga Tuku&amp;#x27;aho"/>
<link wikidata="Q915636" start="27826" end="27840" title="Prime Minister of Tonga" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q319953" start="27957" end="27970" title="Feleti Sevele" label="Feleti Sevele"/>
<link wikidata="Q273739" start="28379" end="28403" title="Taufa&amp;#x27;ahau Tupou IV" label="Taufa&amp;#x27;ahau Tupou IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q242424" start="28549" end="28562" title="Freedom House" label="Freedom House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417780" start="28570" end="28595" title="Freedom in the World 2006" label="Freedom in the World 2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q580640" start="28937" end="28954" title="2006 Tonga riots" label="rioting broke out"/>
<link wikidata="Q38834" start="28978" end="28987" title="Nukuʻalofa" label="Nukualofa"/>
<link wikidata="Q580640" start="29584" end="29610" title="2006 Nuku&amp;#x27;alofa riots" label="2006 Nuku&amp;#x27;alofa riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q671460" start="29635" end="29659" title="2008 Tongan general election" label="The April 2008 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q544394" start="29843" end="29851" title="sedition" label="sedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q580640" start="29861" end="29887" title="2006 Nuku&amp;#x27;alofa riots" label="2006 Nuku&amp;#x27;alofa riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531545" start="30002" end="30031" title="Tonga Broadcasting Commission" label="Tonga Broadcasting Commission"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30172" end="30184" title="Tonga Review" label="Tonga Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="30236" end="30253" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405720" start="30349" end="30384" title="Salote Mafile&amp;#x27;o Pilolevu Tuita" label="Salote Mafile&amp;#x27;o Pilolevu Tuita"/>
<link wikidata="Q227716" start="30616" end="30630" title="George Tupou V" label="George Tupou V"/>
<link wikidata="Q915636" start="30705" end="30719" title="Prime Minister of Tonga" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287831" start="30960" end="30989" title="Legislative Assembly of Tonga" label="Legislative Assembly of Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="31335" end="31359" title="representative democracy" label="representative democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q620452" start="31466" end="31475" title="Tongatapu" label="Tongatapu"/>
<link wikidata="Q859666" start="31487" end="31493" title="Vavaʻu" label="Vavaʻu"/>
<link wikidata="Q612098" start="31503" end="31510" title="Haʻapai" label="Haʻapai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200954" start="31528" end="31533" title="Niuas" label="Niuas"/>
<link wikidata="Q423528" start="31538" end="31542" title="ʻEua" label="ʻEua"/>
<link wikidata="Q3587258" start="31926" end="31949" title="Tongan general election, 2010" label="Early general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806585" start="32013" end="32032" title="Times of Tonga" label="Taimi Media Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618591" start="32047" end="32079" title="2010 Tongan Legislative Assembly" label="2010 Tongan Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366423" start="32148" end="32188" title="Democratic Party of the Friendly Islands" label="Democratic Party of the Friendly Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3594634" start="32302" end="32322" title="&amp;#x27;Akilisi Pohiva" label="&amp;#x27;Akilisi Pohiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q3594634" start="32438" end="32453" title="ʻAkilisi Pohiva" label="ʻAkilisi Pohiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821046" start="32466" end="32477" title="Tongatapu 1" label="Tongatapu 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q57880" start="32560" end="32575" title="Sialeʻataongo Tuʻivakanō" label="Lord Tuʻivakanō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193702" start="32675" end="32699" title="parliamentary opposition" label="parliamentary opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q227716" start="32993" end="33007" title="George Tupou V" label="George Tupou V"/>
<link wikidata="Q208497" start="33121" end="33129" title="Tupou VI" label="Tupou VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q15552713" start="33132" end="33153" title="2014 Tongan general election" label="New elections in 2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q30751165" start="33409" end="33420" title="2017 Tongan general election" label="November 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q110567218" start="33609" end="33638" title="2022 Hunga Tonga–Hunga Ha&amp;#x27;apai eruption and tsunami" label="tsunami caused by an eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143318" start="33646" end="33671" title="Hunga Tonga–Hunga Haʻapai" label="Hunga Tonga–Hunga Haʻapai"/>
<link wikidata="Q149509" start="33859" end="33877" title="History of Oceania" label="History of Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q836240" start="33879" end="33904" title="List of monarchs of Tonga" label="List of monarchs of Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q915636" start="33906" end="33929" title="Prime Minister of Tonga" label="Prime Minister of Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154675" start="33931" end="33948" title="Politics of Tonga" label="Politics of Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q23022146" start="33950" end="33978" title="Kingdom of Tonga (1900–1970)" label="Kingdom of Tonga (1900–1970)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30160" wikidata="Q2748202" url="?curid=30160" title="Geography of Tonga">
<text>Located in Oceania, Tonga is a small archipelago in the South Pacific Ocean, directly south of Samoa and about two-thirds of the way from Hawaii to New Zealand. It has 169 islands, 36 of them inhabited, which are in three main groups – Vavaʻu, Haʻapai, and Tongatapu – and cover an -long north–south line. The total size is just . Due to the spread out islands it has the 40th largest Exclusive Economic Zone of .

The largest island, Tongatapu, on which the capital city of Nukualofa is located, covers . Geologically the Tongan islands are of two types: most have a limestone base formed from uplifted coral formations; others consist of limestone overlaying a volcanic base.

==Climate==
The climate is tropical with a distinct warm period (December–April), during which the temperatures rise above , and a cooler period (May–November), with temperatures rarely rising above . The temperature increases from , and the annual rainfall is from as one moves from Tongatapu in the south to the more northerly islands closer to the Equator. The average wettest period is around March with on average . The average daily humidity is 80%. Cyclones can occur from October to April.

==Geology==
Though administratively divided into the three main island groups of Tongatapu, Ha&#x27;apai, and Vava&#x27;u (excluding the outlying islands), the Tonga archipelago is actually made of two geologically different parallel chains of islands.

The western islands, such as ʻAta (also known as Pylstaart island), Fonuafo&#x27;ou, Tofua, Kao, Lata&#x27;iki, Late, Fonualei, Toku, Niuatoputapu, and Tafahi, make up the Tongan Volcanic Arc and are all of volcanic origin. They were created from the subduction of the westwards-moving Pacific plate under the Australia-India plate at the Tonga Trench. The Tongan Islands sit on the Australia-India plate just west of the Tonga Trench. These volcanoes are formed when materials in the descending Pacific plate heat and rise to the surface. There is only limited coral reef development on these islands, except for Niuatoputapu.

The eastern islands are not volcanic and sit above the mostly submerged Tonga ridge that runs parallel to the Tongan Volcanic Arc and the Tongan Trench. Of these islands, only &#x27;Eua has risen high enough to expose its underlying Eocene volcanic bedrock, the rest are either low coral limestone islands (Tongatapu, Vava&#x27;u, Lifuka) or sand cay islands (&#x27;Uoleva, &#x27;Uiha). These islands are surrounded by &quot;a protective and resource-rich labyrinth of fringing, apron and off-shore barrier reefs&quot; that have supported most of the human settlement in Tonga ever since the first Lapita People arrived circa 900 BCE.

The Tongan Volcanic Arc has been important in supplying the islands on the Tonga ridge with an andesite tephra soil that has resulted in &quot;an extremely rich soil capable of supporting a high-yield, short-fallow agricultural system.&quot; Also, the andesite/basalt from the volcanoes were initially used as &quot;hammerstones, weaving weights, cooking stones, and decorative pebbles for grave decoration.&quot; Tafahi island in the far north provided volcanic glass to initial human settlers.

In December 2014 and January 2015, a volcanic island 1 km wide by 2 km long was created adjacent to the island of Hunga Tonga–Hunga Ha&#x27;apai 65 kilometers northwest of Nuku&#x27;alofa. The volcanic eruption has built the new island to a height of 100 m composed of ash and large rock fragments. In regards to volcanism, Tonga has moderate volcanic activity. Fonualei (elev. 180 m) has shown frequent activity in recent years, while Niuafo&#x27;ou (elev. 260 m), which last erupted in 1985, has forced evacuations; other historically active volcanoes include Late and Tofua. Natural hazards include earthquakes and volcanic activity at Fonuafo&#x27;ou (Falcon Shoal/Island) and Late&#x27;iki (Metis Shoal/Island).

==Facts==

Geographic coordinates: 

Area:
&quot;total:&quot; 
&quot;land:&quot; 
&quot;water:&quot; 

Coastline:
Maritime claims:
&quot;continental shelf:&quot;
 depth or to the depth of exploitation
&quot;exclusive economic zone:&quot;
 and 
&quot;territorial sea:&quot;
Elevation extremes:
&quot;lowest point:&quot;
Pacific Ocean 
&quot;highest point:&quot;
unnamed location on Kao 

Land use:
&quot;arable land:&quot;
21.33%
&quot;permanent crops:&quot;
14.67%
&quot;other:&quot;
64.00% (2011)

Environment - international agreements:
&quot;party to:&quot;
Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change Kyoto-Protocol, Desertification, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Ozone Layer Protection, and Ship Pollution.

Natural resources are fish and fertile soil. Current environmental issues are deforestation as more and more land is being cleared for agriculture and settlement; some damage to coral reefs from starfish and indiscriminate coral and shell collectors; and overhunting threatens native sea turtle populations.

==See also==
*Tongan tropical moist forests
*List of islands and towns in Tonga

==References==
==Sources==
*World Factbook</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="11" end="18" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q678" start="20" end="25" title="Tonga" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="37" end="48" title="archipelago" label="archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="62" end="75" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="95" end="100" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="138" end="144" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="148" end="159" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q859666" start="236" end="242" title="Vavaʻu" label="Vavaʻu"/>
<link wikidata="Q612098" start="244" end="251" title="Haʻapai" label="Haʻapai"/>
<link wikidata="Q620452" start="257" end="266" title="Tongatapu" label="Tongatapu"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="385" end="408" title="Exclusive Economic Zone" label="Exclusive Economic Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q38834" start="475" end="484" title="Nukuʻalofa" label="Nukualofa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="663" end="671" title="volcanic" label="volcanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q423507" start="1461" end="1465" title="ʻAta" label="ʻAta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414448" start="1517" end="1522" title="Tofua" label="Tofua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520405" start="1524" end="1527" title="Kao (island)" label="Kao"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1529" end="1542" title="Lata&amp;#x27;iki" label="Lata&amp;#x27;iki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550157" start="1544" end="1548" title="Late (Tonga)" label="Late"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427939" start="1550" end="1558" title="Fonualei" label="Fonualei"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650638" start="1560" end="1564" title="Tokū, Tonga" label="Toku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144842" start="1566" end="1578" title="Niuatoputapu" label="Niuatoputapu"/>
<link wikidata="Q283712" start="1584" end="1590" title="Tafahi" label="Tafahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q176318" start="1683" end="1693" title="subduction" label="subduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q205411" start="1718" end="1731" title="Pacific Plate" label="Pacific plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q119294" start="1854" end="1866" title="Tonga Trench" label="Tonga Trench"/>
<link wikidata="Q423528" start="2237" end="2246" title="&amp;#x27;Eua" label="&amp;#x27;Eua"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="2294" end="2300" title="Eocene" label="Eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q620452" start="2368" end="2377" title="Tongatapu" label="Tongatapu"/>
<link wikidata="Q859666" start="2379" end="2390" title="Vava&amp;#x27;u" label="Vava&amp;#x27;u"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309255" start="2392" end="2398" title="Lifuka" label="Lifuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711214" start="2427" end="2433" title="Uoleva" label="Uoleva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107778" start="2435" end="2445" title="ʻUiha" label="&amp;#x27;Uiha"/>
<link wikidata="Q181908" start="2792" end="2800" title="andesite" label="andesite"/>
<link wikidata="Q209245" start="2801" end="2807" title="tephra" label="tephra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143318" start="3308" end="3338" title="Hunga Tonga–Hunga Ha&amp;#x27;apai" label="Hunga Tonga–Hunga Ha&amp;#x27;apai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427939" start="3556" end="3564" title="Fonualei" label="Fonualei"/>
<link wikidata="Q966941" start="3630" end="3644" title="Niuafo&amp;#x27;ou" label="Niuafo&amp;#x27;ou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994146" start="3890" end="3901" title="Metis Shoal" label="Metis Shoal"/>
<link wikidata="Q22664" start="3923" end="3945" title="Geographic coordinates" label="Geographic coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="4119" end="4142" title="exclusive economic zone" label="exclusive economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520405" start="4293" end="4296" title="Kao (island)" label="Kao"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="4473" end="4485" title="Biodiversity" label="Biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q47359" start="4518" end="4532" title="Kyoto-Protocol" label="Kyoto-Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q183481" start="4534" end="4549" title="Desertification" label="Desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="4732" end="4745" title="deforestation" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q102078715" start="4977" end="5006" title="Tongan tropical moist forests" label="Tongan tropical moist forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q502914" start="5008" end="5042" title="List of islands and towns in Tonga" label="List of islands and towns in Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="5072" end="5086" title="World Factbook" label="World Factbook"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30161" wikidata="Q1273397" url="?curid=30161" title="Demographics of Tonga">
<text>Tongans, a Polynesian group, represent more than 98% of the inhabitants of Tonga. The rest are European (the majority are British), mixed European, and other Pacific Islanders. There also are several hundred Chinese. Almost two-thirds of the population live on its main island, Tongatapu. Although an increasing number of Tongans have moved into the only urban and commercial center, Nukualofa, where European and Indigenous cultural and living patterns have blended, village life and kinship ties continue to be important throughout the country. Everyday life is heavily influenced by Polynesian traditions and especially by the Christian faith; for example, all commerce and entertainment activities cease from midnight Saturday until midnight Sunday, and the constitution declares the Sabbath to be sacred, forever. Other important Christian denominations include Methodists (Free Wesleyan) and Roman Catholics, and the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Primary education between ages 6 and 14 is compulsory and free in state schools. Mission schools provide about 83% of the primary and 90% of the secondary level education. Higher education includes teacher training, nursing and medical training, a small private university, a women&#x27;s business college, and a number of private agricultural schools. Most higher education is pursued overseas.

Based on 2021 estimates, the religious breakdown of the population was Protestant 63.9% (includes Free Wesleyan Church 34.2%, Free Church of Tonga 11.3%, Church of Tonga 6.8%, Tokaikolo Christian Church 1.5%, Assembly of God 2.5%, Seventh Day Adventist 2.5%, Constitutional Church of Tonga 1.2%, and other Protestant 4%), Latter-day Saints 19.7%, Roman Catholic 13.7%, other 2.1%, none 0.6%, unspecified 0.1%.

As the 1960s ended the population growth rate fell rapidly in the country.

==Population==
In the 1930s, Tonga had a population of about 32,000. Starting in the 1970s large scale migration began to Australia and New Zealand. By the 1970s the emigration rate from Tonga to Australia, New Zealand, United Kingdom, Canada, France and the United States was over 2% annually. The country has over 100,000 residents.

===Structure of the population===

==Vital statistics==

===Registered births and deaths=== 
==Migration==

===Emigration===
There are over 150,000 people of Tongan descent living outside of Tonga, mostly in New Zealand, the United States, and Australia.
====Oceania====
82,389 New Zealanders identified themselves as being of Tongan ethnicity with 22,413 stating that they were born in Tonga. As of 2016, Tongan New Zealanders make up 1.2% of New Zealand&#x27;s population of approximately 5 million people. There is a Tongan Australian population of 32,691 people, which is over 0.1% of Australia&#x27;s population. 60% of Tongan people live in New South Wales.
====United States====
In the U.S., Tongan Americans constitute a small 0.02% of the U.S. population, with over 67,000 people recorded having Tongan ancestry in the country as of 2020.
Much of the U.S. Tongan community resides in California. In San Mateo County (0.7% of the county&#x27;s population) in the San Francisco Bay Area, there are over 5,000 Tongan Americans, mainly concentrated in Daly City, East Palo Alto, San Mateo, and San Bruno. There is a Tongan community in Oakland, of about 1,500 people (0.3% of Oakland&#x27;s population). There is a Tongan population in Los Angeles County, mainly in Inglewood (0.7% of the city&#x27;s population), Hawthorne, and Long Beach. There are also around 1,000 Tongans in Sacramento and more throughout the Sacramento Valley.
There is a sizable Tongan community in Utah, mainly in the Salt Lake Valley. Salt Lake County has over 8,000 residents of Tongan ancestry. The Glendale neighborhood of Salt Lake City has one of the highest concentrations of Tongans in the area.
Euless, Texas, in the Dallas-Fort Worth area, has a significant Tongan community, with more than 1,000 residents.
Portland, Oregon has 500 Tongan individuals, with its metropolitan area having several hundred more in addition.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q26085464" start="0" end="7" title="Tongans" label="Tongans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042001" start="11" end="21" title="Polynesians" label="Polynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q678" start="75" end="80" title="Tonga" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q842438" start="122" end="129" title="British people" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100814" start="208" end="215" title="Chinese in Tonga" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q620452" start="278" end="287" title="Tongatapu" label="Tongatapu"/>
<link wikidata="Q38834" start="384" end="393" title="Nukuʻalofa" label="Nukualofa"/>
<link wikidata="Q35942" start="586" end="595" title="Polynesia" label="Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="630" end="639" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116511" start="788" end="795" title="Sabbath in Christianity" label="Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500150" start="867" end="893" title="Free Wesleyan Church of Tonga" label="Methodists (Free Wesleyan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="898" end="913" title="Roman Catholics" label="Roman Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="919" end="966" title="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="2397" end="2408" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2414" end="2427" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="2433" end="2442" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q871904" start="2467" end="2481" title="New Zealanders" label="New Zealanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q678" start="2576" end="2581" title="Tonga" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q39054502" start="2595" end="2615" title="Tongan New Zealander" label="Tongan New Zealander"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821010" start="2709" end="2726" title="Tongan Australian" label="Tongan Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="2778" end="2787" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="2836" end="2851" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821008" start="2888" end="2903" title="Tongan American" label="Tongan American"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="3082" end="3092" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q108101" start="3097" end="3113" title="San Mateo County" label="San Mateo County"/>
<link wikidata="Q213205" start="3160" end="3182" title="San Francisco Bay Area" label="San Francisco Bay Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q370925" start="3246" end="3255" title="Daly City" label="Daly City"/>
<link wikidata="Q988697" start="3257" end="3271" title="East Palo Alto" label="East Palo Alto"/>
<link wikidata="Q169943" start="3273" end="3282" title="San Mateo, California" label="San Mateo"/>
<link wikidata="Q667738" start="3288" end="3297" title="San Bruno" label="San Bruno"/>
<link wikidata="Q104994" start="3430" end="3448" title="Los Angeles County" label="Los Angeles County"/>
<link wikidata="Q621549" start="3460" end="3469" title="Inglewood, California" label="Inglewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q688596" start="3508" end="3517" title="Hawthorne, California" label="Hawthorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q16739" start="3523" end="3533" title="Long Beach" label="Long Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="3667" end="3671" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q377106" start="3687" end="3703" title="Salt Lake Valley" label="Salt Lake Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568331" start="3771" end="3779" title="Glendale, Salt Lake City" label="Glendale"/>
<link wikidata="Q23337" start="3796" end="3810" title="Salt Lake City" label="Salt Lake City"/>
<link wikidata="Q26483" start="3873" end="3886" title="Euless, Texas" label="Euless, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q179295" start="3895" end="3912" title="Dallas-Fort Worth" label="Dallas-Fort Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="3987" end="4003" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland, Oregon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30162" wikidata="Q1154675" url="?curid=30162" title="Politics of Tonga">
<text>The politics of Tonga take place in a framework of a constitutional monarchy, whereby the King is the Head of State and the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces. Tonga&#x27;s Prime Minister is currently appointed by the King from among the members of Parliament after having won the support of a majority of its members. Executive power is vested in the Cabinet of Ministers. Legislative power is vested in the King in Parliament, and judicial power is vested in the supreme court.

Tonga joined the Commonwealth of Nations in 1970, and the United Nations in 1999. While exposed to colonial forces, Tonga has never lost indigenous governance, a fact that makes Tonga unique in the Pacific and boosts confidence in the monarchical system. The British High Commission in Tonga closed in March 2006.

Tonga&#x27;s current king, Tupou VI, traces his line directly back through six generations of monarchs. The previous king, George Tupou V, born in 1946, continued to have ultimate control of the government until July 2008. At that point, concerns over financial irregularities and calls for democracy led to his relinquishing most of his day-to-day powers over the government.

==Executive==

|King
|Tupou VI
|18 March 2012
|Prime Minister
|Siaosi Sovaleni
|Independent
|27 December 2021
Its executive includes the prime minister and the cabinet, which becomes the Privy Council when presided over by the monarch. In intervals between legislative sessions, the Privy Council makes ordinances, which become law if confirmed by the legislature. The monarch is hereditary and appoints all members of the cabinet, including the prime minister and the deputy prime minister.

==Legislature==

The Legislative Assembly is composed of representatives from both the Nobles and the people. This composition is established by Article 59 of the Constitution as amended by the &quot; Constitution of Tonga amendment Act 2010 &quot; Article 51 of the same Act allows the PM to nominate and the King to appoint up to 4 extra cabinet members from outside the Assembly.

The current composition is:
* 9 Nobles
* 17 Elected by Commoners

==Political parties and elections==

The electoral system was changed in April 2010, with 17 of 26 representatives now directly elected.

===By-elections===
Below is a list of recent or upcoming by-elections:

==Courts==
Tonga&#x27;s court system consists of the Court of Appeal (Privy Council), the Supreme Court, the Magistrates&#x27; Court, and the Land Court. Judges are appointed by the monarch.

The judiciary is headed by a Chief Justice. The current Chief Justice is Michael Hargreaves Whitten.

==Administrative divisions==
Tonga is divided in three island groups; Ha&#x27;apai, Tongatapu, Vava&#x27;u. The only form of local government is through town and district officials who have been popularly elected since 1965. The town official represents the central government in the villages, the district official has authority over a group of villages.

==See also==
* Electoral calendar
* Electoral system
* Lists of political parties
* 2006 Tonga riots

==References==
==External links==
*Adam Carr&#x27;s Election Archive</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1154675" start="4" end="21" title="Politics of Tonga" label="politics of Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="53" end="76" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q836240" start="90" end="94" title="King of Tonga" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="378" end="395" title="Legislative power" label="Legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="502" end="525" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q208497" start="827" end="835" title="Tupou VI" label="Tupou VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q227716" start="923" end="937" title="George Tupou V" label="George Tupou V"/>
<link wikidata="Q580640" start="1081" end="1100" title="2006 Nuku‘alofa riots" label="calls for democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q836240" start="1194" end="1198" title="List of monarchs of Tonga" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q208497" start="1200" end="1208" title="Tupou VI" label="Tupou VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q915636" start="1225" end="1239" title="Prime Minister of Tonga" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q19631293" start="1241" end="1256" title="Siaosi Sovaleni" label="Siaosi Sovaleni"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="1258" end="1269" title="Independent (politician)" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="1292" end="1301" title="executive branch" label="executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="1315" end="1329" title="prime minister" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567190" start="1338" end="1345" title="Cabinet of Tonga" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253633" start="1365" end="1378" title="Privy Council of Tonga" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q116" start="1405" end="1412" title="monarch" label="monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="1506" end="1509" title="law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="1530" end="1541" title="legislature" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q116" start="1547" end="1554" title="monarch" label="monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="1624" end="1638" title="prime minister" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287831" start="1692" end="1712" title="Legislative Assembly of Tonga" label="Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959031" start="2384" end="2399" title="Court of Appeal" label="Court of Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q190752" start="2421" end="2434" title="Supreme court" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178328" start="2552" end="2565" title="Chief Justice of Tonga" label="Chief Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q113366390" start="2596" end="2622" title="Michael Hargreaves Whitten" label="Michael Hargreaves Whitten"/>
<link wikidata="Q125688440" start="2997" end="3015" title="Electoral calendar" label="Electoral calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q182985" start="3018" end="3034" title="Electoral system" label="Electoral system"/>
<link wikidata="Q11025641" start="3037" end="3063" title="Lists of political parties" label="Lists of political parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q580640" start="3066" end="3082" title="2006 Tonga riots" label="2006 Tonga riots"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30164" wikidata="Q7696044" url="?curid=30164" title="Telecommunications in Tonga">
<text>Telecommunications in Tonga include radio, television, telephones, and the Internet.

==Telephone==
Main lines in use:
14,697 (2018)

Telephones - mobile cellular:
107,938 (2018)

Telephone system:

Fixed PSTN, GSM 900

Main Island has 4G mobile. 

&quot;domestic:&quot;
NA
&quot;international:&quot;
satellite earth station - 2 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean))

==Radio==
Broadcast stations:
AM 1 (2005), FM 5 (2005), shortwave 1 (1998)

Radios:
61,000 (1997)

==Television==
Broadcast stations:
4 (2005)

Televisions:
2,000 (1997)

In April 2002 the Tongasat company started its own satellite telecommunication service when it obtained the Esiafi 1 (former private American Comstar D4) satellite (launched in 1981) that was moved to Tonga&#x27;s own geostationary point.

==Internet==
Internet Service Providers (ISPs):
2 (2005)

Country code (Top level domain): .to

Broadband internet communication is provided by the Tonga Cable System that went online in April 2018.

On 15 January 2022, following a volcanic eruption on the island of Hunga Tonga–Hunga Haʻapai, the Tonga Cable System was severed, leaving the country without Internet access. Using a satellite dish at the University of the South Pacific, the telecommunications company Digicel provided limited 2G coverage to the island of Tongatapu, as well as giving residents free SIM cards.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7696044" start="0" end="27" title="Telecommunications in Tonga" label="Telecommunications in Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="36" end="41" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="43" end="53" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q11035" start="55" end="65" title="Telephone" label="telephones"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="71" end="83" title="the Internet" label="the Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="301" end="310" title="satellite" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q778126" start="329" end="337" title="Intelsat" label="Intelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="339" end="352" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q15078788" start="366" end="375" title="Broadcasting" label="Broadcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q14752666" start="545" end="553" title="Tongasat" label="Tongasat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="635" end="680" title="Esiafi 1" label="Esiafi 1 (former private American Comstar D4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q192316" start="745" end="758" title="Geostationary orbit" label="geostationary"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="780" end="805" title="Internet Service Provider" label="Internet Service Provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q906278" start="825" end="837" title="Country code" label="Country code"/>
<link wikidata="Q41626" start="858" end="861" title=".to" label=".to"/>
<link wikidata="Q16258444" start="915" end="933" title="Tonga Cable System" label="Tonga Cable System"/>
<link wikidata="Q110567218" start="999" end="1059" title="2022 Hunga Tonga–Hunga Ha&amp;#x27;apai eruption and tsunami" label="volcanic eruption on the island of Hunga Tonga–Hunga Haʻapai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062121" start="1172" end="1203" title="University of the South Pacific" label="University of the South Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117506" start="1236" end="1243" title="Digicel" label="Digicel"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30165" wikidata="Q5767163" url="?curid=30165" title="Transport in Tonga">
<text>Transport in Tonga includes road, air and water-based infrastructure. There are 680 km of highways in Tonga, of which 184 km are paved, and there are a number of air and seaports.

There are three harbours in Tonga: Neiafu, Nukualofa and Pangai, and in terms of merchant marine, the country possesses seven ships that exceed 1,000 GT, whose masses combined total 17,760 GT. By type, there is one bulk ship, two cargo ships, two liquefied gas ships, one petroleum tanker and roll-on/roll-off ship, the MV ‘Otuanga’ofa.

By 1999 estimates, there are six airports in Tonga. Of these, only Fuaamotu International Airport on Tongatapu has paved runways. Of the remaining airports, one has runways exceeding length 1,524 m, two have runways longer than 914 m, with the remaining two having runways shorter than 914 m.

There was formerly a railway in Nuku&#x27;alofa, but it no longer exists.

Currently, Bajaj RE and Bajaj Qute are used in Nuku&#x27;alofa as taxi.

==References==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5767163" start="0" end="18" title="Transport in Tonga" label="Transport in Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q269949" start="90" end="97" title="highway" label="highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q283202" start="197" end="204" title="harbour" label="harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025393" start="216" end="222" title="Neiafu (Vava&amp;#x27;u)" label="Neiafu"/>
<link wikidata="Q38834" start="224" end="233" title="Nukuʻalofa" label="Nukualofa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027037" start="238" end="244" title="Pangai" label="Pangai"/>
<link wikidata="Q865132" start="262" end="277" title="merchant marine" label="merchant marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719498" start="331" end="333" title="Gross Tonnage" label="GT"/>
<link wikidata="Q473932" start="474" end="490" title="roll-on/roll-off" label="roll-on/roll-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q117355402" start="501" end="516" title="MV ‘Otuanga’ofa" label="MV ‘Otuanga’ofa"/>
<link wikidata="Q975696" start="586" end="616" title="Fuaʻamotu International Airport" label="Fuaamotu International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q620452" start="620" end="629" title="Tongatapu" label="Tongatapu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4848835" start="912" end="922" title="Bajaj Qute" label="Bajaj Qute"/>
<link wikidata="Q82650" start="954" end="958" title="taxi" label="taxi"/>
</links>
</doc>
