<doc id="33102" wikidata="Q130861" url="?curid=33102" title="Battle of Kursk">
<text>The Battle of Kursk was a major World War II Eastern Front battle between the forces of Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union near Kursk in southwestern Russia during the summer of 1943, resulting in a Soviet victory. The Battle of Kursk is the single largest battle in the history of warfare. It ranks only behind the Battle of Stalingrad several months earlier as the most often-cited turning point in the European theatre of the war. It was one of the costliest battles of the Second World War, the single deadliest armoured battle in history, and the opening day of the battle, 5 July, was the single costliest day in the history of aerial warfare in terms of aircraft shot down. The battle was further marked by fierce house-to-house fighting and hand-to-hand combat.

The battle began with the launch of the German offensive Operation Citadel (), on 5 July, which had the objective of pinching off the Kursk salient with attacks on the base of the salient from north and south simultaneously. After the German offensive stalled on the northern side of the salient, on 12 July, the Soviets commenced their Kursk Strategic Offensive Operation with the launch of Operation Kutuzov () against the rear of the German forces on the same side. On the southern side, the Soviets also launched powerful counterattacks the same day, one of which led to a large armoured clash, the Battle of Prokhorovka. On 3 August, the Soviets began the second phase of the Kursk Strategic Offensive Operation with the launch of the Belgorod–Kharkov offensive operation (Operation Polkovodets Rumyantsev, ) against the German forces on the southern side of the salient.

The Germans hoped to weaken the Soviet offensive potential for the summer of 1943, by cutting off and enveloping the forces that they anticipated would be in the Kursk salient. Hitler believed that a victory here would reassert German strength and improve his prestige with his allies, who he thought were considering withdrawing from the war. It was also hoped that large numbers of Soviet prisoners would be captured to be used as slave labour in the German armaments industry. The Soviet government had foreknowledge of the German plans from the Lucy spy ring. Aware months in advance that the attack would fall on the neck of the Kursk salient, the Soviets built a defence in depth designed to wear down the German armoured spearhead. The Germans delayed the offensive while they tried to build up their forces and waited for new weapons, giving the Red Army time to construct a series of deep defensive belts and establish a large reserve force for counter-offensives, with one German officer describing Kursk as &quot;another Verdun&quot;.

The battle was the final strategic offensive that the Germans were able to launch on the Eastern Front. Because the Allied invasion of Sicily began during the battle, Adolf Hitler was forced to divert troops training in France to meet the Allied threat in the Mediterranean, rather than using them as a strategic reserve for the Eastern Front. As a result, Hitler cancelled the offensive at Kursk after only a week, in part to divert forces to Italy. Germany&#x27;s heavy losses of men and tanks ensured that the victorious Soviet Red Army held a strategic initiative for the rest of the war. The Battle of Kursk was the first time in the Second World War that a German strategic offensive was halted before it could break through enemy defences and penetrate to its strategic depths. Though the Red Army had succeeded in winter offensives previously, their counter-offensives after the German attack at Kursk were their first successful summer offensives of the war. The battle has been called the &quot;last gasp of Nazi aggression&quot;.
== Background ==
As the Battle of Stalingrad slowly ground to its conclusion, the Red Army moved to a general offensive in the south, in Operation Little Saturn. By January 1943, a gap had opened between German Army Group B and Army Group Don, and the advancing Soviet armies threatened to cut off all German forces south of the Don River, including Army Group A operating in the Caucasus. Army Group Center came under significant pressure as well. Kursk was retaken by the Soviets on 8 February 1943, and Rostov on 14 February. The Soviet Bryansk, Western, and newly created Central Fronts prepared for an offensive which envisioned the encirclement of Army Group Centre between Bryansk and Smolensk. By February 1943 the southern sector of the German front was in strategic crisis.

Since December 1942, Field Marshal Erich von Manstein had been strongly requesting &quot;unrestricted operational freedom&quot; to allow him to use his forces in a fluid manner. On 6 February 1943, Manstein met with Hitler at his headquarters in Görlitz (now Gierłoż, Poland) to discuss the proposals he had previously sent. He received an approval from Hitler for a counteroffensive against the Soviet forces advancing in the Donbas region. On 12 February 1943, the remaining German forces were reorganised. To the south, Army Group Don was renamed Army Group South and placed under Manstein&#x27;s command. Directly to the north, Army Group B was dissolved, with its forces and areas of responsibility divided between Army Group South and Army Group Centre. Manstein inherited responsibility for the massive breach in the German lines. On 18 February, Hitler arrived at Army Group South headquarters at Zaporizhia just hours before the Soviets liberated Kharkov, and had to be hastily evacuated on the 19th.

Once given freedom of action, Manstein intended to utilise his forces to make a series of counterstrokes into the flanks of the Soviet armoured formations, with the goal of destroying them while retaking Kharkov and Kursk. The II SS Panzer Corps had arrived from France in January 1943, refitted and up to near full strength. Armoured units from the 1st Panzer Army of Army Group A had pulled out of the Caucasus and further strengthened Manstein&#x27;s forces.

The operation was hastily prepared and did not receive a name. Later known as Third Battle of Kharkov, it commenced on 21 February, as 4th Panzer Army under General Hoth launched a counter-attack. The German forces cut off the Soviet mobile spearheads and continued the drive north, retaking Kharkov on 15 March and Belgorod on 18 March. A Soviet offensive launched on 25 February by the Central Front against Army Group Centre had to be abandoned by 7 March to allow the attacking formations to disengage and redeploy to the south to counter the threat of the advancing German forces under Manstein. Exhaustion of both the Wehrmacht and the Red Army, coupled with the loss of mobility due to the onset of the spring rasputitsa, resulted in the cessation of operations for both sides by mid-March. The counteroffensive left a Soviet salient extending from north to south and from east to west into the German area of control, centred on the city of Kursk.

=== German plans and preparation ===
The heavy losses sustained by Germany since the opening of Operation Barbarossa had resulted in a shortage in infantry and artillery. Units were in total 470,000 men understrength. For the Wehrmacht to undertake an offensive in 1943, the burden of the offensive, in both attacking the Soviet defences and holding ground on the flanks of the advance, would have to be carried primarily by the panzer divisions. On 10 March, Manstein presented a plan whereby the German forces would pinch off the Kursk salient with a rapid offensive commencing as soon as the spring rasputitsa had subsided.

On 13 March, Hitler signed Operational Order No. 5, which authorised several offensives, including one against the Kursk salient. As the last Soviet resistance in Kharkov petered out, Manstein attempted to persuade Günther von Kluge, commander of Army Group Centre, to immediately attack the Central Front, which was defending the northern face of the salient. Kluge refused, believing that his forces were too weak to launch such an attack. Further Axis advances were blocked by Soviet forces that had been shifted down from the Central Front to the area north of Belgorod. By mid-April, amid poor weather and with the German forces exhausted and in need of refitting, the offensives of Operational Order No. 5 were postponed.

On 15 April, Hitler issued Operational Order No. 6, which called for the Kursk offensive operation, codenamed &quot;Zitadelle&quot; (&quot;Citadel&quot;), to begin on 3 May or shortly thereafter. The directive was drafted by Kurt Zeitzler, the OKH Chief of Staff. For the offensive to succeed it was deemed essential to attack before the Soviets had a chance to prepare extensive defences or to launch an offensive of their own. Some military historians have described the operation using the term blitzkrieg (lightning war); other military historians do not use the term in their works on the battle.

Operation Citadel called for a double envelopment, directed at Kursk, to surround the Soviet defenders of five armies and seal off the salient. Army Group Centre would provide General Walter Model&#x27;s 9th Army to form the northern pincer. It would cut through the northern face of the salient, driving south to the hills east of Kursk, securing the rail line from Soviet attack. Army Group South would commit the 4th Panzer Army, under Hermann Hoth, and Army Detachment Kempf, under Werner Kempf, to pierce the southern face of the salient. This force would drive north to meet the 9th Army east of Kursk. Manstein&#x27;s main attack was to be delivered by Hoth&#x27;s 4th Panzer Army, spearheaded by the II SS Panzer Corps under Paul Hausser. The XLVIII Panzer Corps, commanded by Otto von Knobelsdorff, would advance on the left while Army Detachment &quot;Kempf&quot; would advance on the right. The 2nd Army, under the command of Walter Weiss, would contain the western portion of the salient.

On 27 April, Model met with Hitler to review and express his concern regarding intelligence which showed the Red Army constructing very strong positions at the shoulders of the salient and having withdrawn their mobile forces from the area west of Kursk. He argued that the longer the preparation phase continued, the less the operation could be justified. He recommended completely abandoning Citadel, allowing the army to await and defeat the coming Soviet offensive, or radically revising the plan for Citadel. Though in mid-April, Manstein had considered the Citadel offensive profitable, by May he shared Model&#x27;s misgivings.

Hitler called his senior officers and advisors to Munich for a meeting on 4 May. Hitler spoke for about 45 minutes on the reasons to postpone the attack, essentially reiterating Model&#x27;s arguments. A number of options were put forth for comment: going on the offensive immediately with the forces at hand; delaying the offensive further to await the arrival of new and better tanks; radically revising the operation, or cancelling it altogether. Manstein advocated an early attack, but requested two additional infantry divisions, to which Hitler responded that none were available. Kluge spoke out strongly against postponement and discounted Model&#x27;s intelligence. Albert Speer, the minister of Armaments and War Production, spoke about the difficulties of rebuilding the armoured formations and the limitations of German industry to replace losses. General Heinz Guderian argued strongly against the operation, stating &quot;the attack was pointless&quot;. The conference ended without Hitler coming to a decision, but Citadel was not aborted. Three days later, OKW, Hitler&#x27;s conduit for controlling the military, postponed the launch date for Citadel to 12 June.

Following this meeting, Guderian continued to voice his concerns over an operation that would likely degrade the panzer forces that he had been attempting to rebuild. He considered the offensive, as planned, to be a misuse of the panzer forces, as it violated two of the three tenets he had laid out as the essential elements for a successful panzer attack – surprise, deployment in mass, and suitable terrain. In his opinion, the limited German resources in men and materiel should be conserved, as they would be needed for the pending defence of western Europe. In a meeting with Hitler on 10 May he asked,
Hitler replied, &quot;I know. The thought of it turns my stomach.&quot; Guderian concluded, &quot;In that case your reaction to the problem is the correct one. Leave it alone.&quot;

Despite reservations, Hitler remained committed to the offensive. He and the OKW, early in the preparatory phase, were hopeful that the offensive would revitalise German strategic fortunes in the east. As the challenges offered by Citadel increased, he focused more and more on the expected new weapons that he believed were the key to victory: principally the Panther tank, but also the Ferdinand tank destroyer and greater numbers of the Tiger heavy tank. He postponed the operation in order to await their arrival. Receiving reports of powerful Soviet concentrations behind the Kursk area, Hitler further delayed the offensive to allow for more equipment to reach the front.

With pessimism for Citadel increasing with each delay, in June, Alfred Jodl, the Chief of Staff at the OKW, instructed the armed forces propaganda office to portray the upcoming operation as a limited counteroffensive. Due to concerns of an Allied landing in the south of France or in Italy and delays in deliveries of the new tanks, Hitler postponed again, this time to 20 June. Zeitzler was profoundly concerned with the delays, but he still supported the offensive. On 17–18 June, following a discussion in which the OKW Operations Staff suggested abandoning the offensive, Hitler further postponed the operation until 3 July then, on 1 July, Hitler announced 5 July as the launch date of the offensive.

A three-month quiet period had descended upon the Eastern Front as the Soviets prepared their defences and the Germans attempted to build up their forces. The Germans used this period for specialised training of their assault troops. All units underwent training and combat rehearsals. The Waffen-SS had built a full-scale duplicate Soviet strong point that was used to practice the techniques for neutralizing such positions. The panzer divisions received replacement men and equipment and attempted to get back up to strength. The German forces to be used in the offensive included 12 panzer divisions and 5 panzergrenadier divisions, four of which had tank strengths greater than their neighbouring panzer divisions. However, the force was markedly deficient in infantry divisions, which were essential to hold ground and to secure the flanks. By the time the Germans initiated the offensive, their force amounted to around 777,000 men, 2,451 tanks and assault guns (70 percent of the German armour on the Eastern Front) and 7,417 guns and mortars. The Battle of Kursk would engulf more than 70% of Germany&#x27;s military force on the Eastern Front.

=== Soviet plans and preparation ===
In 1943, an offensive by the Soviet Central, Bryansk and Western Fronts against Army Group Centre was abandoned shortly after it began in early March, when the southern flank of the Central Front was threatened by Army Group South. Soviet intelligence received information about German troop concentrations spotted at Orel and Kharkov, as well as details of an intended German offensive in the Kursk sector through the Lucy spy ring in Switzerland. The Soviets verified the intelligence via their spy in Britain, John Cairncross, at the Government Code and Cypher School at Bletchley Park, who clandestinely forwarded raw decrypts directly to Moscow. Cairncross also provided Soviet intelligence with identifications of the Luftwaffe airfields in the region. Soviet politician Anastas Mikoyan wrote that on 27 March 1943, Soviet leader Joseph Stalin notified him of a possible German attack in the Kursk sector. Stalin and some senior officers were eager to strike first once the &quot;rasputitsa&quot; ended, but a number of key officers, including Deputy Supreme Commander Georgiy Zhukov, recommended a strategic defensive before going on the offensive. In a letter to the &quot;Stavka&quot; and Stalin, on 8 April, Zhukov wrote:

Stalin consulted with his frontline commanders and senior officers of the General Staff from 12 to 15 April 1943. In the end he and the Stavka agreed that the Germans would probably target Kursk. Stalin believed the decision to defend would give the Germans the initiative, but Zhukov countered that the Germans would be drawn into a trap where their armoured power would be destroyed, thus creating the conditions for a major Soviet counteroffensive. They decided to meet the enemy attack by preparing defensive positions to wear out the German groupings before launching their own offensive. Preparation of defences and fortifications began by the end of April, and continued until the German attack in early July. The two-month delay between the German decision to attack the Kursk salient and its implementation allowed the Red Army ample time to thoroughly prepare.

The Voronezh Front, commanded by Nikolai Vatutin, was tasked with defending the southern face of the salient. The Central Front, commanded by Konstantin Rokossovsky, defended the northern face. Waiting in reserve was the Steppe Front, commanded by Ivan Konev. In February 1943, the Central Front had been reconstructed from the Don Front, which had been part of the northern pincer of Operation Uranus and had been responsible for the destruction of the 6th Army at Stalingrad.

The Central and Voronezh Fronts each constructed three main defensive belts in their sectors, with each subdivided into several zones of fortification. The Soviets employed the labour of over 300,000 civilians. Fortifying each belt was an interconnected web of minefields, barbed-wire fences, anti-tank ditches, deep entrenchments for infantry, anti-tank obstacles, dug-in armoured vehicles, and machine-gun bunkers. Behind the three main defensive belts were three more belts prepared as fallback positions; the first was not fully occupied or heavily fortified, and the last two, though sufficiently fortified, were unoccupied with the exception of a small area in the immediate environs of Kursk. The combined depth of the three main defensive zones was about . The six defensive belts on either side of Kursk were deep. If the Germans managed to break through these defences they would still be confronted by additional defensive belts to the east, manned by the Steppe Front. These brought the total depth of the defences to nearly .

The Voronezh and Central Fronts dug and of trenches respectively, laid out in criss-cross pattern for ease of movement. The Soviets built more than 686 bridges and about of roads in the salient. Red Army combat engineers laid 503,993 anti-tank mines and 439,348 anti-personnel mines, with the highest concentration in the first main defensive belt. The minefields at Kursk achieved densities of 2,500 anti-personnel and 2,200 anti-tank mines per kilometre, six times the density used in the defence of Moscow. For example, the 6th Guards Army of the Voronezh Front, was spread out over nearly of front and was protected by 69,688 anti-tank and 64,430 anti-personnel mines in its first defensive belt with a further 20,200 anti-tank and 9,097 anti-personnel mines in its second defensive belt. Furthermore, mobile obstacle detachments were tasked with laying more mines directly in the path of advancing enemy armoured formations. These units, consisting of two platoons of combat engineers with mines at division level and one company of combat engineers normally equipped with 500–700 mines at corps level, functioned as anti-tank reserves at every level of command.

In a letter dated 8 April, Zhukov warned that the Germans would attack the salient with a strong armoured force:
Nearly all artillery, including howitzers, guns, anti-aircraft and rockets, were tasked with anti-tank defence. Dug-in tanks and self-propelled guns further strengthened the anti-tank defences. Anti-tank forces were incorporated into every level of command, mostly as anti-tank strong points with the majority concentrated on likely attack routes and the remainder amply spread out elsewhere. Each anti-tank strong-point typically consisted of four to six anti-tank guns, six to nine anti-tank rifles, and five to seven heavy and light machine guns. They were supported by mobile obstacle detachments as well as by infantry with automatic firearms. Independent tank and self-propelled gun brigades and regiments were tasked with cooperating with the infantry during counterattacks.

Soviet preparations also included increased activity of Soviet partisans, who attacked German communications and supply lines. The attacks were mostly behind Army Group North and Army Group Centre. In June 1943, partisans operating in the occupied area behind Army Group Centre destroyed 298 locomotives, 1,222 railway wagons and 44 bridges, and in the Kursk sector there were 1,092 partisan attacks on railways. These attacks delayed the build-up of German supplies and equipment, and required the diversion of German troops to suppress the partisans, delaying their training for the offensive. Central Partisan Headquarters coordinated many of these attacks. In June Soviet Air Forces (VVS) flew over 800 sorties at night to resupply the partisan groups operating behind Army Group Centre. The VVS also provided communication and sometimes even daylight air-support for major partisan operations.

Special training was provided to the Soviet infantry manning the defences to help them overcome the tank phobia that had been evident since the start of the German invasion. Soldiers were packed into trenches and tanks were driven overhead until all signs of fear were gone. This training exercise was referred to by the soldiers as &quot;ironing&quot;. In combat, the soldiers would spring up in the midst of the attacking infantry to separate them from the spearheading armoured vehicles. The separated armoured vehicles – now vulnerable to infantry armed with PTRD-41 anti-tank rifles, demolition charges and molotov cocktails – could then be disabled or destroyed at point-blank range. These types of attacks were mostly effective against the Ferdinand tank destroyers, which lacked machine guns as secondary armament. The soldiers were also promised financial rewards for each tank destroyed, with the People&#x27;s Commissariat of Defence providing a bounty of 1,000 roubles for each destroyed tank.

The Soviets employed &quot;maskirovka&quot; (military deception) to mask defensive positions and troop dispositions and to conceal the movement of men and materiel. These included camouflaging gun emplacements, constructing dummy airfields and depots, generating false radio-traffic, and spreading rumours among the Soviet frontline troops and the civilian population in the German-held areas. Movement of forces and supplies to and from the salient took place at night only. Ammunition caches were carefully concealed to blend in with the landscape. Radio transmission was restricted and fires were forbidden. Command posts were hidden and motor transport in and around them forbidden.

According to a Soviet General Staff report, 29 of the 35 major Luftwaffe raids on Soviet airfields in the Kursk sector in June 1943 were against dummy airfields. According to historian Antony Beevor, in contrast, Soviet aviation apparently succeeded in destroying more than 500 Luftwaffe aircraft on the ground. The Soviet deception efforts were so successful that German estimates issued in mid-June placed the total Soviet armoured strength at 1,500 tanks. The result was not only a vast underestimation of Soviet strength, but a misperception of Soviet strategic intentions.
The main tank of the Soviet tank arm was the T-34 medium tank, on which the Red Army attempted to concentrate production. The tank arm also contained large numbers of the T-70 light tank. For example, the 5th Guards Tank Army roughly contained 270 T-70s and 500 T-34s. In the salient itself the Soviets assembled a large number of lend-lease tanks. These included U.S.-manufactured M3 Lee medium tanks and British-built Churchill, Matilda II and Valentine infantry tanks. However, the T-34 made up the bulk of the Soviet armour. Without including the deeper reserves organised under the Steppe Front, the Soviets massed about 1,300,000 men, 3,600 tanks, 20,000 artillery pieces and 2,792 aircraft to defend the salient. This amounted to 26 percent of the total manpower of the Red Army, 26 percent of its mortars and artillery, 35 percent of its aircraft and 46 percent of its tanks. One source states that in the Battle of Stalingrad the Soviets used fourteen field armies and one tank army, while at Kursk they used twenty-two full-strength field armies and five tank armies. According to one source, the Soviets concentrated 80% of their entire air fleet for use at the Battle of Kursk. According to some historians, the Soviets employed 40% of their manpower and 75% of their armoured forces to the battle.

=== Contest for aerial supremacy ===
By 1943 the Luftwaffe&#x27;s strength on the Eastern Front had started to weaken after Stalingrad, and the siphoning of resources to North Africa. The Luftwaffe forces in the east were further depleted with fighter units being shifted back to Germany to defend against the escalating Allied bombing campaign. By the end of June, only 38.7 percent of the Luftwaffe&#x27;s total aircraft remained in the east. In 1943 the Luftwaffe could still achieve local aerial superiority by concentrating its forces. The majority of German aircraft left available on the Eastern Front were slated for Citadel. The goal of the Luftwaffe remained unchanged. The priority was to gain aerial supremacy, then to isolate the battlefield from enemy reinforcements, and finally, once the critical point had been reached in the land battle, to render close air support.
The changing strengths between the two opponents prompted the Luftwaffe to make operational changes for the battle. Previous offensive campaigns had been initiated with Luftwaffe raids against opposing airfields to achieve aerial superiority. By this point in the war Red Army equipment reserves were extensive and the Luftwaffe commanders realised that aircraft could be easily replaced, making such raids futile. Therefore, this mission was abandoned. In addition, previous campaigns had made use of medium bombers flying well behind the frontline to block the arrival of reinforcements. This mission, however, was rarely attempted during Citadel.

The Luftwaffe command understood that their support would be crucial for the success of Citadel, but problems with supply shortfalls hampered their preparations. Partisan activity, particularly behind Army Group Center, slowed the rate of re-supply and cut short the Luftwaffe&#x27;s ability to build up essential stockpiles of petrol, oil, lubricants, engines, munitions, and, unlike Red Army units there were no reserves of aircraft that could be used to replace damaged aircraft over the course of the operation. Fuel was the most significant limiting factor. To help build up supplies for the support of Citadel, the Luftwaffe greatly curtailed its operations during the last week of June. Despite this conservation of resources, the Luftwaffe did not have the resources to sustain an intensive air effort for more than a few days after the operation began.

For Citadel, the Luftwaffe confined its operations to the direct support of the forces on the ground. In this mission the Luftwaffe continued to make use of the Junkers Ju 87 &quot;Stuka&quot; dive-bombers. A new development to this aircraft was the &quot;Bordkanone&quot; 3,7 cm cannon, one of which could be slung under each wing of the Stuka in a gun pod. Half of the Stuka groups assigned to support Citadel were equipped with these &quot;Kanonenvogel&quot; (literally &quot;cannon-bird&quot;) tankbuster aircraft. The air groups were also strengthened by the recent arrival of the Henschel Hs 129, with its 30 mm MK 103 cannon, and the F-subtype ground attack (&quot;jabo&quot;) version of the Focke-Wulf Fw 190.

In the months preceding the battle, Luftflotte 6 supporting Army Group Center noted a marked increase in the strength of the opposing VVS formations. The VVS formations encountered displayed better training, and were flying improved equipment with greater aggressiveness and skill than the Luftwaffe had seen earlier. The introduction of the Yakovlev Yak-9 and Lavochkin La-5 fighters gave the Soviet pilots near parity with the Luftwaffe in terms of equipment. Furthermore, large numbers of ground-attack aircraft, such as the Ilyushin Il-2 &quot;Shturmovik&quot; and the Pe-2, had become available as well. The VVS also fielded large numbers of aircraft supplied via lend-lease. Huge stockpiles of supplies and ample reserves of replacement aircraft meant the Red Army and VVS formations would be able to conduct an extended campaign without slackening in the intensity of their effort.

== Opposing forces ==
=== Germans ===
For the operation, the Germans used four armies along with a large portion of their total tank strength on the Eastern Front. On 1 July, the 9th Army of Army Group Centre based in the northern side of the salient contained 335,000 men (223,000 combat soldiers); in the south, the 4th Panzer Army and Army Detachment &quot;Kempf&quot;, of Army Group South, had 223,907 men (149,271 combat soldiers) and 100,000–108,000 men (66,000 combat soldiers) respectively. The 2nd Army, that held the western side of the salient contained an estimated 110,000. In total, the German forces had a total strength of 777,000–779,000 men, and the three attacking armies contained 438,271 combat soldiers. Army Group South was equipped with more armoured vehicles, infantry and artillery than the 9th Army of Army Group Center. The 4th Panzer Army and Army Detachment &quot;Kempf&quot; had 1,377 tanks and assault guns, while the 9th Army possessed 988 tanks and assault guns.

German industry produced 2,816 tanks and self-propelled guns between April and June, of which 156 were Tigers and 484 Panthers. At Kursk, a total of 259 Panther tanks, about 211 Tigers, and 90 Ferdinands were used.

The two new Panther battalions – the 51st and 52nd – together equipped with 200 Panthers, for which the offensive had been delayed, were attached to the &quot;Großdeutschland&quot; Division in the XLVIII Panzer Corps of Army Group South. With the 51st and 52nd Battalions arriving on 30 June and 1 July, the two units had little time to perform reconnaissance or to orient themselves to the terrain they found themselves in. This was a breach of the methods of the &quot;Panzerwaffe&quot;, considered essential for the successful use of armour. Though led by experienced panzer commanders, many of the tank crews were new recruits and had little time to become familiar with their new tanks, let alone train together to function as a unit. The two battalions came direct from the training ground and lacked combat experience. In addition, the requirement to maintain radio silence until the start of the attack meant that the Panther units had little training in battalion-level radio procedures. Furthermore, the new Panthers were still experiencing problems with their transmissions, and proved mechanically unreliable. By the morning of 5 July, the units had lost 16 Panthers due to mechanical breakdown, leaving only 184 available for the launching of the offensive.

July and August 1943 saw the heaviest German ammunition expenditure on the Eastern Front up to that point, with 236,915 tons consumed in July and 254,648 in August. The previous peak had been 160,645 tons in September 1942.

=== Red Army ===
The Red Army used two Fronts for the defence of Kursk, and created a third front behind the battle area which was held as a reserve. The Central and Voronezh Fronts fielded 12 armies, with 711,575 men (510,983 combat soldiers) and 625,591 men (446,236 combat soldiers) respectively. In reserve, the Steppe Front had an additional 573,195 men (449,133). Thus the total size of the Soviet force was 1,910,361 men, with 1,426,352 actual combat soldiers.

Soviet armour strength included 4,869 tanks and 259 SPGs. Overall a third of the Soviet tanks at Kursk were light tanks, but in some units this proportion was considerably higher. Of the 3,600 tanks in the Central and Voronezh Fronts in July 1943, 1,061 were light as T-60 and T-70 tanks. With very thin armour and small guns, they were unable to effectively engage the frontal armour of German medium and heavy tanks or AFVs.

The most capable Soviet tank at Kursk was the T-34. However, the original version was armed only with a 76.2mm gun, which struggled against uparmoured Panzer IVs, and the frontal armour of Tigers and Panthers was essentially impenetrable. Only the SU-122 and SU-152 self-propelled guns had the power to destroy the Tiger at short range, but they were not equal to the Tiger&#x27;s 88mm gun at long range, and there were very few SU-122s and SU-152s at Kursk.



=== Comparison of strength ===

=== Preliminary actions ===
Fighting started on the southern face of the salient on the evening of 4 July 1943, when German infantry launched attacks to seize high ground for artillery observation posts prior to the main assault. During these attacks, a number of Red Army command and observation posts along the first main belt of defence were captured. By 16:00, elements of the Panzergrenadier Division &quot;Großdeutschland&quot;, 3rd and 11th Panzer Divisions had seized the village of Butovo and proceeded to capture Gertsovka before midnight. At around 22:30, Vatutin ordered 600 guns, mortars and Katyusha rocket launchers, of the Voronezh Front, to bombard the forward German positions, particularly those of the II SS Panzer Corps.

To the north, at Central Front headquarters, reports of the anticipated German offensive came in. At around 02:00 5 July, Zhukov ordered his preemptive artillery bombardment to begin. The hope was to disrupt German forces concentrating for the attack, but the outcome was less than hoped for. The bombardment delayed the German formations but failed in the goal of disrupting their schedule or inflicting substantial losses. The Germans began their own artillery bombardment at about 05:00, which lasted 80 minutes in the northern face and 50 minutes in the southern face. After the barrage, the ground forces attacked, aided by close air support provided by the Luftwaffe.

In the early morning of 5 July, the VVS launched a large raid against German airfields, hoping to destroy the Luftwaffe on the ground. This effort failed, and the VVS units suffered considerable losses. The air operation is misunderstood in most accounts. The German &quot;Freya&quot; radar stations at Belgorod and Kharkov in 1943 had only picked up Soviet air formations approaching Belgorod and were not responsible for the failure of the entire Soviet preemptive air strike on the eve of Operation Citadel. The VVS lost 176 aircraft on 5 July, compared to the 26 aircraft lost by the Luftwaffe. The losses of the VVS 16th Air Army operating in the northern face were lighter than those suffered by the 2nd Air Army. The Luftwaffe was able to gain and maintain air superiority over the southern face until 10–11 July, when the VVS began to obtain ascendancy but the control of the skies over the northern face was evenly contested until the VVS began to gain air superiority on 7 July, which it maintained for the rest of the operation.

== Operation along the northern face ==

Model&#x27;s main attack was delivered by XLVII Panzer Corps, supported by 45 Tigers of the attached 505th Heavy Tank Battalion. Covering their left flank was XLI Panzer Corps, with an attached regiment of 83 &quot;Ferdinand&quot; tank destroyers. On the right flank, XLVI Panzer Corps consisted at this time of four infantry divisions with just nine tanks and 31 assault guns. To the left of XLI Panzer Corps was XXIII Army Corps, which consisted of the reinforced 78th Assault Infantry Division and two regular infantry divisions. While the corps contained no tanks, it did have 62 assault guns. Opposing the 9th Army was the Central Front, deployed in three heavily fortified defensive belts.

===Initial German advance===
Model chose to make his initial attacks using infantry divisions reinforced with assault guns and heavy tanks, and supported by artillery and the Luftwaffe. In doing so he sought to maintain the armoured strength of his panzer divisions to be used for exploitation once the Red Army defences were breached. Once a breakthrough had been achieved the panzer forces would move through and advance towards Kursk. Jan Möschen, a major in Model&#x27;s staff, later commented that Model expected a breakthrough on the second day. If a breakthrough did occur the briefest delay in bringing up the panzer divisions would give the Red Army time to react. His corps commanders thought that a breakthrough was extremely unlikely.

Following a preliminary bombardment and Red Army counter bombardments, the 9th Army opened its attack at 05:30 on 5 July. Nine infantry divisions and one panzer division, with attached assault guns, heavy tanks and tank destroyers, pushed forward. Two companies of Tiger tanks were attached to the 6th Infantry Division and were the largest single grouping of Tigers employed that day. Opposing them were the 13th and 70th Armies of the Central Front.

The 20th Panzer and 6th Infantry Divisions of the XLVII Panzer Corps spearheaded the advance. Behind them the remaining two panzer divisions followed, ready to exploit any breakthrough. The heavily mined terrain and fortified positions of the 15th Rifle Division slowed the advance. By 08:00 safe lanes had been cleared through the minefield. That morning information obtained from prisoner interrogation identified a weakness at the boundary of the 15th and 81st Rifle Divisions caused by the German preliminary bombardment. The Tigers were redeployed and struck towards this area. Red Army formations countered with a force of around 90 T-34s. In the resulting three-hour battle, Red Army armoured units lost 42 tanks while the Germans lost two Tigers and a further five more immobilized with track damage. While the Red Army counter-attack was defeated and the first defensive belt breached, the fighting had delayed the Germans long enough for the rest of 29th Rifle Corps of the 13th Army – initially deployed behind the first belt – to move forward and seal the breach. Red Army minefields were covered by artillery fire, making efforts to clear paths through the fields difficult and costly. Goliath and Borgward IV remote-controlled engineer mine-clearing vehicles met with limited success. Of the 653rd Heavy Panzerjäger Battalion&#x27;s 45 Ferdinands sent into battle, all but 12 of them were immobilized by mine damage before 17:00. Most of these were later repaired and returned to service, but the recovery of these very large vehicles was difficult.

On the first day, the XLVII Panzer Corps penetrated into the Red Army defences before stalling, and the XLI Panzer Corps reached the heavily fortified small town of Ponyri, in the second defensive belt, which controlled the roads and railways leading south to Kursk. The German advance into the Red Army lines cost 1,287 men killed and missing and a further 5,921 wounded.

===Red Army counter-attack===

Rokossovsky ordered the 17th Guards and 18th Guards Rifle Corps with the 2nd Tank Army and 19th Tank Corps, backed up by close air support, to counterattack the German 9th Army the following day on 6 July. However, due to poor coordination, only the 16th Tank Corps of the 2nd Tank Army commenced the counterattack on the dawn of 6 July after the preparatory artillery barrage. The 16th Tank Corps, fielding about 200 tanks, attacked the XLVII Panzer Corps and ran into the Tiger tanks of the 505th Heavy Tank Battalion, which knocked out 69 tanks and forced the rest to withdraw to the 17th Guards Rifle Corps of the 13th Army. Later that morning, the XLVII Panzer Corps responded with its own attack against the 17th Guards Rifle Corps entrenched around the village Olkhovatka in the second defensive belt. The attack commenced with an artillery barrage and was spearheaded by the 24 serviceable Tigers of the 505th Heavy Tank Battalion, but it failed to break the Red Army defence at Olkhovatka, and the Germans suffered heavy casualties. Olkhovatka was on high ground that provided a clear view of much of the frontline. At 18:30, the 19th Tank Corps joined the 17th Guards Rifle Corps further bolstering resistance. Rokossovsky also decided to dig in most of his remaining tanks to minimize their exposure. Ponyri, defended by the 307th Rifle Division of the 29th Rifle Corps, was also concertedly attacked on 6 July by the German 292nd and 86th Infantry, 78th Assault Infantry and 9th Panzer Divisions, but the Germans were unable to dislodge the defenders from the heavily fortified village.

===Ponyri and Olkhovatka===

Over the next three days from 7 to 10 July, Model concentrated the effort of the 9th Army at Ponyri and Olkhovatka, which both sides considered as vital positions. In response, Rokossovsky pulled forces from other parts of the front to these sectors. The Germans attacked Ponyri on 7 July, and captured half of the town after intense house-to-house fighting. A Soviet counterattack the following morning forced the Germans to withdraw, and a series of counterattacks ensued by both sides with control of the town being exchanged several times over the next few days. By 10 July, the Germans had secured most of the town, but Soviet counterattacks continued. The back and forth battles for Ponyri and the nearby Hill 253.5 were battles of attrition, with heavy casualties on both sides. The intensity led it to being referred to by the troops as &quot;mini-Stalingrad&quot; and by military historian Paul Carell as the &quot;Stalingrad of the Kursk salient&quot;. The war diary of the 9th Army described the heavy fighting as a &quot;new type of mobile attrition battle&quot;. German attacks on Olkhovatka and the nearby village of Teploe failed to penetrate the Soviet defences; including a powerful concerted attack on 10 July by about 300 German tanks and assault guns from the 2nd, 4th, and 20th Panzer Divisions, supported by every available Luftwaffe air power in the northern face.

On 9 July a meeting between Kluge, Model, Joachim Lemelsen and Josef Harpe was held at the headquarters of the XLVII Panzer Corps. It had become clear to the German commanders that the 9th Army lacked the strength to obtain a breakthrough, and their Soviet counterparts had also realized this, but Kluge wished to maintain the pressure on the Soviets in order to aid the southern offensive.

While the operation on the northern side of the salient began with a attack front, by 6 July it had been reduced to . The following day the attack frontage dropped to , and on both the 8 and 9 July penetrations of only occurred. By 10 July, the Soviets had completely halted the German advance.

On 12 July the Soviets launched Operation Kutuzov, their counter-offensive upon the Orel salient, which threatened the flank and rear of Model&#x27;s 9th Army. The 12th Panzer Division, thus far held in reserve and slated to be committed to the northern side of the Kursk salient, along with the 36th Motorized Infantry, 18th Panzer and 20th Panzer Divisions were redeployed to face the Soviet spearheads.

== Operation along the southern face ==
At around 04:00 on 5 July, the German attack commenced with a preliminary bombardment. Manstein&#x27;s main attack was delivered by Hoth&#x27;s 4th Panzer Army, which was organized into densely concentrated spearheads, and which included some of the finest divisions in the German Army, with the forces under Hoth&#x27;s command regarded as &quot;the most powerful striking force ever assembled under a single German commander&quot;. In fifty minutes, Hoth&#x27;s bombardment expended more shells than the combined total fired by German forces during the Polish Campaign and French Campaign. The 4th Panzer Army was opposed by the Soviet 6th Guards Army, which was composed of the 22nd Guards Rifle Corps and 23rd Guards Rifle Corps. The Soviets had constructed three fortified defensive belts to slow and weaken the attacking armoured forces. Though they had been provided superb intelligence, the Voronezh Front headquarters had still not been able to pinpoint the location where the Germans would place their offensive weight.

===Initial German advance===

==== XLVIII Panzer Corps ====

The panzergrenadier division &quot;Großdeutschland&quot; (Walter Hörnlein), was the strongest division in the 4th Panzer Army. It was supported on its flanks by the 3rd and 11th Panzer Divisions. The Panzer IIIs and IVs of the &quot;Großdeutschland&quot; had been supplemented by a company of 15 Tiger tanks, which were used to spearhead the attack. At dawn on 5 July, &quot;Großdeutschland&quot;, backed by heavy artillery support, advanced on a three-kilometre front upon the 67th Guards Rifle Division of the 22nd Guards Rifle Corps. The Panzerfüsilier Regiment, advancing on the left wing, stalled in a minefield and subsequently 36 Panthers were immobilized. The stranded regiment was subjected to a barrage of Soviet anti-tank and artillery fire, which inflicted numerous casualties. Engineers were moved up and cleared paths through the minefield but suffered casualties in the process. The combination of fierce resistance, minefields, thick mud and mechanical breakdowns took its toll. With paths cleared, the regiment resumed its advance towards Gertsovka. In the ensuing battle, many casualties were suffered including the regimental commander Colonel Kassnitz. Due to the fighting, and the marshy terrain south of the village, surrounding the Berezovyy stream, the regiment once more bogged down.

The panzergrenadier regiment of &quot;Großdeutschland&quot;, advancing on the right wing, pushed through to the village of Butovo. The tanks were deployed in a &quot;Panzerkeil&quot; (arrow) formation to minimise the effects of the Soviet Pakfront defence, with the Tigers leading and the Panzer IIIs, IVs and assault guns fanning out to the flanks and rear. They were followed by infantry and combat engineers. Attempts by the VVS to impede the advance were repulsed by the Luftwaffe.

The 3rd Panzer Division, advancing on the left flank of &quot;Großdeutschland&quot;, made good progress and by the end of the day had captured Gertsovka and reached Mikhailovka. The 167th Infantry Division, on the right flank of the 11th Panzer Division, also made sufficient progress, reaching Tirechnoe by the end of the day. By the end of 5 July, a wedge had been created in the first belt of the Soviet defences.

==== II SS Panzer Corps ====

To the east, during the night of 4–5 July, SS combat engineers had infiltrated no-man&#x27;s land and cleared lanes through the Soviet minefields. At dawn, 5 July, the three divisions of II SS Panzer Corps – SS Panzergrenadier Division &quot;Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler&quot;, 2nd SS Panzergrenadier Division &quot;Das Reich&quot; and the 3rd SS Panzergrenadier Division &quot;Totenkopf&quot; – attacked the 52nd Guards Rifle Division of the 6th Guards Army. The main assault was led by a spearhead of 42 Tigers among 494 tanks and assault guns attacking on a twelve-kilometre front. &quot;Totenkopf&quot;, the strongest of the three divisions, advanced towards Gremuchhi and screened the right flank. The 1st SS Panzergrenadier Division advanced on the left flank towards Bykovka. The 2nd SS Panzer Division advanced between the two formations in the center. Following closely behind the tanks were the infantry and combat engineers, coming forward to demolish obstacles and clear trenches. The advance was well supported by the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot;, which greatly aided in breaking Soviet strong points and artillery positions.

By 09:00, the II SS Panzer Corps had broken through the Soviet first belt of defence along its entire front. While probing positions between the first and second Soviet defensive belts, at 13:00, the 2nd SS Panzer Division vanguard came under fire from two T-34 tanks, which were destroyed. Forty more Soviet tanks soon engaged the division. The 1st Guards Tank Army clashed with the 2nd SS Panzer Division in a four-hour battle, resulting in the Soviet tanks withdrawing. The engagement bought enough time for units of the 23rd Soviet Guards Rifle Corps, lodged in the Soviet second belt, to prepare itself and be reinforced with additional anti-tank guns. By the early evening, 2nd SS Panzer Division had reached the minefields on the perimeter of the Soviet second belt of defence. The 1st SS Division had secured Bykovka by 16:10, then pushed forward towards the second belt of defence at Yakovlevo but its attempts to break through were rebuffed. By the end of the day, the 1st SS Division had sustained 97 dead, 522 wounded and 17 missing and lost about 30 tanks. Together with the 2nd SS Panzer Division, it had forced a wedge far into the defences of the 6th Guards Army.

The 3rd SS Panzer Division was making slow progress. They had managed to isolate the 155th Guards Regiment, 52nd Guards Rifle Division (of the 23rd Guards Rifle Corps), from the rest of the division but its attempts to sweep the regiment eastward into the flank of the neighbouring 375th Rifle Division (of the 23rd Guards Rifle Corps) had failed when the regiment was reinforced by the 96th Tank Brigade. Hausser, the commander of II SS Panzer Corps, requested aid from the III Panzer Corps to his right but it had no units to spare. By the end of the day, the 3rd SS Division had made very limited progress due in part to a tributary of the Donets river. The lack of progress undermined the advance made by its sister divisions and exposed the right flank of the corps to Soviet forces. The temperatures, reaching over 30 degrees Celsius, and frequent thunderstorms made fighting conditions difficult.

The 6th Guards Army, which confronted the attack by the XLVIII &quot;Panzer Korps&quot; and II SS &quot;Panzer Korps&quot;, was reinforced with tanks from the 1st Tank Army, the 2nd Guards Tank Corps and the 5th Guards Tank Corps. The 51st and 90th Guards Rifle divisions were moved up to the vicinity of Pokrovka (not Prokhorovka, to the north-east), in the path of the 1st SS Panzer Division. The 93rd Guards Rifle Division was deployed further back, along the road leading from Pokrovka to Prokhorovka.

==== Army Detachment &quot;Kempf&quot; ====

Facing Army Detachment &quot;Kempf&quot;, consisting of III Panzer Corps and Corps &quot;Raus&quot; (commanded by Erhard Raus), was the 7th Guards Army, dug in on the high ground on the eastern bank of the Northern Donets. The two German corps were tasked with crossing the river, breaking through the 7th Guards Army and covering the right flank of the 4th Panzer Army. The 503rd Heavy Tank Battalion, equipped with 45 Tigers, was also attached to the III Panzer Corps, with one company of 15 Tigers attached to each of the corps&#x27; three panzer divisions.

At the Milkhailovka bridgehead, just south of Belgorod, eight infantry battalions of the 6th Panzer Division crossed the river under heavy Soviet bombardment. Part of a company of Tigers from the 503rd Heavy Tank Battalion was able to cross before the bridge was destroyed. The rest of the 6th Panzer Division was unable to cross further south due to a traffic jam at the crossing, and remained on the western bank of the river throughout the day. Those units of the division that had crossed the river attacked Stary Gorod, but were unable to break through due to poorly cleared minefields and strong resistance.

To the south of the 6th Panzer Division, the 19th Panzer Division crossed the river but was delayed by mines, moving forward by the end of the day. Luftwaffe bombed the bridgehead in a friendly fire incident, wounding 6th Panzer Division commander Walther von Hünersdorff and Hermann von Oppeln-Bronikowski of the 19th Panzer Division. Further south, infantry and tanks of 7th Panzer Division crossed the river. A new bridge had to be built specifically for the Tigers, causing further delays. Despite a poor start, the 7th Panzer Division eventually broke into the first belt of the Soviet defence and pushed on between Razumnoe and Krutoi Log, advancing , the furthest &quot;Kempf&quot; got during the day.
Operating to the south of 7th Panzer Division, were the 106th Infantry Division and the 320th Infantry Division of Corps &quot;Raus&quot;. The two formations attacked across a front without armour support. The advance began well, with the crossing of the river and a swift advance against the 72nd Guards Rifle Division. Corps &quot;Raus&quot; took the village of Maslovo Pristani, penetrating the first Red Army defence line. A Soviet counter-attack supported by about 40 tanks was beaten off, with the assistance from artillery and flak batteries. After having suffered 2,000 casualties since the morning and still facing considerable resistance from the Soviet forces, the corps dug in for the night.

Delaying the progress of &quot;Kempf&quot; allowed Red Army forces time to prepare their second belt of defence to meet the German attack on 6 July. The 7th Guards Army, which had absorbed the attack of III Panzer Corps and Corps &quot;Raus&quot;, was reinforced with two rifle divisions from the reserve. The 15th Guards Rifle Division was moved up to the second belt of defence, in the path of the III Panzer Corps.

=== Development of the battle ===

By the evening of 6 July, the Voronezh Front had committed all of its reserves, except for three rifle divisions under the 69th Army; yet it could not decisively contain the 4th Panzer Army. The XLVIII Panzer Corps along the Oboyan axis, where the third defensive belt was mostly unoccupied, now had only the Red Army second defensive belt blocking it from breakthrough into the unfortified Soviet rear. This forced the &quot;Stavka&quot; to commit their strategic reserves to reinforce the Voronezh Front: the 5th Guards and 5th Guards Tank Armies, both from the Steppe Front, as well as the 2nd Tank Corps from the Southwestern Front. Ivan Konev objected to this premature piecemeal commitment of the strategic reserve, but a personal call from Stalin silenced his complaints. In addition, on 7 July Zhukov ordered the 17th Air Army – the air fleet serving the Southwestern Front – to support the 2nd Air Army in serving the Voronezh Front. On 7 July, the 5th Guards Tank Army began advancing to Prokhorovka. 5th Guards Tank Army commander, Lieutenant General Pavel Rotmistrov, described the journey:
The 10th Tank Corps, then still subordinate to the 5th Guards Army, was rushed ahead of the rest of the army, arriving at Prokhorovka on the night of 7 July, and 2nd Tank Corps arrived at Korocha, southeast of Prokhorovka, by morning of 8 July. Vatutin ordered a powerful counterattack by the 5th Guards, 2nd Guards, 2nd and 10th Tank Corps, in all fielding about 593 tanks and self-propelled guns and supported by most of the Front&#x27;s available air power, which aimed to defeat the II SS Panzer Corps and therefore expose the right flank of XLVIII Panzer Corps. Simultaneously, the 6th Tank Corps was to attack the XLVIII Panzer Corps and prevent it from breaking through to the free Soviet rear. Although intended to be concerted, the counterattack turned out to be a series of piecemeal attacks due to poor coordination. The 10th Tank Corps&#x27; attack began on the dawn of 8 July but they ran straight into the antitank fire of the 2nd and 3rd SS Divisions, losing most of its forces. Later that morning, the 5th Guards Tank Corps&#x27; attack was repelled by the 3rd SS Division. The 2nd Tank Corps joined in the afternoon and was also repelled. The 2nd Guards Tank Corps, masked by the forest around the village Gostishchevo, north of Belgorod, with its presence unknown to the II SS Panzer Corps, advanced towards the 167th Infantry Division. But it was detected by German air reconnaissance just before the attack had materialized, and was subsequently decimated by German ground-attack aircraft armed with MK 103 anti-tank cannons and at least 50 tanks were destroyed. This marked the first time in military history an attacking tank formation had been defeated by air power alone. Although a fiasco, the Soviet counterattack succeeded in stalling the advance of the II SS Panzer Corps throughout the day.

By the end of 8 July, II SS-Panzer Corps had advanced about since the start of Citadel and broken through the first and second defensive belts. However, slow progress by the XLVIII Panzer Corps caused Hoth to shift elements of the II SS-Panzer Corps to the west to help the XLVIII Panzer Corps regain its momentum. On 10 July the full effort of the corps was shifted back to its own forward progress. The direction of their advance now shifted from Oboyan due north to the northeast, toward Prokhorovka. Hoth had discussed this move with Manstein since early May, and it was a part of the 4th Panzer Army&#x27;s plan since the outset of the offensive. By this time, however, the Soviets had shifted reserve formations into its path. The defensive positions were manned by the 2nd Tank Corps, reinforced by the 9th Guards Airborne Division and 301st Anti-tank Artillery Regiment, both from the 33rd Guards Rifle Corps.

Though the German advance in the south was slower than planned, it was faster than the Soviets expected. On 9 July, the first German units reached the Psel River. The next day, the first German infantry crossed the river. Despite the deep defensive system and minefields, German tank losses remained lower than the Soviets&#x27;. At this point, Hoth turned the II SS Panzer Corps away from Oboyan to attack toward the northeast in the direction of Prokhorovka. The main concern of Manstein and Hausser was the inability of Army Detachment &quot;Kempf&quot; to advance and protect the eastern flank of the II SS Panzer Corps. On 11 July, Army Detachment &quot;Kempf&quot; finally achieved a breakthrough. In a surprise night attack, the 6th Panzer Division seized a bridge across the Donets. Once across, Breith made every effort to push troops and vehicles across the river for an advance on Prokhorovka from the south. A linkup with the II SS Panzer Corps would result with the Soviet 69th Army becoming encircled.

=== Battle of Prokhorovka ===
Throughout 10 and 11 July, the II-SS Panzer Corps continued its attack toward Prokhorovka, reaching within of the settlement by the night of 11 July. That same night, Hausser issued orders for the attack to continue the next day. The plan was for the 3rd SS Panzer Division to drive northeast until it reached the Karteschewka-Prokhorovka road. Once there, they were to strike southeast to attack the Soviet positions at Prokhorovka from the flanks and rear. The 1st and 2nd SS Panzer divisions were to wait until 3rd SS Panzer Division attack had destabilised the Soviet positions at Prokhorovka; and once underway, the 1st SS Panzer Division was to attack the main Soviet defences dug in on the slopes southwest of Prokhorovka. To the division&#x27;s right, the 2nd SS Panzer Division was to advance eastward, then turn southward away from Prokhorovka to roll up the Soviet lines opposing the III Panzer Corps&#x27; advance and force a gap. During the night of 11 July, Rotmistrov moved his 5th Guards Tank Army to an assembly area just behind Prokhorovka in preparation for a massive attack the following day. At 5:45 Leibstandarte headquarters started receiving reports of the sound of tank engines as the Soviets moved into their assembly areas. Soviet artillery and Katyusha regiments were redeployed in preparation for the counterattack.

At around 08:00, a Soviet artillery barrage began. At 08:30, Rotmistrov radioed his tankers: &quot;Steel, Steel, Steel!&quot;, the order to commence the attack. Down off the west slopes, before Prokhorovka, came the massed armour of five tank brigades from the Soviet 18th and 29th Tank Corps of the 5th Guards Tank Army. The Soviet tanks advanced down the corridor, carrying mounted infantrymen of the 9th Guards Airborne Division on the tanks. To the north and east, the 3rd SS Panzer Division was engaged by the Soviet 33rd Guards Rifle Corps. Tasked with flanking the Soviet defences around Prokhorovka, the unit first had to beat off a number of attacks before they could go over onto the offensive. Most of the division&#x27;s tank losses occurred late in the afternoon as they advanced through mine fields against well-hidden Soviet anti-tank guns. Although the 3rd SS succeeded in reaching the Karteschewka-Prokhorovka road, their hold was tenuous and it cost the division half of its armour. The majority of German tank losses suffered at Prokhorovka occurred here. To the south, the Soviet 18th and 29th Tank Corps had been thrown back by the 1st SS Panzer Division. The 2nd SS Panzer Division also repelled attacks from the 2nd Tank Corps and the 2nd Guards Tank Corps. Luftwaffe local air superiority over the battlefield also contributed to the Soviet losses, partly due to the VVS being directed against the German units on the flanks of II SS Panzer Corps. By the end of the day, the Soviets had fallen back to their starting positions.

Neither the 5th Guards Tank Army nor the II SS Panzer Corps accomplished their objectives. Although the Soviet counterattack failed with heavy losses, throwing them back onto the defensive, they did enough to stop a German breakthrough.

== Termination of Operation Citadel ==
On the evening of 12 July, Hitler summoned Kluge and Manstein to his headquarters at Görlitz in East Prussia (now Gierłoż, Poland). Two days earlier, the Western Allies had invaded Sicily. The threat of further Allied landings in Italy or along southern France made Hitler believe it was essential to stop the offensive and move forces from Kursk to Italy. Kluge welcomed the news, as he was aware that the Soviets were initiating a massive counter-offensive against his sector but Manstein was less welcoming. Manstein&#x27;s forces had just spent a week fighting through a maze of defensive works and he believed they were on the verge of breaking through to more open terrain, which would allow him to engage and destroy the Soviet armoured reserves in a mobile battle. Manstein stated, &quot;On no account should we let go of the enemy until the mobile reserves he [has] committed [are] completely beaten&quot;. Hitler agreed temporarily to allow the continuation of the offensive in the southern part of the salient, but the following day he ordered Manstein&#x27;s reserve – the XXIV Panzer Corps – to move south to support the 1st Panzer Army.

The offensive continued in the southern part with the launch of Operation Roland on 14 July. After three days, on 17 July, the II SS Panzer Corps was ordered to end its offensive operations and begin to withdraw, marking the end of Operation Roland. One division was transferred to Italy and the other two were sent south to meet new Soviet offensives. The strength of the Soviet reserve formations had been greatly underestimated by German intelligence and the Red Army soon went onto the offensive. In his post-war memoirs &quot;Verlorene Siege&quot; (Lost Victories), Manstein was highly critical of Hitler&#x27;s decision to call off the operation at the height of the tactical battle; however, the veracity of Manstein&#x27;s claims of a near victory is debatable as the quantity of Soviet reserves was far greater than he realized. These reserves were used to re-equip the mauled 5th Guards Tank Army, which launched Operation Rumyantsev a couple of weeks later. The result was a battle of attrition Manstein&#x27;s forces were ill-prepared for and which they had little chance of winning.

During Operation Citadel, the Luftwaffe flew 27,221 sorties in support with 193 combat losses (a 0.709 per cent loss rate per sortie). Soviet units from 5 to 8 July conducted 11,235 sorties with combat losses of 556 aircraft (4.95 per cent per sortie). Germans were destroying Soviet armour and aircraft at a ratio of 1:6. Despite German unit performance, the Wehrmacht was now lacking strategic reserves. In late 1943 just 25 per cent of Luftwaffe day fighters were on the Eastern Front, due to British and US air attacks on Italy and Germany.

== Soviet Kursk Strategic Offensive Operation ==

During the defensive preparations in the months leading up to Citadel, the Soviets also planned and prepared counteroffensive operations that would be launched after the German offensive had halted.

=== In the north: Operation Kutuzov ===
Soviet offensive operations were planned to begin after the strength of the German forces had been dissipated by their Kursk offensive. As the German momentum in the north slowed, the Soviets launched Operation Kutuzov on 12 July against Army Group Centre in the Orel salient, directly north of the Kursk salient. The Bryansk Front, under the command of Markian Popov, attacked the eastern face of the Orel salient while the Western Front, commanded by Vasily Sokolovsky, attacked from the north. The Western Front&#x27;s assault was led by the 11th Guards Army, under Lieutenant General Hovhannes Bagramyan, and was supported by the 1st and 5th Tank Corps. The Soviet spearheads sustained heavy casualties, but pushed through and in some areas achieved significant penetrations. These thrusts endangered German supply routes and threatened the 9th Army with encirclement. With this threat, 9th Army was compelled to go over fully to the defensive.

The thinly stretched 2nd Panzer Army stood in the way of this Soviet force. The German commanders had been wary of such an attack and forces were quickly withdrawn from the Kursk offensive to meet the Soviet offensive.

Operation Kutuzov reduced the Orel salient and inflicted substantial losses on the German military, paving the way for the liberation of Smolensk. Soviet losses were heavy, but were replaced. The offensive allowed the Soviets to seize the strategic initiative, which they retained for the remainder of the war.

=== In the south: Operation Rumyantsev ===
Operation Polkovodets Rumyantsev was intended as the main Soviet offensive for 1943. Its aim was to destroy the 4th Panzer Army and Army Detachment Kempf, and cut off the extended southern portion of Army Group South. After the heavy losses sustained by the Voronezh Front, during Citadel, the Soviets needed time to regroup and refit, delaying the start of the offensive until 3 August. Diversionary attacks, launched two weeks earlier across the Donets and Mius Rivers into the Donbas, drew the attention of German reserves and thinned the defending forces that would face the main blow. The offensive was initiated by the Voronezh Front and Steppe Fronts against the northern wing of Army Group South. They drove through the German positions, making broad and deep penetrations. By 5 August, the Soviets had liberated Belgorod.

By 12 August, the outskirts of Kharkov had been reached. The Soviet advance was finally halted by a counter-attack by the 2nd and 3rd SS Panzer Divisions. In the ensuing tank battles, the Soviet armies suffered heavy losses in armour. After this setback, the Soviets focused on Kharkov. After heavy fighting the city was liberated on 23 August. This battle is referred to by the Germans as the Fourth Battle of Kharkov, while the Soviets refer to it as the Belgorod–Kharkov offensive operation.

== Results ==

Soviet journalist and writer Ilya Ehrenburg noted the devastation of the battle;The campaign was a strategic Soviet success. For the first time, a major German offensive had been stopped before achieving a breakthrough; the maximum depth of the German advance was in the north and in the south. The Germans, despite using more technologically advanced armour than in previous years, were unable to break through the deep Soviet defences and were caught off guard by the significant operational reserves of the Red Army. This result changed the pattern of operations on the Eastern Front, with the Soviet Union gaining the operational initiative. The Soviet victory was costly, with the Red Army losing considerably more men and materiel than the German Army. The Soviet Union&#x27;s larger industrial potential and pool of manpower allowed them to absorb and replace its losses. Guderian wrote:
With victory, the initiative firmly passed to the Red Army. For the remainder of the war the Germans were limited to reacting to Soviet advances, and were never able to regain the initiative or launch a major offensive on the Eastern Front. British historian Robin Cross stated that &quot;the Red Army had turned the tide at Stalingrad; it had seized the psychological advantage for the first time. But it was in the terrible killing grounds near Kursk that Hitler&#x27;s panzers, and his ambitions, were dealt a blow from which they never recovered&quot; and that &quot;Failure at Kursk had dealt the Ostheer heavier psychological and material blows than it had suffered at Stalingrad&quot;. Further, the Western Allied landings in Italy opened a new front, further diverting German resources and attention.

Soviet air forces dropped about 20,000 tons of bombs during the battle, 4 times more than in the Battle of Moscow, and 2.5 times more than in the Battle of Stalingrad.

Though the location, plan of attack and timing were determined by Hitler, he blamed the defeat on his General Staff. Unlike Stalin, who gave his commanding generals the liberty to make important command decisions, Hitler&#x27;s interference in German military matters progressively increased while his attention to the political aspects of the war decreased. The opposite was true for Stalin; throughout the Kursk campaign, he trusted the judgment of his commanders, and as their decisions led to battlefield success, it increased his trust in their military judgment. Stalin stepped back from operational planning, only rarely overruling military decisions, resulting in the Red Army being entrusted with higher levels of autonomy during the war.

However, while it is accurate that Hitler interfered in military operational planning and that Stalin generally provided his generals with greater autonomy, this characterization oversimplifies the strategic context surrounding the Battle of Kursk. Hitler&#x27;s decisions to delay the offensive were not merely capricious but were based on substantial logistical concerns, notably the preparation of new Panther and Tiger tanks, which he believed were essential for a successful summer campaign. Recent examinations of wartime documents reveal that Stalin&#x27;s trust in his generals was underpinned by a well-coordinated defense strategy that had been meticulously planned and robustly fortified by early June 1943. The Soviet forces, contrary to the implications of passive or reactive strategies, were proactively prepared and strategically positioned, with manpower and artillery strengths reaching over 80 percent of their July capacity by mid-May, effectively nullifying the advantage a swifter German offensive might have achieved. This suggests that Soviet readiness and strategic placement, rather than mere autonomy, were crucial in determining the outcome at Kursk. Moreover, the detailed preparation and anticipation of the German offensive&#x27;s axis highlight a sophisticated level of strategic defense that goes beyond the simple dichotomy of command autonomy versus interference, reflecting a deep integration of military readiness and strategic foresight.

All told, 239 Red Army personnel were awarded the USSR&#x27;s highest degree of distinction, the title Hero of the Soviet Union (HSU), for their valour in the Battle of Kursk. Two women, Guards Senior Sergeants Mariya Borovichenko and Zinaida Mareseva, were awarded the HSU title posthumously for their valour under fire while serving as combat medics. Borovichenko was assigned to the 32nd Guards Artillery Regiment, 13th Guards Rifle Division, 5th Guards Army and Mareseva served in a medical platoon in the 214th Guards Rifle Regiment, 73rd Guards Rifle Division, 7th Guards Army.

The Battle of Kursk is cited by some as being the true turning point of the European theatre of World War II, however, this has been thoroughly criticized.

== Casualties ==
Soldier Antonius John who participated in the battle expressed that:
The casualties suffered by the two combatants are difficult to determine, due to several factors. German equipment losses were complicated by the fact that they made determined efforts to recover and repair tanks. Tanks disabled one day might be back in action the next day. German personnel losses are clouded by the lack of access to German unit records, which were seized at the end of the war. Many were transferred to the United States national archives and were not made available until 1978, while others were taken by the Soviet Union, which declined to confirm their existence. However, for comparison, military historian Victor Davis Hanson notes that the total combined fatalities of the Battle of Midway (3,419) were less than a third of the fatalities incurred daily at the Battle of Kursk.

=== Soviet losses ===
The Russian military historian Grigoriy Krivosheyev, who based his figures on the Soviet archives, is considered by historian David Glantz as the most reliable source for Soviet casualty figures. Krivosheyev calculated total Soviet losses during the German offensive as 177,877. The Central Front suffered 15,336 irrecoverable casualties and 18,561 medical casualties, for a total of 33,897. The Voronezh Front suffered 27,542 irrecoverable casualties and 46,350 medical casualties, for a total of 73,892. The Steppe Front suffered 27,452 irrecoverable casualties and 42,606 medical casualties, for a total of 70,085.

During the two Soviet offensives, total casualties amounted to 685,456 men. During Operation Kutuzov, Soviet losses amounted to 112,529 irrecoverable casualties and 317,361 medical casualties, for a total loss of 429,890. The Western Front reported 25,585 irrecoverable casualties and 76,856 medical casualties. The Bryansk Front suffered 39,173 irrecoverable casualties and 123,234 medical casualties. The Central Front lost 47,771 irrecoverable casualties and 117,271 medical casualties. Soviet losses during Operation Polkovodets Rumyantsev totaled 255,566 men, with 71,611 listed as irrecoverable casualties and 183,955 as medical casualties. The Voronezh Front lost 48,339 irrecoverable casualties and 108,954 medical casualties, for a total of 157,293. The Steppe Front lost 23,272 irrecoverable casualties and 75,001 medical casualties, for a total of 98,273.

Russian historian Boris Sokolov places the losses of the Red Army much higher, giving the figures of 450,000 killed, 50,000 missing (POWs), and 1.2 million wounded throughout the course of the battle, which Glantz states might be inflated, but nonetheless acknowledges that official Soviet figures are most likely conservative. Karl-Heinz Frieser also mentions Sokolov and states that Soviet losses are clearly understated. The German historian Roman Töppel states that official Soviet losses are underestimated by 40%, giving a number of 1.2 million, with him having consulted armies and units archives. Further, Töppel notes Russian historians critical of the official report estimate losses ranging from 910,000 to 2.3 million men, with Sokolov going as high as 999,300 Soviet casualties at Kursk.
Soviet equipment losses during the German offensive came to 1,614 tanks and self-propelled guns destroyed or damaged of the 3,925 vehicles committed to the battle. Soviet losses were roughly three times those of the Germans. During Operation Kutuzov, 2,349 tanks and self-propelled guns were lost out of an initial strength of 2,308; a loss of over 100 percent. During Polkovodets Rumyantsev, 1,864 tanks and self-propelled guns were lost out of the 2,439 employed. The loss ratio suffered by the Soviets was roughly 5:1 in favour of the Germans. Large Soviet reserves of equipment and their high rate of tank production enabled the Soviet tank armies to quickly replace lost equipment and maintain their fighting strength. The Red Army repaired many of its damaged tanks; many Soviet tanks were rebuilt up to four times to keep them in the fight. Soviet tank strength went back up to 2,750 tanks by 3 August due to the repair of damaged vehicles.

According to the historian Christer Bergström, VVS losses during the German offensive amounted to 677 aircraft on the northern flank and 439 on the southern flank. Total casualties are uncertain. Bergström&#x27;s research indicates total Soviet air losses between 12 July and 18 August, during the German offensive and the Operation Kutuzov counteroffensive, were 1,104 aircraft. Frieser states that the official Soviet figure of 1,626 planes lost &quot;seems completely unbelievable&quot;, and cites Sokolov&#x27;s minimum of 3,300 and cites &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; as being more reliable due to the strictness of data, with 4,209 Soviet planes downed.

=== German losses ===
In Soviet and German data, the human losses figures are not equivalent. In Soviet figures, both combat and non-combat losses (sick, deserted, accident...) were counted. In German, they did not count non-combat losses, and did not take into account the number of the missing, or died in hospitals from wounds, they counted only &quot;front-line losses&quot;.

Karl-Heinz Frieser, who reviewed the German archive record, calculated that during Citadel 54,182 casualties were suffered. Of these, 9,036 were killed, 1,960 were reported missing and 43,159 were wounded. The 9th Army suffered 23,345 casualties, while Army Group South suffered 30,837 casualties. Throughout the Soviet offensives, 111,114 casualties were suffered. In facing Operation Kutuzov, 14,215 men were killed, 11,300 were reported missing (presumed killed or captured) and 60,549 were wounded. During Polkovodets Rumyantsev, 25,068 casualties were incurred, including 8,933 killed and missing. Total casualties for the three battles were approximately 170,000, with 46,500 killed or missing (per German military medical data).

However, German personnel losses are clouded by the lack of access to German unit records, which were seized at the end of the war. Heersarzt 10-Day Casualty Reports per Army/Army Group are based on the reports of the German troops, the numbers are understated. According to the 10-day reports, the losses of the 6th German Army from 11 to 31 August 1943 were only 5,122 men (in the report of the commander of this army, General Carl Holidt, and the commander of the GA &quot;South&quot;, von Manstein, they reported this army lost 6,814 non-commissioned officers and soldiers only from 18 to 21 August). According to Niklas Zetterling with Anders Frankson, the 9th German Army lost from 4 to 9 July 1943 were 26,692 men; 1.46 times more than Heersarzt 10-Day reports. According to Stephen Newton, as of 5 July, the average number of infantry divisions in the 4th Tank Army and OG &quot;Kempf&quot; was 17,369, while the tank and motorized divisions were 18,410. On 30 August 1943, the average number of infantry divisions in the 4th Tank Army and OG &quot;Kempf&quot; was 8,269 men, and the tank and motorized divisions – 10,745 men. Then the average loss of personnel in the Battle of Kursk (excluding replenishment) is the same for infantry divisions: 9,100 men (52%); for tank and motorized divisions: 7,665 men (41%). At the same time, the losses of Army Group Center in the Battle of Kursk can be estimated by extrapolating the above estimate of the losses of the 4th Panzer Army and OG Kempf to the losses of Army Group Center. It should be considered that the losses of the Wehrmacht in the Battle of Kursk were 380,000 to 430,000 men. The Germans lost in the Battle of Kursk can be estimated from the balance of the armed forces of Germany from 1 June 1943 to 1 June 1944. The Wehrmacht&#x27;s losses for this period were 3,705,500 men. The average two-month loss – 623,000 men, and the loss of the Wehrmacht in the Battle of Kursk accounted for 61–75 percent of the Wehrmacht&#x27;s total losses in July–August 1943. Estimates of 380,000–430,000 casualties in the Battle of Kursk does not contradict the balance of its strength.
During Citadel, 252 to 323 tanks and assault guns were destroyed. By 5 July, when the Battle of Kursk started, there were only 184 operational Panthers. Within two days, this had dropped to 40. On 17 July 1943 after Hitler had ordered a stop to the German offensive, Guderian sent in the following preliminary assessment of the Panthers,
By 16 July, Army Group South counted 161 tanks and 14 assault guns lost. Up to 14 July, the 9th Army reported they had lost as write-offs 41 tanks and 17 assault guns. These losses break down as 109 Panzer IVs, 42 Panthers, 38 Panzer IIIs, 31 assault guns, 19 &quot;Ferdinand&quot;s, 10 Tigers and three flame tanks. Before the Germans ended their offensive at Kursk, the Soviets began their counter-offensive and pushed the Germans back into a steady retreat. Thus, a report on 11 August 1943 showed that the numbers of write-offs in Panthers swelled to 156, with only 9 operational. The German Army was forced into a fighting retreat and increasingly lost tanks in combat as well as from abandoning and destroying damaged vehicles. On the Eastern Front, 50 Tiger tanks were lost during July and August, with some 240 damaged. Most of these occurred during their offensive at Kursk. Between 600 and 1,612 tanks and assault guns sustained damage in the period from 5 to 18 July. The total number of German tanks and assault guns destroyed during July and August on the Eastern Front amount to 1,331. Of these, Frieser estimates that 760 were destroyed during the Battle of Kursk. and Beevor writes that &quot;the Red Army had lost five armoured vehicles for every German panzer destroyed&quot;. Töppel&#x27;s estimate is higher, up to 1,200 were destroyed In total at least 2,952 German tanks and assault guns were destroyed or damaged during the battle of Kursk.

Frieser reports Luftwaffe losses at 524 aircraft, with 159 lost during the German offensive, 218 destroyed during Operation Kutuzov and 147 lost during Operation Polkovodets Rumyantsev. In reviewing the reports of the quartermaster of the Luftwaffe, Bergström presents different figures. Between 5 and 31 July, Bergström reports 681 aircraft lost or damaged (335 for &quot;Fliegerkorps VIII&quot; and 346 for &quot;Luftflotte 6&quot;) with 420 being written off (192 from &quot;Fliegerkorps VIII&quot; and 229 from &quot;Luftflotte 6&quot;).

The historian Karsten Heinz Schönbach criticizes that Western historiographie stubbornly refers to german loss statistics without any form of critical source analysis. He notes that the formerly technical term „total loss“ lost its purely technical meaning over the course of the war and developed into a euphemism. His investigation of the Wehrmacht maintenance and repair system revealed that, the „total losses“ were recorded for as long as possible as merely „undergoing repair.“ He quotes Hitler, who commentend during a situation briefing on armored forces: „I keep hearing about short-term repairs, but they never actually happen; they always end up being delayed.“ Schönbach found that, ulitmately 40% to 50% of german tanks during Citadel were caught in a repair backlog, with most of these never returning to service.

== Notes ==
== See also ==
* Battle of Chawinda

== References ==
== Sources ==
*
*
*
* – A study of the southern sector of the Battle of Kursk conducted by the US Army Concepts Analysis Agency and directed by Walter J. Bauman, using data collected from military archives in Germany and Russia by The Dupuy Institute (TDI).
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* – This report, commissioned by the Soviet General Staff in 1944, was designed to educate the Red Army on how to conduct war operations. It was classified secret until its declassification in 1964, and was subsequently translated to English and edited by Orenstein and Glantz. Its original title was &quot;Collection of materials for the study of war experience, no. 11&quot; ()
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

==Further reading==
*
*.
*
*

== External links ==
*Licari, Michael J. &quot;The Battle of Kursk: Myths and Reality&quot;. Archived from the original on 2014-09-12. Retrieved 1 November 2014.
*Licari, Michael J. &quot;A Review Essay: Books on the Battle of Kursk&quot;. Archived from the original on 2014-09-11. Retrieved 1 November 2014.
*Wilson, Alan. &quot;Kursk – Raw Data to Download&quot;, 6 February 1999. – Information from the US Army KOSAVE II study on the southern face battle
*Wilson, Alan. The Kursk Region, July 1943 (maps), 27 October 1999
*&quot;Fighting a Lost War: The German Army in 1943&quot;: , lecture by Robert Citino, via the official channel of the U.S. Army Heritage and Education Center</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q130861" start="4" end="19" title="Battle of Kursk" label="Battle of Kursk"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="32" end="44" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="45" end="58" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="88" end="100" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="109" end="121" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3159" start="127" end="132" title="Kursk" label="Kursk"/>
<link wikidata="Q192781" start="270" end="288" title="Military history" label="history of warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q38789" start="315" end="335" title="Battle of Stalingrad" label="Battle of Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q44700" start="404" end="431" title="European theatre of World War II" label="European theatre of the war"/>
<link wikidata="Q26215037" start="622" end="647" title="history of aerial warfare" label="history of aerial warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q860251" start="720" end="743" title="Urban warfare" label="house-to-house fighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q602507" start="748" end="767" title="hand-to-hand combat" label="hand-to-hand combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136088" start="827" end="844" title="Operation Citadel" label="Operation Citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030752" start="910" end="917" title="Salient (military)" label="salient"/>
<link wikidata="Q130861" start="1107" end="1142" title="Battle of Kursk" label="Kursk Strategic Offensive Operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q672571" start="1162" end="1179" title="Operation Kutuzov" label="Operation Kutuzov"/>
<link wikidata="Q541506" start="1373" end="1394" title="Battle of Prokhorovka" label="Battle of Prokhorovka"/>
<link wikidata="Q709484" start="1510" end="1546" title="Belgorod–Kharkov offensive operation" label="Belgorod–Kharkov offensive operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="1926" end="1932" title="Axis powers" label="allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q513760" start="2081" end="2126" title="Forced labour under German rule during World War II" label="slave labour in the German armaments industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q48995547" start="2197" end="2210" title="Lucy spy ring" label="Lucy spy ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q750633" start="2317" end="2333" title="defence in depth" label="defence in depth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068457" start="2367" end="2385" title="armoured spearhead" label="armoured spearhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q130847" start="2680" end="2686" title="Battle of Verdun" label="Verdun"/>
<link wikidata="Q217981" start="2811" end="2836" title="Allied invasion of Sicily" label="Allied invasion of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="2862" end="2874" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="3226" end="3234" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898480" start="3462" end="3477" title="strategic depth" label="strategic depth"/>
<link wikidata="Q38789" start="3760" end="3780" title="Battle of Stalingrad" label="Battle of Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="3818" end="3826" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q52315" start="3873" end="3896" title="Operation Little Saturn" label="Operation Little Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3947" end="3959" title="Army Group B#Eastern Front" label="Army Group B"/>
<link wikidata="Q318342" start="3964" end="3978" title="Army Group Don" label="Army Group Don"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229" start="4065" end="4074" title="Don River (Russia)" label="Don River"/>
<link wikidata="Q163259" start="4086" end="4098" title="Army Group A" label="Army Group A"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="4116" end="4124" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q158260" start="4126" end="4143" title="Army Group Center" label="Army Group Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3159" start="4185" end="4190" title="Kursk" label="Kursk"/>
<link wikidata="Q908" start="4242" end="4248" title="Rostov-on-Don" label="Rostov"/>
<link wikidata="Q921618" start="4276" end="4283" title="Bryansk Front" label="Bryansk"/>
<link wikidata="Q848492" start="4285" end="4292" title="Western Front (Soviet Union)" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q190500" start="4312" end="4326" title="Central Front (Soviet Union)" label="Central Fronts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2801" start="4416" end="4423" title="Bryansk" label="Bryansk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337" start="4428" end="4436" title="Smolensk" label="Smolensk"/>
<link wikidata="Q57135" start="4556" end="4574" title="Erich von Manstein" label="Erich von Manstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q157153" start="4751" end="4763" title="Wolf&amp;#x27;s Lair" label="headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q627409" start="4767" end="4774" title="Gierłoż, Kętrzyn County" label="Görlitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="4789" end="4795" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q605714" start="4948" end="4954" title="Donbas" label="Donbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q157835" start="5426" end="5436" title="Zaporizhia" label="Zaporizhia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42308" start="5477" end="5484" title="Kharkiv" label="Kharkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q701700" start="5759" end="5777" title="II SS Panzer Corps" label="II SS Panzer Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q163388" start="5882" end="5897" title="1st Panzer Army" label="1st Panzer Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q157873" start="6073" end="6096" title="Third Battle of Kharkov" label="Third Battle of Kharkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323" start="6311" end="6319" title="Belgorod" label="Belgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="6619" end="6628" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q745709" start="6712" end="6722" title="rasputitsa" label="rasputitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="7048" end="7068" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Operation Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q57141" start="7795" end="7812" title="Günther von Kluge" label="Günther von Kluge"/>
<link wikidata="Q60730" start="8534" end="8547" title="Kurt Zeitzler" label="Kurt Zeitzler"/>
<link wikidata="Q155870" start="8553" end="8556" title="Oberkommando des Heeres" label="OKH"/>
<link wikidata="Q56506" start="8807" end="8817" title="blitzkrieg" label="blitzkrieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q146889" start="8943" end="8961" title="Pincer movement" label="double envelopment"/>
<link wikidata="Q70536" start="9096" end="9108" title="Walter Model" label="Walter Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q275151" start="9116" end="9124" title="9th Army (Wehrmacht)" label="9th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q57150" start="9351" end="9363" title="Hermann Hoth" label="Hermann Hoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664778" start="9369" end="9390" title="Army Detachment Kempf" label="Army Detachment Kempf"/>
<link wikidata="Q60896" start="9398" end="9410" title="Werner Kempf" label="Werner Kempf"/>
<link wikidata="Q57181" start="9645" end="9657" title="Paul Hausser" label="Paul Hausser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816913" start="9663" end="9682" title="XLVIII Panzer Corps (Germany)" label="XLVIII Panzer Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q62764" start="9697" end="9718" title="Otto von Knobelsdorff" label="Otto von Knobelsdorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q819304" start="9818" end="9826" title="2nd Army (Wehrmacht)" label="2nd Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q62103" start="9849" end="9861" title="Walter Weiß" label="Walter Weiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="10600" end="10606" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q60045" start="11225" end="11237" title="Albert Speer" label="Albert Speer"/>
<link wikidata="Q70560" start="11418" end="11432" title="Heinz Guderian" label="Heinz Guderian"/>
<link wikidata="Q152412" start="11623" end="11626" title="Oberkommando der Wehrmacht" label="OKW"/>
<link wikidata="Q151960" start="12884" end="12896" title="Panther tank" label="Panther tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q81661" start="12911" end="12920" title="Elefant" label="Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q161161" start="12921" end="12935" title="tank destroyer" label="tank destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q151221" start="12963" end="12968" title="Tiger I" label="Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q57123" start="13266" end="13277" title="Alfred Jodl" label="Alfred Jodl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779157" start="14497" end="14503" title="Panzer division" label="panzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q745798" start="14866" end="14877" title="assault gun" label="assault gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="14944" end="14948" title="artillery" label="guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905205" start="14953" end="14960" title="mortar (weapon)" label="mortars"/>
<link wikidata="Q48995547" start="15521" end="15534" title="Lucy spy ring" label="Lucy spy ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="15538" end="15549" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q528192" start="15615" end="15630" title="John Cairncross" label="John Cairncross"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15639" end="15672" title="Government Communications Headquarters#Government Code and Cypher School (GC&amp;amp;CS)" label="Government Code and Cypher School"/>
<link wikidata="Q155921" start="15676" end="15690" title="Bletchley Park" label="Bletchley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="15826" end="15835" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q152738" start="15879" end="15894" title="Anastas Mikoyan" label="Anastas Mikoyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="15938" end="15951" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q124617" start="16177" end="16191" title="Georgiy Zhukov" label="Georgiy Zhukov"/>
<link wikidata="Q540951" start="16283" end="16289" title="Stavka" label="Stavka"/>
<link wikidata="Q277985" start="17211" end="17225" title="Voronezh Front" label="Voronezh Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q299364" start="17240" end="17255" title="Nikolai Vatutin" label="Nikolai Vatutin"/>
<link wikidata="Q40482" start="17349" end="17371" title="Konstantin Rokossovsky" label="Konstantin Rokossovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347332" start="17428" end="17440" title="Steppe Front" label="Steppe Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q185024" start="17455" end="17465" title="Ivan Konev" label="Ivan Konev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241225" start="17535" end="17544" title="Don Front" label="Don Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q155008" start="17592" end="17608" title="Operation Uranus" label="Operation Uranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047311" start="17979" end="17994" title="anti-tank ditch" label="anti-tank ditch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2801289" start="18031" end="18050" title="anti-tank obstacles" label="anti-tank obstacles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4451185" start="18052" end="18058" title="hull down" label="dug-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q151197" start="18930" end="18945" title="combat engineer" label="combat engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q828414" start="18960" end="18974" title="anti-tank mine" label="anti-tank mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148188" start="18988" end="19007" title="anti-personnel mine" label="anti-personnel mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q151290" start="19217" end="19234" title="Battle of Moscow" label="defence of Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4031957" start="19253" end="19268" title="6th Guards Army" label="6th Guards Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000908" start="20137" end="20155" title="self-propelled gun" label="self-propelled gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q9180311" start="20637" end="20654" title="automatic firearm" label="automatic firearm"/>
<link wikidata="Q313830" start="20847" end="20863" title="Soviet partisans" label="Soviet partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q921432" start="21460" end="21477" title="Soviet Air Forces" label="Soviet Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q550024" start="22254" end="22261" title="PTRD-41" label="PTRD-41"/>
<link wikidata="Q167096" start="22303" end="22319" title="molotov cocktail" label="molotov cocktail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065168" start="22598" end="22635" title="People&amp;#x27;s Commissariat of Defence Industry of the USSR" label="People&amp;#x27;s Commissariat of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q615640" start="22664" end="22670" title="Soviet rouble" label="rouble"/>
<link wikidata="Q17051531" start="22725" end="22735" title="maskirovka" label="maskirovka"/>
<link wikidata="Q380229" start="23571" end="23584" title="Antony Beevor" label="Antony Beevor"/>
<link wikidata="Q172233" start="24009" end="24013" title="T-34" label="T-34"/>
<link wikidata="Q181130" start="24135" end="24139" title="T-70" label="T-70"/>
<link wikidata="Q207637" start="24295" end="24305" title="lend-lease" label="lend-lease"/>
<link wikidata="Q223184" start="24346" end="24352" title="M3 Lee" label="M3 Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q696182" start="24384" end="24393" title="Churchill tank" label="Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q502412" start="24395" end="24405" title="Matilda II" label="Matilda II"/>
<link wikidata="Q899078" start="24410" end="24419" title="Valentine tank" label="Valentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q38789" start="24878" end="24898" title="Battle of Stalingrad" label="Battle of Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="25358" end="25371" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q218678" start="25446" end="25458" title="North African Campaign" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q55688684" start="25520" end="25533" title="Jagdgeschwader" label="fighter units"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704274" start="25564" end="25573" title="Defense of the Reich" label="to defend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639992" start="25597" end="25620" title="Combined Bomber Offensive" label="Allied bombing campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q898788" start="25981" end="25997" title="Air supremacy" label="aerial supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q331435" start="26007" end="26030" title="Air interdiction" label="isolate the battlefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050818" start="26142" end="26159" title="close air support" label="close air support"/>
<link wikidata="Q26795" start="27836" end="27849" title="Junkers Ju 87" label="Junkers Ju 87"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658024" start="27925" end="27954" title="BK 37" label="&amp;quot;Bordkanone&amp;quot; 3,7 cm"/>
<link wikidata="Q820248" start="28025" end="28032" title="gun pod" label="gun pod"/>
<link wikidata="Q655135" start="28261" end="28276" title="Henschel Hs 129" label="Henschel Hs 129"/>
<link wikidata="Q552029" start="28293" end="28306" title="MK 103 cannon" label="MK 103 cannon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28312" end="28325" title="Focke-Wulf Fw 190#Ground attack versions (BMW 801)" label="the F-subtype"/>
<link wikidata="Q34775" start="28374" end="28391" title="Focke-Wulf Fw 190" label="Focke-Wulf Fw 190"/>
<link wikidata="Q703863" start="28430" end="28442" title="Luftflotte 6" label="Luftflotte 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q562475" start="28736" end="28750" title="Yakovlev Yak-9" label="Yakovlev Yak-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q846989" start="28755" end="28769" title="Lavochkin La-5" label="Lavochkin La-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q211443" start="28922" end="28958" title="Ilyushin Il-2" label="Ilyushin Il-2 &amp;quot;Shturmovik&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q943315" start="28967" end="28971" title="Petlyakov Pe-2" label="Pe-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q130368" start="30050" end="30067" title="armoured fighting vehicle" label="armoured vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q696944" start="30651" end="30687" title="Panzer-Grenadier-Division Großdeutschland" label="&amp;quot;Großdeutschland&amp;quot; Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q208109" start="32034" end="32040" title="Army Group" label="Fronts"/>
<link wikidata="Q875583" start="32572" end="32583" title="light tanks" label="light tanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q462442" start="32732" end="32736" title="T-60" label="T-60"/>
<link wikidata="Q201371" start="33821" end="33824" title="3rd Panzer Division (Wehrmacht)" label="3rd"/>
<link wikidata="Q192223" start="33991" end="34015" title="Katyusha rocket launcher" label="Katyusha rocket launcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455960" start="35071" end="35094" title="Freya radar" label="&amp;quot;Freya&amp;quot; radar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35425" end="35438" title="Special Purpose Command#16th Air Army" label="16th Air Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4029873" start="35510" end="35522" title="2nd Air Army" label="2nd Air Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q898788" start="35721" end="35737" title="air parity" label="evenly contested"/>
<link wikidata="Q682386" start="35987" end="36013" title="German heavy tank battalion" label="505th Heavy Tank Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q268720" start="36352" end="36382" title="78th Infantry Division (Wehrmacht)" label="78th Assault Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4028917" start="38027" end="38046" title="15th Rifle Division (Soviet Union)" label="15th Rifle Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4032539" start="38243" end="38262" title="81st Rifle Division" label="81st Rifle Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q571184" start="38983" end="38990" title="Goliath tracked mine" label="Goliath"/>
<link wikidata="Q324552" start="38995" end="39006" title="Borgward IV" label="Borgward IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682586" start="39090" end="39123" title="653rd Heavy Panzerjäger Battalion" label="653rd Heavy Panzerjäger Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030804" start="41090" end="41110" title="307th Rifle Division (Soviet Union)" label="307th Rifle Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q860251" start="41717" end="41740" title="urban warfare" label="house-to-house fighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788866" start="42350" end="42359" title="war diary" label="war diary"/>
<link wikidata="Q672571" start="43492" end="43509" title="Operation Kutuzov" label="Operation Kutuzov"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="44462" end="44477" title="Invasion of Poland" label="Polish Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="44482" end="44497" title="Battle of France" label="French Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q590507" start="45003" end="45018" title="panzergrenadier" label="panzergrenadier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565784" start="45057" end="45072" title="Walter Hörnlein" label="Walter Hörnlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q151475" start="45199" end="45209" title="Panzer III" label="Panzer III"/>
<link wikidata="Q12186" start="45215" end="45218" title="Panzer IV" label="IVs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4642290" start="45477" end="45503" title="67th Guards Rifle Division" label="67th Guards Rifle Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q788561" start="46475" end="46485" title="Panzerkeil" label="Panzerkeil"/>
<link wikidata="Q652532" start="46548" end="46556" title="Pakfront" label="Pakfront"/>
<link wikidata="Q156970" start="47452" end="47518" title="1st SS Division Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler" label="SS Panzergrenadier Division &amp;quot;Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q160133" start="47520" end="47573" title="2nd SS Panzer Division Das Reich" label="2nd SS Panzergrenadier Division &amp;quot;Das Reich&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q159522" start="47582" end="47635" title="3rd SS Division Totenkopf" label="3rd SS Panzergrenadier Division &amp;quot;Totenkopf&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q162559" start="48721" end="48741" title="1st Guards Tank Army (Soviet Union)" label="1st Guards Tank Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370129" start="49017" end="49030" title="anti-tank gun" label="anti-tank gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3598747" start="50639" end="50660" title="2nd Guards Tank Corps" label="2nd Guards Tank Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q72409" start="51127" end="51138" title="Erhard Raus" label="Erhard Raus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333748" start="51149" end="51164" title="7th Guards Army (Soviet Union)" label="7th Guards Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q168248" start="51367" end="51382" title="4th Panzer Army" label="4th Panzer Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3952213" start="51388" end="51414" title="503rd Heavy Panzer Battalion" label="503rd Heavy Tank Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q246313" start="51664" end="51683" title="6th Panzer Division (Wehrmacht)" label="6th Panzer Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q562438" start="52235" end="52255" title="19th Panzer Division (Wehrmacht)" label="19th Panzer Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303061" start="52375" end="52388" title="friendly fire" label="friendly fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q63969" start="52438" end="52461" title="Walther von Hünersdorff" label="Walther von Hünersdorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q63852" start="52466" end="52496" title="Hermann von Oppeln-Bronikowski" label="Hermann von Oppeln-Bronikowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q260811" start="52563" end="52582" title="7th Panzer Division (Wehrmacht)" label="7th Panzer Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q167338" start="52955" end="52978" title="106th Infantry Division (Wehrmacht)" label="106th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q225190" start="52987" end="53010" title="320th Infantry Division (Wehrmacht)" label="320th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4032299" start="53192" end="53218" title="72nd Guards Rifle Division" label="72nd Guards Rifle Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q72656" start="54283" end="54289" title="Oboyan" label="Oboyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4031636" start="54569" end="54579" title="5th Guards Army (Soviet Union)" label="5th Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594845" start="54584" end="54599" title="5th Guards Tank Army (Soviet Union)" label="5th Guards Tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469548" start="54675" end="54693" title="Southwestern Front (Soviet Union)" label="Southwestern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q4553569" start="54879" end="54892" title="17th Air Army" label="17th Air Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q258359" start="55056" end="55067" title="Prokhorovka, Belgorod Oblast" label="Prokhorovka"/>
<link wikidata="Q776856" start="55120" end="55136" title="Pavel Rotmistrov" label="Pavel Rotmistrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q60013" start="55349" end="55356" title="Korocha" label="Korocha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816913" start="57156" end="57175" title="XLVIII Panzer Corps" label="XLVIII Panzer Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4029835" start="57758" end="57772" title="2nd Tank Corps (Soviet Union)" label="2nd Tank Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4032694" start="57792" end="57820" title="9th Guards Airborne Division" label="9th Guards Airborne Division"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57875" end="57898" title="33rd Guards Rifle Corps" label="33rd Guards Rifle Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133871" start="58052" end="58062" title="Psel River" label="Psel River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594845" start="59941" end="59961" title="5th Guards Tank Army" label="5th Guards Tank Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984942" start="60670" end="60689" title="Tank desant" label="mounted infantrymen"/>
<link wikidata="Q217981" start="62297" end="62311" title="Allied invasion of Sicily" label="invaded Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q30638281" start="63340" end="63356" title="Operation Roland" label="Operation Roland"/>
<link wikidata="Q933075" start="63807" end="63822" title="Verlorene Siege" label="Verlorene Siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q709484" start="64199" end="64219" title="Operation Rumyantsev" label="Operation Rumyantsev"/>
<link wikidata="Q462301" start="65563" end="65576" title="Markian Popov" label="Markian Popov"/>
<link wikidata="Q48032" start="65662" end="65679" title="Vasily Sokolovsky" label="Vasily Sokolovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032186" start="65754" end="65770" title="11th Guards Army" label="11th Guards Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q48112" start="65797" end="65816" title="Hovhannes Bagramyan" label="Hovhannes Bagramyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q275019" start="66502" end="66524" title="Battle of Smolensk (1943)" label="liberation of Smolensk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67122" end="67142" title="Donbas Strategic Offensive (July 1943)" label="Diversionary attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165587" start="67193" end="67203" title="Mius River" label="Mius River"/>
<link wikidata="Q348497" start="68106" end="68120" title="Ilya Ehrenburg" label="Ilya Ehrenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q38789" start="69297" end="69307" title="Battle of Stalingrad" label="Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q162333" start="69724" end="69729" title="Italian Campaign (World War II)" label="front"/>
<link wikidata="Q151290" start="69879" end="69895" title="Battle of Moscow" label="Battle of Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4094297" start="72388" end="72407" title="Mariya Borovichenko" label="Mariya Borovichenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q4281324" start="72412" end="72428" title="Zinaida Mareseva" label="Zinaida Mareseva"/>
<link wikidata="Q175253" start="72595" end="72621" title="13th Guards Rifle Division" label="13th Guards Rifle Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q55650131" start="72716" end="72742" title="73rd Guards Rifle Division" label="73rd Guards Rifle Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q44700" start="72838" end="72870" title="European theatre of World War II" label="European theatre of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276395" start="73636" end="73655" title="Victor Davis Hanson" label="Victor Davis Hanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q173034" start="73704" end="73720" title="Battle of Midway" label="Battle of Midway"/>
<link wikidata="Q730645" start="73863" end="73883" title="Grigoriy Krivosheyev" label="Grigoriy Krivosheyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q356036" start="73958" end="73970" title="David M. Glantz" label="David Glantz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74145" end="74169" title="Casualty (person)#Other definitions" label="irrecoverable casualties"/>
<link wikidata="Q893794" start="75337" end="75350" title="Boris Vadimovich Sokolov" label="Boris Sokolov"/>
<link wikidata="Q108402" start="75647" end="75665" title="Karl-Heinz Frieser" label="Karl-Heinz Frieser"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="79269" end="79280" title="Carl Holidt" label="Carl Holidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610094" start="79622" end="79636" title="Stephen Newton" label="Stephen Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687222" start="81621" end="81631" title="flame tank" label="flame tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7683569" start="82588" end="82594" title="panzer" label="panzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770964" start="83149" end="83178" title="8th Air Corps (Germany)" label="&amp;quot;Fliegerkorps VIII&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870720" start="84183" end="84201" title="Battle of Chawinda" label="Battle of Chawinda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347107" start="85536" end="85549" title="Robert Citino" label="Robert Citino"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863062" start="85583" end="85622" title="U.S. Army Heritage and Education Center" label="U.S. Army Heritage and Education Center"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33105" wikidata="Q1501543" url="?curid=33105" title="Wargame">
<text>A wargame is a strategy game in which two or more players command opposing armed forces in a simulation of an armed conflict. Wargaming may be played for recreation, to train military officers in the art of strategic thinking, or to study the nature of potential conflicts. Many wargames re-create specific historic battles, and can cover either whole wars, or any campaigns, battles, or lower-level engagements within them. Many simulate land combat, but there are wargames for naval, air combat, and cyber as well as many that combine various domains.

There is ambiguity as to whether or not activities where participants physically perform mock combat actions (e.g. friendly warships firing dummy rounds at each other) are considered wargames. It is common terminology for a military&#x27;s field training exercises to be referred to as &quot;live wargames&quot;, but certain institutions such as the US Navy do not accept this. Likewise, activities like paintball and airsoft are often classified as combat sports. In contrast however the War Olympics also calls itself “the international army games” and often is referred to as wargaming colloquially.

Modern wargaming was invented in Prussia in the early 19th-century, and eventually the Prussian military adopted wargaming as a tool for training their officers and developing doctrine. After Prussia defeated France in the Franco-Prussian War, wargaming was widely adopted by military officers in other countries. Civilian enthusiasts also played wargames for fun, but this was a niche hobby until the development of consumer electronic wargames in the 1990s.

==Professional vs recreational==

A professional wargame is a wargame that is used by a military as a serious tool for training or research. A recreational wargame is one played for fun, often in a competitive context.

Recreational wargames can cover a wide variety of subjects, from pre-historic to modern – even fantasy or sci-fi combat. Games which do not include modern armaments and tactics are of limited interest to the military, though wargames covering famous historical battles can interest military historians. As professional wargames are used to prepare officers for actual warfare, there is naturally a strong emphasis on realism and current events.

Military organizations are typically secretive about their current wargames, and this makes designing a professional wargame a challenge. The data the designers require, such as the performance characteristics of weapons or the locations of military bases, are often classified, which makes it difficult for the designers to verify that their models are accurate. Secrecy also makes it harder to disseminate corrections if the wargame has already been delivered to the clients. Then there is the small player base. Whereas a commercial wargame might have thousands or even millions of players, professional wargames tend to have small player bases, which makes it harder for the designers to acquire feedback. Consequently, errors in professional wargame models tend to persist.

Although commercial wargame designers study consumer trends and listen to player feedback, their products are usually designed and sold with a take-it-or-leave-it approach. Professional wargames, by contrast, are typically commissioned by the military that plans to use them. If a wargame is commissioned by several clients, then the designer will have to juggle their competing demands. This can lead to great complexity, high development costs, and a compromised product that satisfies nobody.

Commercial wargames are under more pressure to deliver an enjoyable experience for the players, who expect a user-friendly interface, a reasonable learning curve, exciting gameplay, and so forth. By contrast, military organizations tend to see wargaming as a tool and a chore, and players are often bluntly obliged to use whatever is provided to them.

Professional wargames that are arbitrated by an umpire or the players themselves (manual wargames) tend to have simple models and computations compared to recreational wargames. Umpires may even be allowed to make arbitrary decisions using their own expertise. One reason for this is to keep the learning curve small. Recreational wargamers tend to have a lot of wargaming experience (it is usually considered a hardcore hobby), so learning a complicated new wargame is easy if it is similar enough to ones they&#x27;ve already played. By contrast, military officers typically have little or no wargaming experience. A second reason is that the technical data required to design an accurate and precise model, such as the performance characteristics of a fighter jet, is often classified.

==Overview==
The exact definition of &quot;wargame&quot; varies from one writer to the next and one organization to the next. To prevent confusion, this section will establish the general definition employed by this article.

*A wargame simulates an armed conflict, be it a battle, a campaign, or an entire war. &quot;Business wargames&quot; do not simulate armed conflict and thus fall outside the scope of this article.
*A wargame is adversarial. There must be at least two opposing sides whose players react intelligently to each other&#x27;s decisions, though there are wargames with solitaire rules to govern the actions of the non-player side(s). 
*A wargame does not involve the use of actual troops and armaments. This definition is used by the US Naval War College. Some writers use the term &quot;live wargames&quot; to refer to games that use actual troops in the field, but this article shall instead refer to these as field exercises.

===Setting and scenario===
A wargame must have a &quot;setting&quot; that is based on some historical era of warfare so as to establish what armaments, unit types, and doctrines the combatants may wield and the environment they fight in. A &quot;historical setting&quot; accurately depicts a real historical era of warfare. Among recreational wargamers, the most popular historical era is World War 2. Professional military wargamers prefer the modern era. A &quot;fantasy setting&quot; depicts a fictional world in which the combatants wield fictional or anachronistic armaments, but it should be similar enough to some historical era of warfare such that the combatants fight in a familiar and credible way. For instance, &quot;Warhammer Age of Sigmar&quot; has wizards and dragons, but the combat is mostly based on medieval warfare (spearmen, archers, knights, etc.). Some are also set in a hypothetical future or counterfactual past, to simulate, for example, a &quot;World War Three&quot; or rebellion of colonists on Mars.

A wargame&#x27;s &quot;scenario&quot; describes the circumstances of the specific conflict being simulated, from the layout of the terrain to the exact composition of the fighting forces to the victory conditions of the players. Historical wargames often re-enact historical battles. Alternatively, the game may provide fictional &quot;what-if&quot; scenarios. One challenge in the design of historical wargames is that the scenarios may be inherently unbalanced and present one side with an unwinnable situation. In such cases, the victory conditions may be adjusted for the disadvantaged side so that they can win simply by doing better than what happened historically. Some games simply concede that the scenario is imbalanced and urge players to switch sides and play again to compare their performance. It is easier to design a balanced scenario where all players have a fair chance of winning if it is fictionalized. Board wargames usually have a fixed scenario.

===Level of war===
A wargame&#x27;s level of war determines to the scope of the scenario, the basic unit of command, and the degree to which lower level processes are abstracted.

At the &quot;tactical level&quot;, the scenario is a single battle. The basic unit of command is an individual soldier or small group of soldiers. The time span of the scenario is in the order of minutes. At this level, the specific capabilities of the soldiers and their armaments are described in detail. An example of a tactical-level games is &quot;Flames of War&quot;, in which players use miniature figurines to represent individual soldiers, and move them around on a scale model of the battlefield.

At the &quot;operational level&quot;, the scenario is a military campaign, and the basic unit of command is a large group of soldiers. At this level, the outcomes of battles are usually determined by a simple computation.

At the &quot;strategic level&quot;, the scenario is an entire war. The player addresses higher-level concerns such as economics, research, and diplomacy. The time span of the game is in the order of months or years.

===Examples===
* &quot;Flames of War&quot; is a tactical-level historical miniature wargame that simulates land battles during World War 2.
* &quot;TACSPIEL&quot; is an operational-level professional wargame developed in the 1960s by the US Army for research into guerilla warfare.
* The Sigma war games were a series of strategic-level professional wargames that sought to predict the outcome of the Vietnam War.
* &quot;Hearts of Iron IV&quot; is a strategic-level computer wargame set in the mid-20th century.
* &quot;Wings of War&quot; is tactical-level recreational wargame that simulates World War 1 aerial dogfights.
* &quot;Star Wars: X-Wing&quot; is a fantasy wargame whose rules are based on &quot;Wings of War&quot;.
* &quot;&quot; is a computer program that serves as a platform for users to create and share their own wargame of a hypothetical real world conflict (ranging from the tactical to the strategic level) using its database of units that range from World War 2 to the near future.

==Design issues==
===Realism===
A wargame must simulate warfare to a reasonable degree of realism, though what counts as sufficient realism depends on the players. Military wargames need to be highly realistic because their purpose is to prepare officers for real warfare. Recreational wargames only need to be as realistic as it pleases the players, so in most recreational wargames the emphasis is on verisimilitude, i.e. the satisfactory appearance of realism. In any case, no wargame can be perfectly realistic. A wargame&#x27;s design must make trade-offs between realism, playability, and fun, and function within the constraints of its medium.

Fantasy wargames arguably stretch the definition of wargaming by representing fictional or anachronistic armaments, but they may still be called wargames if they resemble real warfare to the satisfaction of the players. For example, &quot;Warhammer Fantasy Battle&quot; has wizards and dragons, but the bulk of the armaments are taken from medieval warfare (spearmen, knights, archers, etc.).

&quot;Validation&quot; is the process by which a given wargame is proven to be realistic. For historical wargames, this usually means being able to accurately recreate a certain historical battle. Validating military wargames is sometimes tricky as they are typically used to simulate hypothetical future scenarios.

===Complexity===
Whereas the rules of chess are relatively simple, and the rules of Go even simpler, wargames tend to have very sophisticated rules as a matter of their commitment to representing the concrete realities of warfare. Generally speaking, the more realistic a wargame seeks to be, the more complicated its rules are.

For example, chess pieces only have a few rules determining their behaviour, such as how and when they are allowed to move or capture based on their type and board location, providing a highly abstracted model of warfare which represents troop positioning and composition. Stones in Go have no properties, behaviours, or state on their own, and only potentially represent, relative to other stones, elements of a larger board position, providing an extremely abstract strategic model in which the determinant of victory is a generalisation of territorial control and influence projection. Contrarily, in wargames counters typically represent decidedly more concrete and internally quite complex entities (companies, battalions, etc.), with detailed interior state (stat blocks and tables of troop numbers, equipment, operational readiness, artillery charts, etc.), often with convoluted rules governing how they operate and interact, and furthermore the global state of the game is often governed by extensive non-local rules representing exigencies like seasonal weather or supply lines.

This makes wargames difficult to learn, as it can be difficult to simply begin playing without already understanding a great deal about how to do so. Even experienced wargamers usually play with their rulebook on hand, because the rules for most wargames are too complex to fully memorize. For many people, the complexity also makes wargames difficult to enjoy, but some players enjoy high realism, so finding a balance between realism and simplicity is tricky when it comes to recreational wargames.

One way to solve the problem of complexity is to use a referee who has the discretion to arbitrate events, using whatever tools and knowledge they deem fit. This solution is popular with military instructors because it allows them to apply their own expertise when they use wargames to instruct students. The drawback of this approach is that the referee must be very knowledgeable in warfare and impartial, else they may issue unrealistic or unfair rulings.

Another way to address complexity is to use a computer to automate some or all of the routine procedures. Video games can be both sophisticated and easy to learn, which is why computer wargames are more popular than tabletop wargames.

===Scale===
Every wargame must have a sense of &quot;scale&quot;, so that it may realistically simulate how topography, distance, and time affect warfare. Scale is usually expressed as a ratio, e.g. a scale of 1:1000 indicates that 1 cm on the game map represents 10 m (1,000 cm). In miniature wargaming, scale is more often expressed as the height of a model of a human measured from the base of its feet up to the eyes or top of the head (e.g. 28mm).

Military wargames typically aim to model time and space as realistically as is feasible, so everything in the simulation conforms to a single scale. Recreational wargame designers, by contrast, tend to use abstract scaling techniques to make their wargames easier to learn and play. Tabletop miniature wargames, for instance, cannot realistically model the range of modern firearms, because miniature wargaming models are typically built to a scale between 1:64 and 1:120. At those scales, riflemen should be able to shoot each other from several meters away, which is longer than most game tables. If model soldiers could shoot each other from opposite ends of the table, without the need to maneuver, the game would be very monotonous. For example, the miniature wargame &quot;Bolt Action&quot; solves this problem by reducing a rifle&#x27;s range to 24 inches, a sub-machine gun&#x27;s range to 12 inches, and a pistol&#x27;s range to 6 inches. Even if these ranges are not realistic, their proportions make intuitive sense (a rifle&#x27;s range is longer than a sub-machine gun, due to the differing ammunitions) and thus preserve some verisimilitude, all the while compressing the battle to fit the confines of the table. Additionally, the ranges are multiples of 6, which makes them easier to remember.

===Fog of war===
In real warfare, commanders have incomplete information about their enemy and the battlespace. A wargame that conceals some information from the player is called a &quot;closed&quot; game. An &quot;open&quot; wargame has no secret information. Most recreational wargames are open wargames. A closed wargame can simulate the espionage and reconnaissance aspects of war.

Military wargames often use referees to manage secret information. The players may be forced to sit in separate rooms, and communicate their orders with the referee in the game room, who in turn reports back only the information he judges the players should know. Some recreational wargames use a referee too, often referring to them as &quot;the GameMaster&quot; (e.g. &quot;Warhammer 40,000: Rogue Trader&quot;).

The fog of war is easy to simulate in a computer wargame, as a virtual environment is free of the physical constraints of a tabletop game. The computer itself can serve as the referee.

==Types==
===Miniature===
Miniature wargaming is a form of wargaming where units on the battlefield are represented by miniature models, as opposed to abstract pieces such as wooden blocks or plastic counters. Likewise, the battlefield itself is represented by model terrain, as opposed to a flat board or map; naval wargames are often played on a floor because they tend to require more space than a tabletop. Most miniature wargaming is recreational because issues of scale get in the way of realism.

Miniature wargaming can be more expensive and time-consuming than other forms of wargaming. Furthermore, most manufacturers do not sell ready-to-play models, they sell boxes of model parts, which the players are expected to assemble and paint themselves. This requires skill, time, and money, but many players like the opportunity to show off their artistic skills. Miniature wargaming is often as much about artistry as it is about play.

===Board===

A board wargame is played on a board that has a more-or-less fixed layout and is supplied by the game&#x27;s manufacturer. This is in contrast to customizable playing fields made with modular components, such as in miniature wargaming.

===Block===
In block wargaming, the Fog of War is built into the game by representing units with upright wooden blocks that are marked on only one face, which is oriented towards the player who owns the block. The opponent cannot see the markings from his position. The first such block wargame was &quot;Quebec 1759&quot; by Columbia Games (previously named Gamma Two Games), depicting the campaign surrounding the Battle of the Plains of Abraham.

===Card===
Because of their nature, cards are well suited for abstract games, as opposed to the simulation aspects of wargames. Traditional card games are not considered wargames even when nominally about the same subject (such as the game &quot;War&quot;).

An early card wargame was &quot;Nuclear War&quot;, a &#x27;tongue-in-cheek game of the end of the world&#x27;, first published in 1966 and still published today by Flying Buffalo. It does not simulate how any actual nuclear exchange would happen, but it is still structured unlike most card games because of the way it deals with its subject.

In the late 1970s Battleline Publications (a board wargame company) produced two card games, &quot;Naval War&quot; and &quot;Armor Supremacy&quot;. The first was fairly popular in wargaming circles, and is a light system of naval combat, though again not depicting any &#x27;real&#x27; situation (players may operate ships from opposing navies side-by-side). &quot;Armor Supremacy&quot; was not as successful, but is a look at the constant design and development of new types of tanks during World War II.

The most successful card wargame (as a card game and as a wargame) would almost certainly be &quot;Up Front&quot;, a card game about tactical combat in World War II published by Avalon Hill in 1983. The abstractness is harnessed in the game by having the deck produce random terrain, and chances to fire, and the like, simulating uncertainty as to the local conditions (nature of the terrain, etc.).

Dan Verssen Games is a specialist designer and publisher of card games for several genres, including air combat and World War II and modern land combat.

Also, card driven games (CDGs), first introduced in 1993, use a deck of (custom) cards to drive most elements of the game, such as unit movement (activation) and random events. These are, however, distinctly board games, the deck is merely one of the most important &quot;elements&quot; of the game.

===Computer===
The term &quot;wargame&quot; is rarely used in the video gaming hobby; the term &quot;strategy game&quot; is preferred. &quot;Computer wargame&quot; distinguishes a game from a &quot;tabletop wargame&quot;.

Computer wargames have many advantages over traditional wargames. In a computer game, all the routine procedures and calculations are automated. The player needs only to make strategic and tactical decisions. The learning curve for the player is smaller, as the game can be played without mastering all its mechanics. The gameplay is faster, as a computer can process calculations much faster than a human. Computer wargames often have more sophisticated mechanics than traditional wargames thanks to automation. Computer games tend to be cheaper than traditional wargames because, being software, they can be copied and distributed very efficiently. It&#x27;s easier for a player to find opponents with a computer game: a computer game can use artificial intelligence to provide a virtual opponent, or connect him to another human player over the Internet. For these reasons, computers are now the dominant medium for wargaming.

===Computer-assisted===

In the recent years, programs have been developed for computer-assisted gaming as regards to wargaming. Two different categories can be distinguished: local computer assisted wargames and remote computer assisted wargames.

Local computer assisted wargames are mostly not designed toward recreating the battlefield inside computer memory, but employing the computer to play the role of game master by storing game rules and unit characteristics, tracking unit status and positions or distances, animating the game with sounds and voice and resolving combat. Flow of play is simple: each turn, the units come up in a random order. Therefore, the more units an opponent has, the more chance he will be selected for the next turn. When a unit comes up, the commander specifies an order and if offensive action is being taken, a target, along with details about distance. The results of the order, base move distance and effect to target, are reported, and the unit is moved on the tabletop. All distance relationships are tracked on the tabletop. All record-keeping is tracked by the computer.

Remote computer assisted wargames can be considered as extensions to the concept of play-by-email gaming, however the presentation and actual capabilities are completely different. They have been designed to replicate the look and feel of existing board or miniatures wargames on the computer. The map and counters are presented to the user who can then manipulate these, more-or-less as if he were playing the physical game, and send a saved file off to his opponent, who can review what has been done without having to duplicate everything on his physical set-up of the game, and respond. Some allow for both players to get on-line and see each other&#x27;s moves in real-time.

These systems are generally set up so that while one can play the game, the program has no knowledge of the rules, and cannot enforce them. The human players must have a knowledge of the rules themselves. The idea is to promote the playing of the games (by making play against a remote opponent easier), while supporting the industry (and reducing copyright issues) by ensuring that the players have access to the actual physical game.

The four main programs that can be used to play a number of games each are &quot;Aide de Camp&quot;, &quot;Cyberboard&quot;, &quot;Vassal&quot; and &quot;ZunTzu&quot;. &quot;Aide de Camp&quot; is available for purchase, while the other three are offered free. &quot;Vassal&quot; is in turn an outgrowth of the &quot;VASL&quot; (Virtual &quot;ASL&quot;) project, and uses Java, making it accessible to any computer that can run a modern JVM, while the other three are Microsoft Windows programs.

=== Play-by-mail (PBM) ===

Wargames were played remotely through the mail, with players sending lists of moves, or orders, to each other through the mail.

In some early PBM systems, six sided dice rolling was simulated by designating a specific stock and a future date and once that date passed, the players would determine an action&#x27;s outcome using the sales in hundreds value for specific stocks on a specific date and then dividing the NYSE published sales in hundreds by six, using the remainder as the dice result.

&quot;Nuclear Destruction&quot;, by the Flying Buffalo, was an early PBM game in 1970. Origins Award Hall-of-Fame member &quot;Middle-Earth Play-By-Mail&quot; is still active today.

Reality Simulations, Inc. still runs a number of PBM games, such as Duel2 (formerly known as Duelmasters), Hyborian War, and Forgotten Realms: War of the Avatars.

===Email and traditional===
Since email is faster than the standard postal service, the rise of the Internet saw a shift of people playing board wargames from play-by-mail (PBM) to play-by-email (PBEM) or play-by-web (PBW). The mechanics were the same, merely the medium was faster.

At this time, turn-based strategy computer games still had a decent amount of popularity, and many started explicitly supporting the sending of saved-game files through email (instead of needing to find the file to send to the opponent by hand). As with all types of video games, the rise in home networking solutions and Internet access has also meant that networked games are now common and easy to set up.

==History==
===Early Prussian wargames (1780–1806)===

The first wargame was invented in Prussia in 1780 by Johann Christian Ludwig Hellwig. Hellwig&#x27;s wargame was the first true wargame because it attempted to be realistic enough to teach useful lessons in military strategy to future army officers. Hellwig was a college professor and many of his students were aristocrats destined for military service. But Hellwig also wanted to sell his wargame commercially as a recreational item. Hellwig chose to base his game on chess so as to make it attractive and accessible to chess players. Hellwig published a second edition of his rulebook in 1803.

As in chess, Hellwig&#x27;s game was played on a grid of squares, but it was a much larger grid, and the squares were color-coded to represent different types of terrain: mountains, swamp, water, trenches, etc. The layout of the terrain was not fixed, which allowed players to create their own custom battlefields. The pieces in the game represented real military units: cavalry, infantry, artillery, and various support units. As in chess, only a single piece could occupy a square, and the pieces moved square by square, either laterally or diagonally. Over normal terrain, infantry could move a maximum distance of eight squares, dragoons could move twelve squares, and light cavalry could move sixteen squares—intuitively mirroring the speed at which these units move in the real world. But terrain could impede movement: mountains were impassable, swamps slowed units down, rivers could only be crossed with the help of a special pontoon unit, etc. A player could only move one piece per turn, or one group of pieces if they were arranged in a rectangle. A piece could capture an enemy piece by moving into its square, just like in chess, but infantry and artillery pieces could also shoot enemy pieces, at a maximum ranges of two to three squares. Unlike chess, the pieces had orientation: for instance, an infantry piece could only shoot an enemy piece if they were facing it and flanking it. Hellwig&#x27;s wargame could also simulate the fog of war to limited degree: while the players were arranging their pieces in their starting positions, they had the option of placing a screen across the board so that they could not observe their opponent&#x27;s arrangement until the game started. Once the game was in progress, however, there was no hiding anything.

Hellwig&#x27;s wargame was a commercial success, and inspired other inventors to develop their own chess-like wargames. In 1796, another Prussian named Johann Georg Julius Venturini invented his own wargame, inspired by Hellwig&#x27;s game. Venturini&#x27;s game was played on an even larger grid. Venturini&#x27;s game also added rules governing logistics, such as supply convoys and mobile bakeries, and the effects of weather and seasons, making this perhaps the first operational-level wargame. In 1806, an Austrian named Johann Ferdinand Opiz developed a wargame aimed at both civilian and military markets. Like Hellwig&#x27;s game, it used a modular grid-based board. But unlike Hellwig&#x27;s game, Opiz&#x27;s game used dice rolls to simulate the unpredictability of real warfare. This innovation was controversial at the time. Hellwig, who designed his wargame for both leisure as well as instruction, felt that introducing chance would spoil the fun.

A criticism of the chess-like wargames of Hellwig, Venturini, and Opiz was that the pieces were constrained to move across a grid in chess-like fashion. Only a single piece could occupy a square, even if that square represented a square mile; and the pieces had to move square by square, their exact location within a square being immaterial. The grid also forced the terrain into unnatural forms, such as rivers that flowed in straight lines and bent at right angles. This lack of realism meant that no army took these wargames seriously.

===&quot;Kriegsspiel&quot; (1824)===
In 1824, a Prussian army officer named Georg Heinrich Rudolf Johann von Reisswitz presented to the Prussian General Staff a highly realistic wargame that he and his father had developed over the years. Instead of a chess-like grid, this game was played on accurate paper maps of the kind the Prussian army used. This allowed the game to model terrain naturally and better simulate battles in real locations. The pieces could be moved across the map in a free-form manner, subject to terrain obstacles. The pieces, each of which represented some kind of army unit (an infantry battalion, a cavalry squadron, etc.), were little rectangular blocks made of lead. The pieces were painted either red or blue to indicate the faction it belonged to. The blue pieces were used to represent the Prussian army and red was used to represent some foreign enemy—since then it has been the convention in military wargaming to use blue to represent the faction to which the players actually belong to. The game used dice to add a degree of randomness to combat. The scale of the map was 1:8000 and the pieces were made to the same proportions as the units they represented, such that each piece occupied the same relative space on the map as the corresponding unit did on the battlefield.

The game modeled the capabilities of the units realistically using data gathered by the Prussian army during the Napoleonic Wars. Reisswitz&#x27;s manual provided tables that listed how far each unit type could move in a round according to the terrain it was crossing and whether it was marching, running, galloping, etc.; and accordingly the umpire used a ruler to move the pieces across the map. The game used dice to determine combat results and inflicted casualties, and the casualties inflicted by firearms and artillery decreased over distance. Unlike chess pieces, units in Reisswitz&#x27;s game could suffer partial losses before being defeated, which were tracked on a sheet of paper (recreational gamers might call this &quot;hitpoint tracking&quot;). The game also had some rules that modeled morale and exhaustion.

Reisswitz&#x27;s game also used an umpire. The players did not directly control the pieces on the game map. Rather, they wrote orders for their virtual troops on pieces of paper, which they submitted to the umpire. The umpire then moved the pieces across the game map according to how he judged the virtual troops would interpret and carry out their orders. When the troops engaged the enemy on the map, the umpire rolled the dice, computed the effects, and removed defeated units from the map. The umpire also managed secret information so as to simulate the fog of war. The umpire placed pieces on the map only for those units which he judged both sides could see. He kept a mental track of where the hidden units were, and only placed their pieces on the map when he judged they came into view of the enemy.

Earlier wargames had fixed victory conditions, such as occupying the enemy&#x27;s fortress. By contrast, Reisswitz&#x27;s wargame was open-ended. The umpire decided what the victory conditions were, if there were to be any, and they typically resembled the goals an actual army in battle might aim for. The emphasis was on the experience of decision-making and strategic thinking, not on competition. As Reisswitz himself wrote: &quot;The winning or losing, in the sense of a card or board game, does not come into it.&quot;

In the English-speaking world, Reisswitz&#x27;s wargame and its variants are called &quot;Kriegsspiel&quot;, which is the German word for &quot;wargame&quot;.

The Prussian king and the General Staff officially endorsed Reisswitz&#x27;s wargame, and by the end of the decade every German regiment had bought materials for it. This was thus the first wargame to be widely adopted by a military as a serious tool for training and research. Over the years, the Prussians developed new variations of Reisswitz&#x27;s system to incorporate new technologies and doctrine.

===Worldwide spread===
Prussian wargaming attracted little attention outside Prussia until 1870, when Prussia defeated France in the Franco-Prussian War. Many credited Prussia&#x27;s victory to its wargaming tradition. The Prussian army did not have any significant advantage in weaponry, numbers, or troop training, but it was the only army in the world that practiced wargaming. Civilians and military forces around the world now took a keen interest in the German military wargames, which foreigners referred to as &quot;Kriegsspiel&quot; (the German word for &quot;wargame&quot;). The first &quot;Kriegsspiel&quot; manual in English, based on the system of Wilhelm von Tschischwitz, was published in 1872 for the British army and received a royal endorsement. The world&#x27;s first recreational wargaming club was the University Kriegspiel [&quot;sic&quot;] Club, founded in 1873 at Oxford University in England. In the United States, Charles Adiel Lewis Totten published &quot;Strategos, the American War Game&quot; in 1880, and William R. Livermore published &quot;The American Kriegsspiel&quot; in 1882, both heavily inspired by Prussian wargames. In 1894, the US Naval War College made wargaming a regular tool of instruction.

===Miniature wargaming===
The English writer H. G. Wells developed codified rules for playing with toy soldiers, which he published in a book titled &quot;Little Wars&quot; (1913). This is widely remembered as the first rulebook for miniature wargaming (for terrestrial armies, at least). &quot;Little Wars&quot; had very simple rules to make it fun and accessible to anyone. &quot;Little Wars&quot; did not use dice or computation to resolve fights. For artillery attacks, players used spring-loaded toy cannons which fired little wooden cylinders to physically knock over enemy models. As for infantry and cavalry, they could only engage in hand-to-hand combat (even if the figurines exhibited firearms). When two infantry units fought in close quarters, the units would suffer non-random losses determined by their relative sizes. &quot;Little Wars&quot; was designed for a large field of play, such as a lawn or the floor of a large room. An infantryman could move up to one foot per turn, and a cavalryman could move up to two feet per turn. To measure these distances, players used a two-foot long piece of string. Wells was also the first wargamer to use scale models of buildings, trees, and other terrain features to create a three-dimensional battlefield.

Wells&#x27; rulebook, however, failed to invigorate the miniature wargaming community. A possible reason was the two World Wars, which de-glamorized war and caused shortages of tin and lead that made model soldiers expensive. Another reason may have been the lack of magazines or clubs dedicated to miniature wargames. Miniature wargaming was seen as a niche within the larger hobby of making and collecting model soldiers.

In 1955, a California man named Jack Scruby began making inexpensive miniature models for miniature wargames out of type metal. Scruby&#x27;s major contribution to the miniature wargaming hobby was to network players across America. At the time, the miniature wargaming community was minuscule, and players struggled to find each other. In 1956, Scruby organized the first miniature wargaming convention in America, which was attended by just fourteen people. From 1957 to 1962, he self-published the world&#x27;s first wargaming magazine, titled &quot;The War Game Digest&quot;, through which wargamers could publish their rules and share game reports. It had less than two hundred subscribers, but it did establish a steadily growing community.

Around the same time in the United Kingdom, Donald Featherstone began writing an influential series of books on wargaming, which represented the first mainstream published contribution to wargaming since &quot;Little Wars&quot;. Titles included : &quot;War Games&quot; (1962), &quot;Advanced Wargames&quot;, &quot;Solo Wargaming&quot;, &quot;Wargame Campaigns&quot;, &quot;Battles with Model Tanks&quot;, &quot;Skirmish Wargaming&quot;. Such was the popularity of such titles that other authors were able to have published wargaming titles. This output of published wargaming titles from British authors coupled with the emergence at the same time of several manufacturers providing suitable wargame miniatures (e.g. Miniature Figurines, Hinchliffe, Peter Laing, Garrisson, Skytrex, Davco, Heroic &amp; Ros) was responsible for the huge upsurge of popularity of the hobby in the late 1960s and into the 1970s.

In 1956, Tony Bath published what was the first ruleset for a miniature wargame set in the medieval period. These rules were a major inspiration for Gary Gygax&#x27;s &quot;Chainmail&quot; (1971), which in turn became the basis for the roleplaying game &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;.

From 1983 to 2015, Games Workshop produced what was the first miniature wargame designed to be used with proprietary models: &quot;Warhammer Fantasy&quot;. Earlier miniature wargames were designed to be played using generic models that could be bought from any manufacturer, but &quot;Warhammer Fantasy&#x27;s&quot; setting featured original characters with distinctive visual designs, and their models were produced exclusively by Games Workshop.

===Board wargaming (1954–present)===
The first successful commercial board wargame was &quot;Tactics&quot; (1954) by an American named Charles S. Roberts. What distinguished this wargame from previous ones is that it was mass-produced and all the necessary materials for play were bundled together in a box. Previous wargames were often just a rulebook and required players to obtain the other materials themselves. The game was played on a pre-fabricated board with a fixed layout, which is why it was called a board game.

Roberts later founded the Avalon Hill Game Company, the first firm that specialized in commercial wargames. In 1958, Avalon Hill released &quot;Gettysburg&quot;, which was a retooling of the rules of &quot;Tactics&quot;, and was based on the historical Battle of Gettysburg. &quot;Gettysburg&quot; became the most widely-played wargame yet.

Board wargames were more popular than miniature wargames. One reason was that assembling a playset for miniature wargaming was expensive, time-consuming, and require artisanal skill. Another reason was that board wargames could be played by correspondence. Board wargames were usually grid-based, or else designed in some way that moves could be explained in writing in simple terms. This was not possible with the free-form nature of miniature wargames.

==Notable people==
===Wargaming as a hobby===
* Georg von Reisswitz, who with his father invented &quot;Kriegsspiel&quot;.
* H.G. Wells – Pioneer in miniature wargaming, author of &quot;Little Wars&quot;. His usual companion in wargames was Jerome K. Jerome (of &quot;Three Men in a Boat&quot; fame).
* Jack Scruby – After H.G. Wells, he did the most to make miniature wargaming a respectable hobby. He also popularized miniatures wargaming with a cheaper production process for miniature figures, publishing the first miniature wargaming magazine, the &quot;War Game Digest&quot;, and community building.
* Don Featherstone – Known in the UK as the &quot;co-father&quot; of modern miniature wargaming.
* Charles S. Roberts – Known as the &quot;Father of modern board wargaming&quot;, designed the first modern wargame, as well as the company most identified with modern wargames (Avalon Hill).
* Phil Barker – Co-founder of (Wargames Research Group), co writer of WRG Ancients in 1969 and of DBA the innovative 1990 ruleset.

===Designers/developers===
* Richard Berg – Designer of &quot;Terrible Swift Sword&quot;, and worked at SPI.
* Larry Bond – Designer of &quot;Harpoon&quot;, and best selling author
* Frank Chadwick – A co-founder of Game Designers Workshop (along with Loren Wiseman, Marc Miller, and Rich Banner), one of the first major competitors to Avalon Hill, and himself a prolific wargame designer and innovator.
* Jim Dunnigan – considered &quot;The Dean of Modern Wargaming&quot;, founder of SPI and the most prolific print wargame designer in history. His designs included many firsts in wargaming, including the first tactical wargames.
* Charles Grant – Author of &quot;The Wargame&quot;.
* E. Gary Gygax – Designer of several miniatures and board wargames who went on to co-create (with Dave Arneson) and publish &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;.
* Larry Harris – Designer of &quot;Axis and Allies&quot;, &quot;Conquest of the Empire&quot;, and other games in the Axis and Allies Series.
* Bruce Quarrie – wrote rule sets for Napoleonic and World War II wargames and also on military history.
* John Hill – Designer of &quot;Squad Leader&quot;, &quot;Johnny Reb&quot;, and other well-received designs.
* Redmond Simonsen – Co-founder of SPI and introduced many advanced graphics design elements to wargame designs.

===Notable players===
* Peter Cushing – Actor
* Curt Schilling – Former baseball player and commentator

==Notable examples==

=== Board ===

While a comprehensive list will show the variety of titles, the following games are notable for the reasons indicated:
*Diplomacy – (1954) a classic multi-player game from the &quot;golden age&quot; of wargames in which strategy is exercised off the game board as well as on it.
* Tactics II (Avalon Hill, 1958) – the wargame that launched Avalon Hill.
* &quot;Risk&quot; (Parker Brothers, 1959) – Widely accepted as the first mainstream wargame.
* Gettysburg (Avalon Hill, 1958) – the first modern era wargame intended to model an actual historical event.
* Tactical Game 3 (&quot;Strategy &amp; Tactics&quot; Magazine game, 1969); re-released as &quot;PanzerBlitz&quot; by Avalon Hill in 1970. The very first tactical wargame. The game pioneered the use of &quot;geomorphic mapboards&quot; and PanzerBlitz was a game &quot;system&quot; rather than just a game in that forces could be used to depict any number of actual tactical situations rather than one specific scenario. Pioneered several ground-breaking features, such as use of various types of weapons fire to reflect battlefield conditions. Also created new level of realism in reflecting tactical armored vehicles.
* Quebec 1759 (Columbia Games, 1972) – The first wargame to use wooden blocks with labels to provide a fog of war and four possible steps of strength.
* Sniper! (SPI, 1973) – along with &quot;Patrol&quot;, the first Man to Man wargames where game pieces depicted a single soldier. An adaptation of &quot;Sniper!&quot; also became one of the first multi-player computer wargames.
* Wooden Ships and Iron Men (Battleline Publications, 1974 Avalon Hill, 1976) – the definitive game of Age of Sail warfare for many years.
* Rise and Decline of the Third Reich (Avalon Hill, 1974) – The first serious attempt to model World War II in Europe in its entirety, including (in a limited way) the economic and industrial production of the nations involved. It has seen numerous versions and editions, and is currently available as &quot;John Prados&#x27; Third Reich&quot; from Avalanche Press, and as a far more complex descendant game, &quot;A World At War&quot;, published by GMT Games.
* La Bataille de la Moskowa (Martial Enterprises, 1974) Later republished by Games Designers Workshop and Clash of Arms. With 4 maps and 1000+ counters, it is credited with being the first &quot;monster&quot; wargame (by famed designer Richard Berg.)
* SPQR (GMT Games, 1992)
* Squad Leader (Avalon Hill, 1977) and &quot;Advanced Squad Leader&quot; (1985) have become the most prolific series of wargames, including 3 add-on modules for the former, and 12 for the latter, with additional Historical modules and Deluxe modules also having been released. &quot;ASL&quot; also sets the record for sheer volume of playing components, with thousands of official counters and 60+ &quot;geomorphic mapboards&quot; not counting Deluxe and Historical maps.
* Star Fleet Battles – (Task Force Games, 1978) one of the older still actively played and published wargames today; based on &quot;Star Trek&quot;, it is arguably the most successful tactical space combat system that does not rely on miniatures (published by Amarillo Design Bureau).
* Storm Over Arnhem (Avalon Hill, 1981) – pioneered the use of &quot;point to point&quot; or &quot;area movement&quot; in tactical wargames.
* Axis and Allies – (Nova Games, 1981) the most successful of Milton Bradley&#x27;s (1984) &#x27;GameMaster&#x27; line in an attempt to bring wargaming into the mainstream by appealing to non-wargamers through simplicity and attractive components.
* Ambush! – (Victory Games, 1983) the first solitaire board wargame depicting man to man combat, in which each game piece represented a single person.
* Blue Max – (GDW, 1983) is a multi-player game of World War I aerial combat over the Western Front during 1917 and 1918 with an extremely easy to play mechanism but allow the development of complex strategies.
* We the People – (Avalon Hill, 1994) this game started the Card-Driven wargame movement, which is very influential in current wargame design.

===Miniature===
* Rules for the Jane Naval War Game (S. Low, Marston, 1898) – The first published miniature wargame. A 26-page rule set limited to naval miniature battles. It came in a crate measuring 4 ft. X 4 ft. X 2 ft. Written by Fred Jane. As only a handful of these games survive, they are highly collectible.
* Little Wars (H.G. Wells, 1913) – The first popular published wargame rules. Includes the common miniature wargaming mechanics of dice rolling, range, line of sight, and moving in alternate turns. This game earned Wells the title &quot;The Father of Miniature Wargaming&quot;.
* Miniature Wargames du temps de Napoleon (John C. Candler, 1964) – First period-specific historical miniature wargame. Also the first in a long line of Napoleonic miniature wargames.
* Chainmail (Guidon Games, 1971) – An extension and distillation of rules previously published in various periodicals. While mostly about historical medieval combat, it had an addendum that covered fantasy elements. Major elements of this game were adopted by the role-playing game &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;. Unlike &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;, &quot;Chainmail&quot; used two six-sided dice to resolve combat. Previous fantasy miniature wargames had been written, but this was the first one published. Drawing on the popularity of &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;, this game featured the novelties of combat magic and fantastic creatures as combatants.
* Warhammer Fantasy Battle (Games Workshop, 1983) – An internationally successful fantasy miniature wargame. The First Edition rules introduced innovative open unit design rules, however later editions eliminated the option to build custom units and make use of standard army lists mandatory. Warhammer was one of the first newly developed miniature wargames to enjoy popularity after role-playing games came to market in 1974. In fact, it is because of Roleplaying games becoming so popular, and people having too many models that were rarely used, that this was first published.
* Warhammer 40,000 (Games Workshop, 1987) – A futuristic wargame featuring rival armies with different fighting styles. This wargame has very conceptual artwork suggesting a post-apocalyptic neo-gothic universe with heavy dystopic themes. Unarguably the most profitable miniature wargame ever , it has popularized competitive tournament gameplay in large, international events sanctioned by Games Workshop.
* De Bellis Antiquitatis (Wargames Research Group, 1990) – Radically minimalist rules differentiate this game from other notable miniature wargames. A number of systems have been strongly influenced by DBA.
* Mage Knight (WizKids Inc., 2001) – Innovative game popularizing the combat dial, pre-painted plastic miniatures, and the collectible miniatures games. &quot;Mage Knight&quot; has inspired numerous collectible, skirmish miniature wargames.
* Warmachine (Privateer Press, 2003) – A steampunk-inspired miniatures game featuring steam-powered robots fighting under the direction of powerful wizards. Also has a sister game, Hordes, which features large monstrous creatures in the place of robots.
* Heroscape (Milton Bradley Company, 2004) – An inexpensive, simple wargame that has been successfully mass marketed to both younger wargamers and adults. As miniature wargaming is often an expensive hobby, &quot;Heroscape&quot; and the collectible miniatures games have opened the miniature wargaming hobby to a new demographic.
* Infinity (Corvus Belli, 2005) is a tabletop wargame in which sci-fi themed with 28mm scale metal miniatures are used to simulate futuristic skirmishes.
* BrikWars is a wargame that uses Lego bricks as miniatures and scenery and gained popularity mostly due to the looseness of the rules.
* Flames of War (Battlefront Miniatures, 2002) – Popular World War II wargame at 15mm (1:100) scale, currently focusing on the European and Mediterean theatres. Splits into three time periods (Early War 1939–41, Mid War 1942–43 and Late War 1944–45) to bring some balance and historical matchups.
* Malifaux

See also List of miniature wargames.

===Computer===
* Wars – (Nintendo and Intelligent Systems, with Kuju Entertainment) – a series of turn-based wargames released for the Nintendo Entertainment System, SNES, Game Boy, Game Boy Advance, GameCube, Wii, DS and Switch, respectively, featuring a cartoony aesthetic and grid based gameplay. Intelligent Systems would subsequently adapt the traditional wargaming formula into the popular &quot;Fire Emblem&quot; series of tactical role-playing video games.
* Panzer General – (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1994) – probably the most widely popular computer game that is recognizably a traditional wargame. It spawned several sequels, some of which explored different subject matter.
* Steel Panthers – (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1995) – an early tactical wargame on the same scale as &quot;Squad Leader&quot;, which led to two sequels, and a complete revision of the title for free release.
* Close Combat – (Microsoft, 1996) – not the first wargame to break out from hexes, and still presented in a 2-dimensional format, Close Combat nonetheless uniquely addressed factors such as individual morale and reluctance to carry out orders. The original title led to 5 very successful sequels for the general public, as well as being developed into a training tool for military use only. Close Combat stemmed from an early attempt to translate the &quot;Squad Leader&quot; boardgame to the computer.
* Combat Mission – (Big Time Software, 2000) – not the first 3D tactical wargame (titles such as &quot;Muzzle Velocity&quot; preceded it), but a groundbreaking game series featuring simultaneous order resolution, complete orders of battle for numerous nationalities, with three titles based on the original game engine. As of 2006, a campaign layer is in testing as well as a revised game engine to be released before 2007. CM&#x27;s genesis was also as a failed attempt by Avalon Hill to translate &quot;Squad Leader&quot; to the computer.
* TacOps – (Major I. L. Holdridge, 2003 for v4) – commercial version of “TacOpsCav 4”, an officially issued standard training device of the US Army. It is a simulation of contemporary and near-future tactical, ground, combat between the modern armed forces of the world.
* – (Eugen Systems, 2014) – a 3D regiment or brigade scale simulation set as a &quot;Cold War Gone Hot&quot; themed game in both multiplayer and singleplayer environments. Players construct customized armies through use of a deck system comprising land vehicles, infantry, and helicopters from several NATO and Warsaw Pact nations and manage logistics such as fuel and ammunition while on the battlefield. There is no cohesive campaign, the game instead taking place in several hypothetical conflicts.
* Total War – a wargame set in different time periods, with a turn based map, and a real time battle component, featured on the television series &quot;Time Commanders&quot;
* Hearts of Iron – (Paradox Interactive, 2002) − a grand strategy wargame series that is focused on World War 2. Player may act as any reasonably sized nation at the time, influencing international politics, economic and military development, and can control battlefields on both strategic and operational levels using combined arms. Frequently used to entertain and simulate alternative history scenarios as well as recreate historical events.
* &quot;Hegemony&quot; – (Longbow Games) – a historical real-time strategy series with real-time tactical combat and supply simulation. Campaigning takes place on a single continuous map where players can zoom between the 3D tactical map and the 2D strategy map at any time.
* – (Warfare Sims, 2019) a piece of professional multiplayer wargaming software that is also sold on the commercial market as a single player product. Its primary focus is on allowing the simulation of operational or tactical level real world combat scenarios with real time input. The commercial version comes bundled with some scenarios (in addition to those sold as DLC), however the software&#x27;s primary focus is the ability to create share one&#x27;s own scenarios. The creation of a strategic level wargame is possible in the commercial version, however no such scenario has been bundled with the software. Its level of fidelity is represented down to the individual vehicle/infantry squad and it utilizes a regularly updated database of weapons, vehicles, satellites, and equipment used by nearly every nation on the planet from the end of World War 2 to the near future (including some hypothetical entries). Gameplay is a top down 2D map of the Earth, however you can stream your gameplay to &quot;Tacview&quot; for a 3D view.

===Unique game systems===
* Ace of Aces – (Nova Games, 1980) – this flip-book system is a simulation of aerial dogfighting.
* BattleTech – (FASA, 1984) – initially conceived as a board game, it has created a brand that now includes various different boardgames (tactical as well as strategic), miniature game rules, a role-playing game, computer games, flip-book games (by Nova Games) as well as novels and a TV series.
* Car Wars – (Steve Jackson Games, 1982) – initially printed as a board game, it quickly evolved to incorporate elements of miniatures games.
* Up Front – (Avalon Hill, 1983) – A popular card wargame.

==See also==

* Air wargaming
* Naval wargaming
* Miniature wargaming
* Tactical wargame
* Business war games
* International Wargames Federation
* List of wargame publishers

==Footnotes==

==Bibliography==
*
* (translation by Bill Leeson, 1989)
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

==Further reading==

===Books===
* Stuart Asquith &quot;Wargaming World War Two&quot;, Special Interest Model Books; New edition (31 December 1998) 
* Stuart Asquith &quot;Military Modelling Guide to War Gaming &quot;, Special Interest Model Books 1987
* Stuart Asquith &quot;Military Modelling Guide to Siege War Gaming &quot;, Special Interest Model Books 1990
* Stuart Asquith &quot;Military Modelling Guide to Solo War Gaming &quot;, Special Interest Model Books 1989
* Phil Barker &quot;Know The Game: War Gaming&quot;, EP Publishing 1978.
* Phil Barker &quot;Airfix magazine Guides: Ancient Wargaming&quot;, P.Stephens Ltd 1975.
* Jim Dunnigan, &quot;The Complete Wargames Handbook: How to Play, Design, and Find Them&quot;, Quill 1992. This is available online at hyw.com (verified December 2011).
* Jon Freeman, &quot;The Complete Book of Wargames&quot;, Simon and Schuster 1980. 
* Nicholas Palmer, &quot;The Comprehensive Guide to Board Wargaming&quot;, Arthur Baker Limited London 1977. 
* Nicholas Palmer, &quot;The Best of Board Wargaming&quot;, Hippocrene Books, Inc. New York, NY 1980. 
* Donald Featherstone &quot;Featherstone&#x27;s Complete Wargaming&quot;, David &amp; Charles UK 1989. 
* Donald Featherstone &quot;War Games&quot;, Lulu 2008, 
* Donald Featherstone &quot;Advanced War Games&quot;, Sportshelf &amp; Soccer Assoc 1969. 
* Donald Featherstone &quot;Tank Battles in Miniature: Wargamers&#x27; Guide to the Western Desert Campaign, 1940–42&quot;, P.Stephens Ltd 1973
* Donald Featherstone &quot;War Game Campaigns&quot;, S. Paul 1970
* Donald Featherstone &quot;War Games Through the Ages Vol. 2 1420–1783 &quot;, S. Paul 1974
* Donald Featherstone &quot;War Games Through the Ages Vol. 3 1792–1859&quot;, S. Paul 1975
* Dorca Bis Alejo, &quot;El Hobby de los soldados en miniatura, el wargame, el rol, el modelismo y el coleccionismo.&quot; primera edición: 23 de agosto de 2008, , 212 p.
* Dorca Alejo, &quot;My Toy Soldiers &amp; Me&quot; Second edition.
* Charles Grant &quot;Battle! Practical Wargaming&quot;, Model and Allied Publishing (MAP) 1970. 
* Paddy Griffith &quot;Napoleonic Wargaming For Fun&quot;, Ward Lock Ltd, London, 1980, reprinted 2008 by the History of Wargaming Project link
* Paddy Griffith &quot;Sprawling Wargames multiplayer Wargaming&quot;, Ward Lock Ltd, London, 1980, reprinted 2009 by the History of Wargaming Project link
* Peter Perla &quot;The Art of Wargaming&quot;, Naval Institute Press 1990. 
* Mark Herman, Mark Frost, Robert Kurz &quot;Wargaming for Leaders&quot;, McGraw-Hill 2009. 
* Bruce Quarrie &quot;Airfix magazine Guides: Napoleonic Wargaming&quot;, P.Stephens Ltd 1974.
* Bruce Quarrie &quot;Airfix magazine Guides: World War 2 Wargaming&quot;, P.Stephens Ltd 1976
* Philip Sabin: Simulating War. Studying Conflict Simulation through Games, London 2012.
* C.F. Wesencraft &quot;Practical wargaming&quot;, Hippocrene Books, 1974 reprinted by the History of Wargaming Project link
* C.F. Wesencraft &quot;With Pike and Musket&quot;, reprinted by the History of Wargaming Project link
* Andrew Wilson &quot;War Gaming&quot;, Penguin 1970.
* Terence Wise &quot;Airfix magazine Guides: American Civil War Wargaming&quot;, P.Stephens Ltd 1977.
* Terence Wise &quot;Introduction to Battle Gaming&quot;, Model and Allied Publishing (MAP) 1972. 
* Terence Wise &quot;Terry Wise&#x27;s Introduction to Battlegaming including his unpublished wargaming rules&quot; Printed by the History of Wargaming Project link

===Articles===
* Erik Lin-Greenberg, Reid B.C. Pauly, and Jacquelyn G. Schneider. 2021. “.” &quot;European Journal of International Relations&quot;.
* Sport: Little Wars, Time Magazine, December 14, 1942.
* War games, by Dr. Brett Holman, PhD in History, 5 August 2007.
* Dice against the Nazis: Propaganda aimed to reduce fear, By Clive Gilbert and Kevin Allen, BBC News Magazine, 24 August 2007.
* &quot;Return of the hex-crazed wargamers; Is the Net breathing new life into an endangered hobby--or just postponing the inevitable?,&quot; by Andrew Leonard, Salon Magazine, May 29, 1998.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1501543" start="2" end="9" title="Wargame" label="wargame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150710" start="15" end="28" title="strategy game" label="strategy game"/>
<link wikidata="Q85796290" start="154" end="164" title="recreational wargames" label="recreation"/>
<link wikidata="Q219087" start="207" end="225" title="military strategy" label="strategic thinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q831663" start="365" end="373" title="military campaign" label="campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982037" start="479" end="484" title="Naval wargaming" label="naval"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698396" start="486" end="496" title="Air wargaming" label="air combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969355" start="502" end="507" title="wargame (hacking)" label="cyber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714297" start="795" end="818" title="field training exercise" label="field training exercise"/>
<link wikidata="Q192832" start="959" end="968" title="paintball" label="paintball"/>
<link wikidata="Q217108" start="973" end="980" title="airsoft" label="airsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128792" start="1005" end="1018" title="combat sports" label="combat sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q26262741" start="1044" end="1056" title="War Olympics" label="War Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="1192" end="1199" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="1382" end="1401" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122069" start="1656" end="1676" title="professional wargame" label="professional wargame"/>
<link wikidata="Q85796290" start="1763" end="1783" title="recreational wargame" label="recreational wargame"/>
<link wikidata="Q192781" start="2122" end="2141" title="Military history" label="military historians"/>
<link wikidata="Q575662" start="5459" end="5479" title="US Naval War College" label="US Naval War College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714297" start="5637" end="5652" title="field training exercise" label="field exercises"/>
<link wikidata="Q22087180" start="6385" end="6408" title="Warhammer Age of Sigmar" label="Warhammer Age of Sigmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7674123" start="7849" end="7863" title="Tactical wargame" label="tactical level"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426935" start="8189" end="8202" title="Flames of War" label="Flames of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426935" start="8807" end="8820" title="Flames of War" label="Flames of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q532716" start="8858" end="8875" title="miniature wargame" label="miniature wargame"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639280" start="9072" end="9087" title="Sigma war games" label="Sigma war games"/>
<link wikidata="Q15712701" start="9206" end="9223" title="Hearts of Iron IV" label="Hearts of Iron IV"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9416" end="9433" title="Star Wars: X-Wing Miniatures Game" label="Star Wars: X-Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q928197" start="10680" end="10704" title="Warhammer (game)" label="Warhammer Fantasy Battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392263" start="11181" end="11195" title="rules of chess" label="rules of chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q179416" start="11227" end="11238" title="rules of Go" label="rules of Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q208440" start="11495" end="11506" title="chess piece" label="chess piece"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11755" end="11761" title="Go equipment#Stones" label="Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137069" start="12095" end="12102" title="Counter (board wargames)" label="counter"/>
<link wikidata="Q532716" start="14516" end="14533" title="miniature wargame" label="miniature wargame"/>
<link wikidata="Q60791484" start="15003" end="15014" title="Bolt Action (wargame)" label="Bolt Action"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16297" end="16327" title="Warhammer 40,000: Rogue Trader" label="Warhammer 40,000: Rogue Trader"/>
<link wikidata="Q532716" start="16549" end="16568" title="Miniature wargaming" label="Miniature wargaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931403" start="17482" end="17495" title="board wargame" label="board wargame"/>
<link wikidata="Q532716" start="17695" end="17714" title="miniature wargaming" label="miniature wargaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927217" start="17732" end="17747" title="Block wargame" label="block wargaming"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17753" end="17763" title="Fog of war#Simulations and games" label="Fog of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q311726" start="18022" end="18033" title="Quebec 1759" label="Quebec 1759"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112473" start="18043" end="18057" title="Columbia Games" label="Columbia Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q640673" start="18413" end="18416" title="War (card game)" label="War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068015" start="18458" end="18469" title="Nuclear War (card game)" label="Nuclear War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3746906" start="18590" end="18604" title="Flying Buffalo" label="Flying Buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873163" start="18788" end="18811" title="Battleline Publications" label="Battleline Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q25348523" start="18869" end="18878" title="Naval War" label="Naval War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4006223" start="19376" end="19384" title="Up Front (game)" label="Up Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157386" start="21366" end="21390" title="computer-assisted gaming" label="computer-assisted gaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297822" start="23433" end="23442" title="copyright" label="copyright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276959" start="23653" end="23659" title="VASSAL Engine" label="Vassal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23676" end="23682" title="ZunTzu" label="ZunTzu"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="23893" end="23897" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q193321" start="23958" end="23961" title="JVM" label="JVM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="23989" end="24006" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q96396730" start="24552" end="24571" title="Nuclear Destruction" label="Nuclear Destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3746906" start="24586" end="24600" title="Flying Buffalo" label="Flying Buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206771" start="24633" end="24646" title="Origins Award" label="Origins Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841183" start="24673" end="24698" title="Middle-Earth Play-By-Mail" label="Middle-Earth Play-By-Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q65066525" start="24836" end="24848" title="Hyborian War" label="Hyborian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="24993" end="25001" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q472055" start="25191" end="25210" title="turn-based strategy" label="turn-based strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="25676" end="25683" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213987" start="25695" end="25726" title="Johann Christian Ludwig Hellwig" label="Johann Christian Ludwig Hellwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="29561" end="29568" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3760388" start="29589" end="29631" title="Georg Heinrich Rudolf Johann von Reisswitz" label="Georg Heinrich Rudolf Johann von Reisswitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="30937" end="30952" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q668136" start="31560" end="31568" title="hitpoint" label="hitpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="33690" end="33709" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="34445" end="34462" title="Oxford University" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="34839" end="34850" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069465" start="34949" end="34960" title="Little Wars" label="Little Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q532716" start="35027" end="35046" title="miniature wargaming" label="miniature wargaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q6115068" start="36518" end="36529" title="Jack Scruby" label="Jack Scruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q532716" start="36576" end="36593" title="miniature wargame" label="miniature wargame"/>
<link wikidata="Q794304" start="36602" end="36612" title="type metal" label="type metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q532716" start="36654" end="36673" title="miniature wargaming" label="miniature wargaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294344" start="37278" end="37297" title="Donald Featherstone (wargamer)" label="Donald Featherstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821854" start="38154" end="38163" title="Tony Bath" label="Tony Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059132" start="38318" end="38327" title="Chainmail (game)" label="Chainmail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375" start="38404" end="38426" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q587270" start="38454" end="38468" title="Games Workshop" label="Games Workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q928197" start="38566" end="38583" title="Warhammer (game)" label="Warhammer Fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q587270" start="38867" end="38881" title="Games Workshop" label="Games Workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2387023" start="38971" end="38990" title="Tactics (game)" label="&amp;quot;Tactics&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q790101" start="39435" end="39459" title="Avalon Hill" label="Avalon Hill Game Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5554735" start="39547" end="39569" title="Gettysburg (game)" label="&amp;quot;Gettysburg&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q33132" start="39662" end="39682" title="Battle of Gettysburg" label="Battle of Gettysburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3760388" start="40255" end="40274" title="Georg von Reisswitz" label="Georg von Reisswitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="40332" end="40342" title="H. G. Wells" label="H.G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069465" start="40393" end="40404" title="Little Wars" label="Little Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q218698" start="40448" end="40464" title="Jerome K. Jerome" label="Jerome K. Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q955910" start="40475" end="40494" title="Three Men in a Boat" label="Three Men in a Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6115068" start="40510" end="40521" title="Jack Scruby" label="Jack Scruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294344" start="40815" end="40831" title="Donald Featherstone (wargamer)" label="Don Featherstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065987" start="40912" end="40930" title="Charles S. Roberts" label="Charles S. Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q790101" start="41088" end="41099" title="Avalon Hill" label="Avalon Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181680" start="41104" end="41115" title="Phil Barker" label="Phil Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969359" start="41133" end="41156" title="Wargames Research Group" label="Wargames Research Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324118" start="41263" end="41275" title="Richard Berg (designer)" label="Richard Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703658" start="41296" end="41316" title="Terrible Swift Sword (game)" label="Terrible Swift Sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581090" start="41338" end="41341" title="Simulations Publications" label="SPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755947" start="41345" end="41355" title="Larry Bond" label="Larry Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q16267365" start="41376" end="41383" title="Harpoon (computer game)" label="Harpoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935801" start="41417" end="41431" title="Frank Chadwick" label="Frank Chadwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6680437" start="41486" end="41499" title="Loren Wiseman" label="Loren Wiseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3845378" start="41501" end="41512" title="Marc W. Miller" label="Marc Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323175" start="41518" end="41529" title="Rich Banner" label="Rich Banner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590991" start="41640" end="41652" title="Jim Dunnigan" label="Jim Dunnigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581090" start="41719" end="41722" title="Simulations Publications" label="SPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7674123" start="41847" end="41864" title="tactical wargames" label="tactical wargames"/>
<link wikidata="Q5078368" start="41868" end="41881" title="Charles Grant (game designer)" label="Charles Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379" start="41921" end="41934" title="E. Gary Gygax" label="E. Gary Gygax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381" start="42018" end="42030" title="Dave Arneson" label="Dave Arneson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375" start="42050" end="42072" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219898" start="42082" end="42094" title="Larry Harris (game designer)" label="Larry Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q792553" start="42115" end="42130" title="Axis and Allies" label="Axis and Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978156" start="42223" end="42236" title="Bruce Quarrie" label="Bruce Quarrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181753" start="42328" end="42337" title="John Hill (game designer)" label="John Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581894" start="42358" end="42370" title="Squad Leader" label="Squad Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q20709331" start="42384" end="42394" title="Johnny Reb (game)" label="Johnny Reb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306105" start="42437" end="42453" title="Redmond Simonsen" label="Redmond Simonsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581090" start="42470" end="42473" title="Simulations Publications" label="SPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q309589" start="42573" end="42586" title="Peter Cushing" label="Peter Cushing"/>
<link wikidata="Q954975" start="42597" end="42611" title="Curt Schilling" label="Curt Schilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607989" start="42699" end="42717" title="List of board wargames" label="comprehensive list"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871" start="42811" end="42820" title="Diplomacy (game)" label="Diplomacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q116507336" start="42972" end="42982" title="Tactics II" label="Tactics II"/>
<link wikidata="Q12541" start="43046" end="43062" title="Risk (game)" label="&amp;quot;Risk&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5554735" start="43140" end="43150" title="Gettysburg (game)" label="Gettysburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621882" start="43273" end="43295" title="Strategy &amp;amp; Tactics" label="Strategy &amp;amp; Tactics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132007" start="43345" end="43356" title="PanzerBlitz" label="PanzerBlitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7674123" start="43402" end="43418" title="tactical wargames" label="tactical wargame"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535537" start="43456" end="43475" title="geomorphic mapboard" label="geomorphic mapboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112473" start="43882" end="43896" title="Columbia Games" label="Columbia Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q7547795" start="44020" end="44027" title="Sniper! (board game)" label="Sniper!"/>
<link wikidata="Q106936076" start="44059" end="44065" title="Patrol (board game)" label="Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746124" start="44083" end="44102" title="Man to Man wargames" label="Man to Man wargames"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569827" start="44248" end="44273" title="Wooden Ships and Iron Men" label="Wooden Ships and Iron Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873163" start="44275" end="44298" title="Battleline Publications" label="Battleline Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q790101" start="44305" end="44316" title="Avalon Hill" label="Avalon Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q10363000" start="44387" end="44422" title="Rise and Decline of the Third Reich" label="Rise and Decline of the Third Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q4827499" start="44734" end="44749" title="Avalanche Press" label="Avalanche Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q928726" start="44835" end="44844" title="GMT Games" label="GMT Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q96386581" start="44848" end="44873" title="La Bataille de la Moskowa" label="La Bataille de la Moskowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054486" start="44923" end="44947" title="Games Designers Workshop" label="Games Designers Workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127810" start="44952" end="44965" title="Clash of Arms" label="Clash of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324118" start="45082" end="45094" title="Richard Berg" label="Richard Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2207604" start="45099" end="45103" title="SPQR (board game)" label="SPQR"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581894" start="45124" end="45136" title="Squad Leader" label="Squad Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q379731" start="45167" end="45188" title="Advanced Squad Leader" label="Advanced Squad Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535537" start="45526" end="45545" title="geomorphic mapboard" label="geomorphic mapboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968296" start="45596" end="45614" title="Star Fleet Battles" label="Star Fleet Battles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687303" start="45618" end="45634" title="Task Force Games" label="Task Force Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092" start="45726" end="45735" title="Star Trek" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740263" start="45854" end="45876" title="Amarillo Design Bureau" label="Amarillo Design Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620156" start="45881" end="45898" title="Storm Over Arnhem" label="Storm Over Arnhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788663" start="45978" end="45991" title="area movement" label="area movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q792553" start="46022" end="46037" title="Axis and Allies" label="Axis and Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4741997" start="46270" end="46277" title="Ambush!" label="Ambush!"/>
<link wikidata="Q7558198" start="46312" end="46335" title="solitaire board wargame" label="solitaire board wargame"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746124" start="46346" end="46356" title="Man to Man wargame" label="man to man"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929417" start="46421" end="46429" title="Blue Max (board game)" label="Blue Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q7977909" start="46632" end="46645" title="We the People (game)" label="We the People"/>
<link wikidata="Q716255" start="47008" end="47017" title="Fred Jane" label="Fred Jane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069465" start="47092" end="47103" title="Little Wars" label="Little Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059132" start="47554" end="47563" title="Chainmail (game)" label="Chainmail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5615664" start="47565" end="47577" title="Guidon Games" label="Guidon Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375" start="47840" end="47862" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="48105" end="48126" title="The Lord of the Rings" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q928197" start="48224" end="48248" title="Warhammer Fantasy Battle" label="Warhammer Fantasy Battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q587270" start="48250" end="48264" title="Games Workshop" label="Games Workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q209026" start="48805" end="48821" title="Warhammer 40,000" label="Warhammer 40,000"/>
<link wikidata="Q180774" start="49025" end="49033" title="Dystopia" label="dystopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179762" start="49212" end="49234" title="De Bellis Antiquitatis" label="De Bellis Antiquitatis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969359" start="49236" end="49259" title="Wargames Research Group" label="Wargames Research Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502489" start="49419" end="49430" title="Mage Knight" label="Mage Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426375" start="49432" end="49444" title="WizKids" label="WizKids Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q5146062" start="49540" end="49567" title="collectible miniatures game" label="collectible miniatures game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300729" start="49660" end="49670" title="Warmachine" label="Warmachine"/>
<link wikidata="Q388931" start="49672" end="49687" title="Privateer Press" label="Privateer Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q223685" start="49699" end="49708" title="steampunk" label="steampunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249549" start="49839" end="49845" title="Hordes (game)" label="Hordes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083528" start="49914" end="49923" title="Heroscape" label="Heroscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150493" start="49925" end="49947" title="Milton Bradley Company" label="Milton Bradley Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146062" start="50149" end="50176" title="collectible miniatures game" label="collectible miniatures game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567364" start="50244" end="50252" title="Infinity (wargame)" label="Infinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968000" start="50398" end="50406" title="Brikwars" label="BrikWars"/>
<link wikidata="Q170484" start="50430" end="50434" title="Lego" label="Lego"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426935" start="50534" end="50547" title="Flames of War" label="Flames of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8579944" start="50831" end="50839" title="Malifaux" label="Malifaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628649" start="50850" end="50876" title="List of miniature wargames" label="List of miniature wargames"/>
<link wikidata="Q1828897" start="50896" end="50900" title="Wars (series)" label="Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="50904" end="50912" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q150001" start="50917" end="50936" title="Intelligent Systems" label="Intelligent Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q613801" start="50943" end="50961" title="Kuju (company)" label="Kuju Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q172742" start="51014" end="51043" title="Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Nintendo Entertainment System"/>
<link wikidata="Q183259" start="51045" end="51049" title="Super Nintendo Entertainment System" label="SNES"/>
<link wikidata="Q186437" start="51051" end="51059" title="Game Boy" label="Game Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188642" start="51061" end="51077" title="Game Boy Advance" label="Game Boy Advance"/>
<link wikidata="Q182172" start="51079" end="51087" title="GameCube" label="GameCube"/>
<link wikidata="Q8079" start="51089" end="51092" title="Wii" label="Wii"/>
<link wikidata="Q170323" start="51094" end="51096" title="Nintendo DS" label="DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q19610114" start="51101" end="51107" title="Nintendo Switch" label="Switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768977" start="51281" end="51292" title="Fire Emblem" label="Fire Emblem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751789" start="51346" end="51360" title="Panzer General" label="Panzer General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268871" start="51364" end="51391" title="Strategic Simulations, Inc." label="Strategic Simulations, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1999444" start="51571" end="51585" title="Steel Panthers" label="Steel Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581894" start="51679" end="51691" title="Squad Leader" label="Squad Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666317" start="51782" end="51794" title="Close Combat series" label="Close Combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="51798" end="51807" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581894" start="52238" end="52250" title="Squad Leader" label="Squad Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q369077" start="52286" end="52300" title="Combat Mission (computer game series)" label="Combat Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873135" start="52304" end="52321" title="Big Time Software" label="Big Time Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q6944496" start="52387" end="52402" title="Muzzle Velocity (computer game)" label="Muzzle Velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581894" start="52789" end="52801" title="Squad Leader" label="Squad Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673659" start="52827" end="52833" title="TacOps" label="TacOps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507506" start="53101" end="53114" title="Eugen Systems" label="Eugen Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q52371" start="53129" end="53137" title="regiment" label="regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q102356" start="53141" end="53148" title="brigade" label="brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="53398" end="53402" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="53407" end="53418" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q380346" start="53600" end="53609" title="Total War (video game series)" label="Total War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119843" start="53750" end="53765" title="Time Commanders" label="Time Commanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q739918" start="53774" end="53788" title="Hearts of Iron" label="Hearts of Iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q217493" start="53792" end="53811" title="Paradox Interactive" label="Paradox Interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q105477418" start="54219" end="54239" title="Hegemony (video game series)" label="&amp;quot;Hegemony&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q63184796" start="54243" end="54256" title="Longbow Games" label="Longbow Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993220" start="54497" end="54509" title="Matrix Games" label="Warfare Sims"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604233" start="55560" end="55571" title="Ace of Aces (picture book game)" label="Ace of Aces"/>
<link wikidata="Q810983" start="55658" end="55668" title="BattleTech" label="BattleTech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386529" start="55672" end="55676" title="FASA Corporation" label="FASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035253" start="55954" end="55962" title="Car Wars" label="Car Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q762392" start="55966" end="55985" title="Steve Jackson Games" label="Steve Jackson Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q4006223" start="56096" end="56104" title="Up Front (game)" label="Up Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698396" start="56170" end="56183" title="Air wargaming" label="Air wargaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982037" start="56186" end="56201" title="Naval wargaming" label="Naval wargaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q532716" start="56204" end="56223" title="Miniature wargaming" label="Miniature wargaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7674123" start="56226" end="56242" title="Tactical wargame" label="Tactical wargame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928732" start="56245" end="56263" title="Business war games" label="Business war games"/>
<link wikidata="Q17087998" start="56266" end="56299" title="International Wargames Federation" label="International Wargames Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149756" start="56302" end="56328" title="List of wargame publishers" label="List of wargame publishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590991" start="57055" end="57067" title="James F. Dunnigan" label="Jim Dunnigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6270735" start="57225" end="57236" title="Jon Freeman (game designer)" label="Jon Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18393393" start="57244" end="57273" title="The Complete Book of Wargames" label="The Complete Book of Wargames"/>
<link wikidata="Q7027655" start="57309" end="57324" title="Nick Palmer" label="Nicholas Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7027655" start="57419" end="57434" title="Nick Palmer" label="Nicholas Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q48800306" start="57442" end="57469" title="The Best of Board Wargaming" label="The Best of Board Wargaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294344" start="57522" end="57541" title="Donald Featherstone (wargamer)" label="Donald Featherstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5078368" start="58409" end="58422" title="Charles Grant (game designer)" label="Charles Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q17118733" start="58615" end="58643" title="History of Wargaming Project" label="History of Wargaming Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q17118733" start="58771" end="58799" title="History of Wargaming Project" label="History of Wargaming Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q131860537" start="58884" end="58895" title="Mark Herman (game designer)" label="Mark Herman"/>
<link wikidata="Q778585" start="58897" end="58907" title="Mark Frost" label="Mark Frost"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33108" wikidata="Q21023" url="?curid=33108" title="Canellales">
<text>Canellales is the botanical name for an order of flowering plants, one of the four orders of the magnoliids. It is recognized by the most recent classification of flowering plants, the APG IV system. It is defined to contain two families: Canellaceae and Winteraceae, which comprise 136 species of fragrant trees and shrubs. The Canellaceae are found in tropical America and Africa, and the Winteraceae are part of the Antarctic flora (found in diverse parts of the southern hemisphere). Although the order was defined based on phylogenetic studies, a number of possible synapomorphies have been suggested, relating to the pollen tube, the seeds, the thickness of the integument, and other aspects of the morphology.

Until 1999, these two families were not considered to be closely related. Instead the Winteraceae were considered to be a primitive family (due to the structure of the xylem and carpel, a structure which now seems to be derived from xylem and carpels more typical of the angiosperms as a whole). The Canellaceae was often considered to be related to the Myristicaceae. However, studies starting in 1999, based on molecular phylogeny or morphology, have supported uniting these two families.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21023" start="0" end="10" title="Canellales" label="Canellales"/>
<link wikidata="Q281801" start="18" end="32" title="botanical name" label="botanical name"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="49" end="64" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q846071" start="97" end="107" title="magnoliids" label="magnoliids"/>
<link wikidata="Q24895148" start="185" end="198" title="APG IV system" label="APG IV system"/>
<link wikidata="Q131304" start="239" end="250" title="Canellaceae" label="Canellaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131109" start="255" end="266" title="Winteraceae" label="Winteraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="307" end="311" title="tree" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q42295" start="317" end="322" title="shrub" label="shrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073868" start="419" end="434" title="Antarctic flora" label="Antarctic flora"/>
<link wikidata="Q962872" start="571" end="585" title="synapomorphies" label="synapomorphies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214385" start="668" end="678" title="integument" label="integument"/>
<link wikidata="Q655362" start="705" end="715" title="plant morphology" label="morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q131109" start="804" end="815" title="Winteraceae" label="Winteraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q122811" start="886" end="891" title="xylem" label="xylem"/>
<link wikidata="Q588964" start="896" end="902" title="carpel" label="carpel"/>
<link wikidata="Q131304" start="1018" end="1029" title="Canellaceae" label="Canellaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q161214" start="1072" end="1085" title="Myristicaceae" label="Myristicaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="1131" end="1150" title="molecular phylogeny" label="molecular phylogeny"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33109" wikidata="Q1334829" url="?curid=33109" title="Wearable computer">
<text>A wearable computer, also known as a body-borne computer, is a computing device worn on the body. The definition of &#x27;wearable computer&#x27; may be narrow or broad, extending to smartphones or even ordinary wristwatches.

Wearables may be for general use, in which case they are just a particularly small example of mobile computing. Alternatively, they may be for specialized purposes such as fitness trackers. They may incorporate special sensors such as accelerometers, heart rate monitors, or on the more advanced side, electrocardiogram (ECG) and blood oxygen saturation (SpO2) monitors. Under the definition of wearable computers, we also include novel user interfaces such as Google Glass, an optical head-mounted display controlled by gestures. It may be that specialized wearables will evolve into general all-in-one devices, as happened with the convergence of PDAs and mobile phones into smartphones.

Wearables are typically worn on the wrist (e.g. fitness trackers), hung from the neck (like a necklace), strapped to the arm or leg (smartphones when exercising), or on the head (as glasses or a helmet), though some have been located elsewhere (e.g. on a finger or in a shoe). Devices carried in a pocket or bag – such as smartphones and before them, pocket calculators and PDAs, may or may not be regarded as &#x27;worn&#x27;.

Wearable computers have various technical issues common to other mobile computing, such as batteries, heat dissipation, software architectures, wireless and personal area networks, and data management. Many wearable computers are active all the time, e.g. processing or recording data continuously.

==Applications==

Wearable computers are not only limited to computers such as fitness trackers that are worn on wrists; they also include wearables such as heart pacemakers and other prosthetics. They are used most often in research that focuses on behavioral modeling, health monitoring systems, IT and media development, where the person wearing the computer actually moves or is otherwise engaged with his or her surroundings. Wearable computers have been used for the following:

* general-purpose computing (e.g. smartphones and smartwatches)
* sensory integration, e.g. to help people see better or understand the world better (whether in task-specific applications like camera-based welding helmets or for everyday use like Google Glass)
* behavioral modeling
* health care monitoring systems
* service management
* electronic textiles and fashion design, e.g. Microsoft&#x27;s 2011 prototype &quot;The Printing Dress&quot;.

Wearable computing is the subject of active research, especially the form-factor and location on the body, with areas of study including user interface design, augmented reality, and pattern recognition. The use of wearables for specific applications, for compensating disabilities or supporting elderly people steadily increases.

==Operating systems==
The dominant operating systems for wearable computing are:

* FreeRTOS is a real-time operating system kernel for embedded devices; most of the Smartbands that are currently available in the market are based on FreeRTOS, which include Huawei, Honor, Lenovo, realme, TCL and Xiaomi smartbands.
* LiteOS is a lightweight open source real-time operating system which is part of Huawei&#x27;s &quot;1+2+1&quot; Internet of Things solution.
* Tizen OS from Samsung (there was an announcement in May 2021 that Wear OS and Tizen OS will merge and will be called simply Wear.)
* watchOS watchOS is a proprietary mobile operating system developed by Apple Inc. to run on the Apple Watch.
* Wear OS Wear OS (previously known as Android Wear) is a smartwatch operating system developed by Google Inc.

==History==

Due to the varied definitions of &quot;wearable&quot; and &quot;computer&quot;, the first wearable computer could be as early as the first abacus on a necklace, a 16th-century abacus ring, a wristwatch and &#x27;finger-watch&#x27; owned by Queen Elizabeth I of England, or the covert timing devices hidden in shoes to cheat at roulette by Thorp and Shannon in the 1960s and 1970s.

However, a general-purpose computer is not merely a time-keeping or calculating device, but rather a user-programmable item for arbitrary complex algorithms, interfacing, and data management. By this definition, the wearable computer was invented by Steve Mann, in the late 1970s:

The development of wearable items has taken several steps of miniaturization from discrete electronics over hybrid designs to fully integrated designs, where just one processor chip, a battery, and some interface conditioning items make the whole unit.

===1500s===
Queen Elizabeth I of England received a watch from Robert Dudley in 1571, as a New Year present; it may have been worn on the forearm rather than the wrist. She also possessed a &#x27;finger-watch&#x27; set in a ring, with an alarm that prodded her finger.

===1600s===
The Qing dynasty saw the introduction of a fully functional abacus on a ring, which could be used while it was being worn.

===1960s===
In 1961, mathematicians Edward O. Thorp and Claude Shannon built some computerized timing devices to help them win a game of roulette. One such timer was concealed in a shoe and another in a pack of cigarettes. Various versions of this apparatus were built in the 1960s and 1970s.

Thorp refers to himself as the inventor of the first &quot;wearable computer&quot;. In other variations, the system was a concealed cigarette-pack-sized analog computer designed to predict the motion of roulette wheels. A data-taker would use microswitches hidden in his shoes to indicate the speed of the roulette wheel, and the computer would indicate an octant of the roulette wheel to bet on by sending musical tones via radio to a miniature speaker hidden in a collaborator&#x27;s ear canal. The system was successfully tested in Las Vegas in June 1961, but hardware issues with the speaker wires prevented it from being used beyond test runs. This was not a wearable computer because it could not be re-purposed during use; rather it was an example of task-specific hardware. This work was kept secret until it was first mentioned in Thorp&#x27;s book &quot;Beat the Dealer&quot; (revised ed.) in 1966 and later published in detail in 1969.

===1970s===
Pocket calculators became mass-market devices in 1970, starting in Japan. Programmable calculators followed in the late 1970s, being somewhat more general-purpose computers. The HP-01 algebraic calculator watch by Hewlett-Packard was released in 1977.

A camera-to-tactile vest for the blind, launched by C.C. Collins in 1977, converted images into a 1024-point, ten-inch square tactile grid on a vest.

===1980s===
The 1980s saw the rise of more general-purpose wearable computers. In 1981, Steve Mann designed and built a backpack-mounted 6502-based wearable multimedia computer with text, graphics, and multimedia capability, as well as video capability (cameras and other photographic systems). Mann went on to be an early and active researcher in the wearables field, especially known for his 1994 creation of the Wearable Wireless Webcam, the first example of lifelogging.

Seiko Epson released the RC-20 Wrist Computer in 1984. It was an early smartwatch, powered by a computer on a chip.

In 1989, Reflection Technology marketed the Private Eye head-mounted display, which scans a vertical array of LEDs across the visual field using a vibrating mirror. This display gave rise to several hobbyist and research wearables, including Gerald &quot;Chip&quot; Maguire&#x27;s IBM/Columbia University Student Electronic Notebook, Doug Platt&#x27;s Hip-PC, and Carnegie Mellon University&#x27;s VuMan 1 in 1991.

The Student Electronic Notebook consisted of the Private Eye, Toshiba diskless AIX notebook computers (prototypes), a stylus based input system and a virtual keyboard. It used direct-sequence spread spectrum radio links to provide all the usual TCP/IP based services, including NFS mounted file systems and X11, which all ran in the Andrew Project environment.

The Hip-PC included an Agenda palmtop used as a chording keyboard attached to the belt and a 1.44 megabyte floppy drive. Later versions incorporated additional equipment from Park Engineering. The system debuted at &quot;The Lap and Palmtop Expo&quot; on 16 April 1991.

VuMan 1 was developed as part of a Summer-term course at Carnegie Mellon&#x27;s Engineering Design Research Center, and was intended for viewing house blueprints. Input was through a three-button unit worn on the belt, and output was through Reflection Tech&#x27;s Private Eye. The CPU was an 8 MHz 80188 processor with 0.5 MB ROM.

===1990s===
In the 1990s PDAs became widely used, and in 1999 were combined with mobile phones in Japan to produce the first mass-market smartphone.
In 1993, the Private Eye was used in Thad Starner&#x27;s wearable, based on Doug Platt&#x27;s system and built from a kit from Park Enterprises, a Private Eye display on loan from Devon Sean McCullough, and the Twiddler chording keyboard made by Handykey. Many iterations later this system became the MIT &quot;Tin Lizzy&quot; wearable computer design, and Starner went on to become one of the founders of MIT&#x27;s wearable computing project. 1993 also saw Columbia University&#x27;s augmented-reality system known as KARMA (Knowledge-based Augmented Reality for Maintenance Assistance). Users would wear a Private Eye display over one eye, giving an overlay effect when the real world was viewed with both eyes open. KARMA would overlay wireframe schematics and maintenance instructions on top of whatever was being repaired. For example, graphical wireframes on top of a laser printer would explain how to change the paper tray. The system used sensors attached to objects in the physical world to determine their locations, and the entire system ran tethered from a desktop computer.

In 1994, Edgar Matias and Mike Ruicci of the University of Toronto, debuted a &quot;wrist computer.&quot; Their system presented an alternative approach to the emerging head-up display plus chord keyboard wearable. The system was built from a modified HP 95LX palmtop computer and a Half-QWERTY one-handed keyboard. With the keyboard and display modules strapped to the operator&#x27;s forearms, text could be entered by bringing the wrists together and typing. The same technology was used by IBM researchers to create the half-keyboard &quot;belt computer. Also in 1994, Mik Lamming and Mike Flynn at Xerox EuroPARC demonstrated the Forget-Me-Not, a wearable device that would record interactions with people and devices and store this information in a database for later query. It interacted via wireless transmitters in rooms and with equipment in the area to remember who was there, who was being talked to on the telephone, and what objects were in the room, allowing queries like &quot;Who came by my office while I was on the phone to Mark?&quot;. As with the Toronto system, Forget-Me-Not was not based on a head-mounted display.

Also in 1994, DARPA started the Smart Modules Program to develop a modular, &quot;humionic&quot; approach to wearable and carryable computers, with the goal of producing a variety of products including computers, radios, navigation systems and human-computer interfaces that have both military and commercial use. In July 1996, DARPA went on to host the &quot;Wearables in 2005&quot; workshop, bringing together industrial, university, and military visionaries to work on the common theme of delivering computing to the individual. A follow-up conference was hosted by Boeing in August 1996, where plans were finalized to create a new academic conference on wearable computing. In October 1997, Carnegie Mellon University, MIT, and Georgia Tech co-hosted the IEEE International Symposium on Wearables Computers (ISWC) in Cambridge, Massachusetts. The symposium was a full academic conference with published proceedings and papers ranging from sensors and new hardware to new applications for wearable computers, with 382 people registered for the event. In 1998, the Microelectronic and Computer Technology Corporation created the Wearable Electronics consortial program for industrial companies in the U.S. to rapidly develop wearable computers. The program preceded the MCC Heterogeneous Component Integration Study, an investigation of the technology, infrastructure, and business challenges surrounding the continued development and integration of micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS) with other system components.

In 1998, Steve Mann invented and built the world&#x27;s first smartwatch. It was featured on the cover of Linux Journal in 2000, and demonstrated at ISSCC 2000.

===2000s===
Dr. Bruce H. Thomas and Dr. Wayne Piekarski developed the Tinmith wearable computer system to support augmented reality. This work was first published internationally in 2000 at the ISWC conference. The work was carried out at the Wearable Computer Lab in the University of South Australia.

In 2002, as part of Kevin Warwick&#x27;s Project Cyborg, Warwick&#x27;s wife, Irena, wore a necklace which was electronically linked to Warwick&#x27;s nervous system via an implanted electrode array. The color of the necklace changed between red and blue dependent on the signals on Warwick&#x27;s nervous system.

Also in 2002, Xybernaut released a wearable computer called the Xybernaut Poma Wearable PC, Poma for short. &quot;Poma&quot; stood for Personal Media Appliance. The project failed for a few reasons though the top reasons are that the equipment was expensive and clunky. The user would wear a head-mounted optical piece, a CPU that could be clipped onto clothing, and a mini keyboard that was attached to the user&#x27;s arm.

GoPro released their first product, the GoPro HERO 35mm, which began a successful franchise of wearable cameras. The cameras can be worn atop the head or around the wrist and are shock and waterproof. GoPro cameras are used by many athletes and extreme sports enthusiasts, a trend that became very apparent during the early 2010s.

In the late 2000s, various Chinese companies began producing mobile phones in the form of wristwatches, the descendants of which as of 2013 include the i5 and i6, which are GSM phones with 1.8-inch displays, and the ZGPAX s5 Android wristwatch phone.

===2010s===

Standardization with IEEE, IETF, and several industry groups (e.g. Bluetooth) lead to more various interfacing under the WPAN (wireless personal area network). It also led the WBAN (Wireless body area network) to offer new classification of designs for interfacing and networking. The 6th-generation iPod Nano, released in September 2010, has a wristband attachment available to convert it into a wearable wristwatch computer.

The development of wearable computing spread to encompass rehabilitation engineering, ambulatory intervention treatment, life guard systems, and defense wearable systems.

Sony produced a wristwatch called Sony SmartWatch that must be paired with an Android phone. Once paired, it becomes an additional remote display and notification tool.

Fitbit released several wearable fitness trackers and the Fitbit Surge, a full smartwatch that is compatible with Android and iOS.

On 11 April 2012, Pebble launched a Kickstarter campaign to raise $100,000 for their initial smartwatch model. The campaign ended on 18 May with $10,266,844, over 100 times the fundraising target. Pebble released several smartwatches, including the Pebble Time and the Pebble Round.
Google Glass launched their optical head-mounted display (OHMD) to a test group of users in 2013, before it became available to the public on 15 May 2014. Google&#x27;s mission was to produce a mass-market ubiquitous computer that displays information in a smartphone-like hands-free format that can interact with the Internet via natural language voice commands. Google Glass received criticism over privacy and safety concerns. On 15 January 2015, Google announced that it would stop producing the Google Glass prototype but would continue to develop the product. According to Google, Project Glass was ready to &quot;graduate&quot; from Google X, the experimental phase of the project.

Thync, a headset launched in 2014, is a wearable that stimulates the brain with mild electrical pulses, causing the wearer to feel energized or calm based on input into a phone app. The device is attached to the temple and to the back of the neck with an adhesive strip.

Macrotellect launched two portable brainwave (EEG) sensing devices, BrainLink Pro and BrainLink Lite in 2014, which allows families and meditation students to enhance the mental fitness and stress relief with 20+ brain fitness enhancement Apps on Apple and Android App Stores.

In January 2015, Intel announced the sub-miniature Intel Curie for wearable applications, based on its Intel Quark platform. As small as a button, it features a six-axis accelerometer, a DSP sensor hub, a Bluetooth LE unit, and a battery charge controller. It was scheduled to ship in the second half of the year.

On 24 April 2015, Apple released their take on the smartwatch, known as the Apple Watch. The Apple Watch features a touchscreen, many applications, and a heart-rate sensor. The Apple Watch would later become the most popular wristwatch in the world.

Some advanced VR headsets require the user to wear a desktop-sized computer as a backpack to enable them to move around freely.

=== 2020s ===
On June 5, 2023, Apple unveiled the Vision Pro, an AR headset with a computer built in that has a screen on the front, allowing others to see the wearer&#x27;s face.

==Commercialization==
The commercialization of general-purpose wearable computers, as led by companies such as Xybernaut, CDI and ViA, Inc. has thus far been met with limited success. Publicly traded Xybernaut tried forging alliances with companies such as IBM and Sony in order to make wearable computing widely available, and managed to get their equipment seen on such shows as The X-Files, but in 2005 their stock was delisted and the company filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection amid financial scandal and federal investigation. Xybernaut emerged from bankruptcy protection in January, 2007. ViA, Inc. filed for bankruptcy in 2001 and subsequently ceased operations.

In 1998, Seiko marketed the Ruputer, a computer in a (fairly large) wristwatch, to mediocre returns. In 2001, IBM developed and publicly displayed two prototypes for a wristwatch computer running Linux. The last message about them dates to 2004, saying the device would cost about $250, but it is still under development. In 2002, Fossil, Inc. announced the Fossil Wrist PDA, which ran the Palm OS. Its release date was set for summer of 2003, but was delayed several times and was finally made available on 5 January 2005. Timex Datalink is another example of a practical wearable computer. Hitachi launched a wearable computer called Poma in 2002. Eurotech offers the ZYPAD, a wrist-wearable touch screen computer with GPS, Wi-Fi and Bluetooth connectivity and which can run a number of custom applications. In 2013, a wearable computing device on the wrist to control body temperature was developed at MIT.

Evidence of weak market acceptance was demonstrated when Panasonic Computer Solutions Company&#x27;s product failed. Panasonic has specialized in mobile computing with their Toughbook line since 1996 and has extensive market research into the field of portable, wearable computing products. In 2002, Panasonic introduced a wearable brick computer coupled with a handheld or a touchscreen worn on the arm. The &quot;Brick&quot; Computer is the CF-07 Toughbook, dual batteries, screen used same batteries as the base, 800 x 600 resolution, optional GPS and WWAN. Has one M-PCI slot and one PCMCIA slot for expansion. CPU used is a 600 MHz Pentium 3 factory under clocked to 300 MHz so it can stay cool passively as it has no fan. Micro DIM RAM is upgradeable. The screen can be used wirelessly on other computers. The brick would communicate wirelessly to the screen, and concurrently the brick would communicate wirelessly out to the internet or other networks. The wearable brick was quietly pulled from the market in 2005, while the screen evolved to a thin client touchscreen used with a handstrap.

Google has announced that it has been working on a head-mounted display-based wearable &quot;augmented reality&quot; device called Google Glass. An early version of the device was available to the US public from April 2013 until January 2015. Despite ending sales of the device through their Explorer Program, Google has stated that they plan to continue developing the technology.

LG and iriver produce earbud wearables measuring heart rate and other biometrics, as well as various activity metrics.

Greater response to commercialization has been found in creating devices with designated purposes rather than all-purpose. One example is the WSS1000. The WSS1000 is a wearable computer designed to make the work of inventory employees easier and more efficient. The device allows workers to scan the barcode of items and immediately enter the information into the company system. This removed the need for carrying a clipboard, removed error and confusion from hand written notes, and allowed workers the freedom of both hands while working; the system improves accuracy as well as efficiency.

==Popular culture==
Many technologies for wearable computers derive their ideas from science fiction. There are many examples of ideas from popular movies that have become technologies or are technologies currently being developed.
;3D user interface
:Devices that display usable, tactile interfaces that can be manipulated in front of the user. Examples include the glove-operated hologram computer featured at the Pre-Crime headquarters in the beginning of &quot;Minority Report&quot; and the computers used by the gate workers at Zion in &quot;The Matrix&quot; trilogy.
;Intelligent textiles or smartwear
:Clothing that can relay and collect information. Examples include &quot;Tron&quot; and its sequel, and also many sci-fi military films.
;Threat glasses
:Scan others in vicinity and assess threat-to-self level. Examples include &quot;Terminator 2&quot;, &#x27;Threep&#x27; Technology in &quot;Lock-In&quot;, and &quot;Kill switch.&quot;
;Computerized contact lenses
:Special contact lenses that are used to confirm one&#x27;s identity. Used in &quot;&quot;.
;Combat suit armor
:A wearable exoskeleton that provides protection to its wearer and is typically equipped with powerful weapons and a computer system. Examples include numerous Iron Man suits, the Predator suit, along with Samus Aran&#x27;s Power Suit and Fusion Suit in the &quot;Metroid&quot; video game series. 
;Brain nano-bots to store memories in the cloud
:Used in &quot;Total Recall&quot;.
;Infrared headsets
:Can help identify suspects and see through walls. Examples include Robocop&#x27;s special eye system, as well as some more advanced visors that Samus Aran uses in the &quot;Metroid Prime&quot; trilogy.
;Wrist-worn computers
:Provide various abilities and information, such as data about the wearer, a vicinity map, a flashlight, a communicator, a poison detector or an enemy-tracking device. Examples included are the Pip-Boy 3000 from the &quot;Fallout&quot; games and Leela&#x27;s Wrist Device from the &quot;Futurama&quot; TV sitcom.
;On-chest or smart necklace
:This form-factor of wearable computer has been shown in many sci-fi movies, including &quot;Prometheus&quot; and &quot;Iron Man.&quot;

===Advancement with wearable technology over years===
Technology has advanced with continuous change in wearable computers. Wearable technologies are increasingly used in healthcare. For instance, portable sensors are used as medical devices which helps patients with diabetes to help them keep track of exercise related data. A number of people think wearable technology as a new trend; however, companies have been trying to develop or design wearable technologies for decades. The spotlight has more recently been focused on new types of technology which are more focused on improving efficiency in the wearer&#x27;s life.

===Main elements of wearable computers===
* the display, which allows the user to see the work they do.
* the computer, which allows the user to run an application or access the internet
* the commands, which allows the user to control the machine.

===Challenges with wearable computers===

Wearable technology comes with many challenges, like data security, trust issues, and regulatory and ethical issues. After 2010, wearable technologies have been seen more as a technology focused mostly on fitness. They have been used with the potential to improve the operations of health and many other professions. With an increase in wearable devices, privacy and security issues can be very important, especially when it comes to health devices. Also, the FDA considers wearable devices as &quot;general wellness products&quot;. In the US, wearable devices are not under any Federal laws, but regulatory law like Protected Health Information (PHI) is the subject to regulation which is handled by the Office for Civil Rights (OCR). The devices with sensors can create security issues as the companies have to be more alert to protect the public data. The issue with cybersecurity of these devices are the regulations are not that strict in the US. The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has developed the NIST Cybersecurity Framework, which provides guidelines for improving cybersecurity, although adherence to the framework is voluntary

Consequently, the lack of specific regulations for wearable devices, specifically medical devices, increases the risk of threats and other vulnerabilities. For instance, Google Glass raised major privacy risks with wearable computer technology; Congress investigated the privacy risks related to consumers using Google Glass and how they use the data. The product can be used to track not only the users of the product but others around them, particularly without them being aware. Nonetheless, all the data captured with Google Glass was then stored on Google&#x27;s cloud servers, giving them access to the data. They also raised questions regarding women&#x27;s security as they allowed stalkers or harassers to take intrusive pictures of women&#x27;s bodies by wearing the Glass without any fear of getting caught.

Wearable technologies like smart glasses can also raise cultural and social issues. While wearable technologies can enhance convenience, some devices, such as Bluetooth headphones, may contribute to increased reliance on technology over interpersonal interactions. Society considers these technologies luxury accessories and there may be peer pressure within a group to own similar products. These products raise challenges of social and moral discipline. For instance, wearing a smart watch can be a way to fit in with standards in male-dominated fields, where femininity may be perceived as unprofessional.

Despite the fact that the demand for this technology is increasing, one of the biggest challenges is the price. For example, as of March 2023, the price of an Apple Watch ranges from $249 to $1,749, which for a normal consumer can be prohibitively expensive.

===Future innovations===

Augmented reality allows a new generation of display. As opposed to virtual reality, the user does not exist in a virtual world, but information is superimposed on the real world.

These displays can be easily portable, such as the Vufine+. Other are quite massive, like the Hololens 2. Some headsets are autonomous, such as the Oculus Quest 2 and others. In contrast to a computer, they are more like a terminal module.

Single-board computers (SBC) are improving in performance and becoming cheaper. Some boards are cheap such as the Raspberry Pi Zero and Pi 4, while others are more expensive but more similar to a normal PC, like the Hackboard and LattePanda.

One main domain of future research could be the method of control. Today computers are commonly controlled through the keyboard and the mouse, which could change in the future. For example, the words per minute rate on a keyboard could be statistically improved with a BEPO layout. Ergonomics could also change the results with split keyboards and minimalist keyboards (which use one key for more than one letter or symbol). The extreme could be the Plover and steno keyboard that allow the use of very few keys, pressing more than one at the same time for a letter.

Furthermore, the pointer could be improved from a basic mouse to an accelerator pointer.

The system of gesture controls is evolving from image control (Leap Motion camera) to integrated capture (ex-prototype AI data glove from Zack Freedman.) For some people, the main idea could be to build computers integrated with the AR system which will be controlled with ergonomic controllers. It will make a universal machine that can be as portable as a mobile phone and as efficient as a computer, additionally with ergonomic controllers.

==Military use==

The wearable computer was introduced to the US Army in 1989 as a small computer that was meant to assist soldiers in battle. Since then, the concept has grown to include the Land Warrior program and proposal for future systems. The most extensive military program in the wearables arena is the US Army&#x27;s Land Warrior system, which will eventually be merged into the Future Force Warrior system. There are also researches for increasing the reliability of terrestrial navigation.

F-INSAS is an Indian military project, designed largely with wearable computing. The goal of F-INSAS is to equip soldiers with state-of-the-art technologies that improve their combat effectiveness, including wearable computers to aid in communication, navigation, and situational awareness.

==See also==

*Activity tracker
*Apple Watch
*Artificial neural membrane (Smartskin)
*Augmented reality
*Active tag
*Calculator watch
*Computer-mediated reality
*eHealth
*EyeTap
*E-textiles
*Extended reality
*FrogPad
*Futuristic clothing
*Glove One
*Google Glass
*Golden-i
*GPS watch
*Head-mounted display
*Head-up display
*Heart rate monitor
*Internet of Things
*Lifelog
*Open-source computing hardware
*Identity tag

*Mixed reality
*Mobile phone
*Mobile interaction
*Optical head-mounted display
*OQO
*Personal digital assistant
*Pocket computer
*Skully (helmet)
*Smartphone
*Smartglasses
*Smartwatch
*Spatial computing
*Staff locators
*Tablet PC
*Virtual retinal display
*Wireless ambulatory ECG 
==References==
==External links==
*Peer-reviewed encyclopedia chapter on Wearable Computing by Steve Mann
*A brief history of wearable computing
*IEEE International Symposium on Wearable Computers (Academic Conference)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1334829" start="2" end="19" title="Wearable computer" label="wearable computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334829" start="37" end="56" title="Wearable computer" label="body-borne computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="183" end="193" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q178794" start="212" end="222" title="wristwatch" label="wristwatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738570" start="321" end="337" title="mobile computing" label="mobile computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16001686" start="399" end="414" title="fitness tracker" label="fitness tracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q192940" start="462" end="475" title="accelerometer" label="accelerometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q925303" start="478" end="496" title="heart rate monitor" label="heart rate monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q79785" start="529" end="552" title="Electrocardiography" label="electrocardiogram (ECG)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045040" start="557" end="587" title="Oxygen saturation (medicine)" label="blood oxygen saturation (SpO2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q575092" start="688" end="700" title="Google Glass" label="Google Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105103" start="705" end="733" title="optical head-mounted display" label="optical head-mounted display"/>
<link wikidata="Q162768" start="876" end="879" title="Personal digital assistant" label="PDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="1240" end="1250" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q31087" start="1269" end="1286" title="pocket calculator" label="pocket calculator"/>
<link wikidata="Q162768" start="1292" end="1295" title="Personal digital assistant" label="PDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738570" start="1412" end="1428" title="mobile computing" label="mobile computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q15477170" start="1449" end="1465" title="Thermal management (electronics)" label="heat dissipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q846636" start="1467" end="1488" title="software architecture" label="software architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q249" start="1491" end="1499" title="wireless" label="wireless"/>
<link wikidata="Q202271" start="1504" end="1525" title="personal area network" label="personal area network"/>
<link wikidata="Q372713" start="1804" end="1820" title="Artificial cardiac pacemaker" label="heart pacemakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="2166" end="2176" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362345" start="2182" end="2192" title="smartwatch" label="smartwatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q787354" start="2338" end="2352" title="welding helmet" label="welding helmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q575092" start="2379" end="2391" title="Google Glass" label="Google Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3318160" start="2395" end="2414" title="behavioral modeling" label="behavioral modeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q31207" start="2417" end="2428" title="health care" label="health care"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421432" start="2429" end="2439" title="monitoring (medicine)" label="monitoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q58778" start="2440" end="2446" title="system" label="system"/>
<link wikidata="Q689042" start="2450" end="2468" title="service management" label="service management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097300" start="2471" end="2489" title="E-textiles" label="electronic textile"/>
<link wikidata="Q29583" start="2495" end="2509" title="fashion design" label="fashion design"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146" start="2718" end="2732" title="user interface" label="user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q254183" start="2741" end="2758" title="augmented reality" label="augmented reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q378859" start="2764" end="2783" title="pattern recognition" label="pattern recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q12131" start="2850" end="2862" title="disabilities" label="disabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186761" start="2997" end="3005" title="FreeRTOS" label="FreeRTOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q9662" start="3038" end="3044" title="Kernel (operating system)" label="kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q160120" start="3170" end="3176" title="Huawei" label="Huawei"/>
<link wikidata="Q14799" start="3185" end="3191" title="Lenovo" label="Lenovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636958" start="3209" end="3215" title="Xiaomi" label="Xiaomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067554" start="3230" end="3236" title="LiteOS" label="LiteOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q609306" start="3373" end="3381" title="Tizen" label="Tizen OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716" start="3387" end="3394" title="Samsung" label="Samsung"/>
<link wikidata="Q18012472" start="3506" end="3513" title="watchOS" label="watchOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q18010946" start="3601" end="3612" title="Apple Watch" label="Apple Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q15961745" start="3616" end="3623" title="Wear OS" label="Wear OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362345" start="3672" end="3682" title="smartwatch" label="smartwatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q178794" start="3930" end="3940" title="wristwatch" label="wristwatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="3979" end="3996" title="Queen Elizabeth I" label="Queen Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="4267" end="4276" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808" start="4279" end="4290" title="interface (computing)" label="interfacing"/>
<link wikidata="Q62899" start="4371" end="4381" title="Steve Mann (inventor)" label="Steve Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="4669" end="4686" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Queen Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="4690" end="4697" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q318017" start="4720" end="4733" title="Robert Dudley, 1st Earl of Leicester" label="Robert Dudley"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="4943" end="4955" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q12806" start="4999" end="5005" title="abacus" label="abacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q46847" start="5011" end="5015" title="Ring (jewellery)" label="ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q930755" start="5099" end="5114" title="Edward O. Thorp" label="Edward O. Thorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q92760" start="5119" end="5133" title="Claude Shannon" label="Claude Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q190975" start="5200" end="5208" title="roulette" label="roulette"/>
<link wikidata="Q63759" start="5510" end="5525" title="analog computer" label="analog computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q688956" start="5600" end="5611" title="microswitch" label="microswitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q203435" start="5714" end="5720" title="Octant (plane geometry)" label="octant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624848" start="5892" end="5901" title="Las Vegas Valley" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q31087" start="6317" end="6334" title="Pocket calculator" label="Pocket calculator"/>
<link wikidata="Q493179" start="6391" end="6415" title="Programmable calculators" label="Programmable calculators"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018889" start="6511" end="6527" title="calculator watch" label="calculator watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030571" start="6696" end="6708" title="haptic technology" label="tactile grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q62899" start="6809" end="6819" title="Steve Mann (inventor)" label="Steve Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q62899" start="7016" end="7020" title="Steve Mann (inventor)" label="Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q29576" start="7154" end="7160" title="Webcam" label="Webcam"/>
<link wikidata="Q763835" start="7183" end="7190" title="lifelog" label="lifelog"/>
<link wikidata="Q159614" start="7197" end="7208" title="Seiko Epson" label="Seiko Epson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362345" start="7222" end="7227" title="RC-20" label="RC-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362345" start="7268" end="7278" title="smartwatch" label="smartwatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q610398" start="7293" end="7311" title="computer on a chip" label="computer on a chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333980" start="7370" end="7390" title="head-mounted display" label="head-mounted display"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="7424" end="7428" title="Light-emitting diode" label="LEDs"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="7595" end="7598" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="7599" end="7618" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q190080" start="7678" end="7704" title="Carnegie Mellon University" label="Carnegie Mellon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49125" start="7792" end="7799" title="Toshiba" label="Toshiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q125801526" start="7813" end="7830" title="notebook computer" label="notebook computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q861170" start="7880" end="7896" title="virtual keyboard" label="virtual keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334354" start="7906" end="7937" title="direct-sequence spread spectrum" label="direct-sequence spread spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="7975" end="7981" title="TCP/IP" label="TCP/IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q623494" start="8008" end="8011" title="Network File System" label="NFS"/>
<link wikidata="Q419894" start="8140" end="8157" title="Chorded keyboard" label="chording keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293" start="8199" end="8211" title="Floppy Drive" label="floppy drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="8645" end="8648" title="Central processing unit" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="8690" end="8693" title="Read-only memory" label="ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q162768" start="8721" end="8725" title="Personal digital assistant" label="PDAs"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="8777" end="8789" title="mobile phone" label="mobile phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="8833" end="8843" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708947" start="8882" end="8894" title="Thad Starner" label="Thad Starner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8921" end="8931" title="Doug Platt" label="Doug Platt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9025" end="9046" title="Devon Sean McCullough" label="Devon Sean McCullough"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="9146" end="9149" title="MIT" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="9304" end="9323" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9944" end="9956" title="Edgar Matias" label="Edgar Matias"/>
<link wikidata="Q180865" start="9980" end="10001" title="University of Toronto" label="University of Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q750428" start="10538" end="10552" title="PARC (company)" label="Xerox EuroPARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="11089" end="11094" title="DARPA" label="DARPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="11644" end="11650" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q864855" start="11807" end="11819" title="Georgia Institute of Technology" label="Georgia Tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q131566" start="11834" end="11838" title="IEEE" label="IEEE"/>
<link wikidata="Q6053821" start="11839" end="11892" title="International Symposium on Wearable Computers" label="International Symposium on Wearables Computers (ISWC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q49111" start="11896" end="11920" title="Cambridge, Massachusetts" label="Cambridge, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12776" end="12791" title="Bruce H. Thomas" label="Bruce H. Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q254183" start="12874" end="12891" title="augmented reality" label="augmented reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q15576" start="13032" end="13061" title="University of South Australia" label="University of South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q380459" start="13084" end="13097" title="Kevin Warwick" label="Kevin Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13105" end="13119" title="Kevin Warwick#Project Cyborg" label="Project Cyborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357989" start="13247" end="13262" title="electrode array" label="electrode array"/>
<link wikidata="Q8045332" start="13393" end="13402" title="Xybernaut" label="Xybernaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q733482" start="13805" end="13810" title="GoPro" label="GoPro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13845" end="13860" title="GoPro#35mm" label="GoPro HERO 35mm"/>
<link wikidata="Q17125610" start="14353" end="14361" title="ZGPAX s5" label="ZGPAX s5"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="14362" end="14369" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q131566" start="14423" end="14427" title="IEEE" label="IEEE"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="14429" end="14433" title="IETF" label="IETF"/>
<link wikidata="Q39531" start="14469" end="14478" title="Bluetooth" label="Bluetooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q202271" start="14523" end="14527" title="Wireless personal area network" label="WPAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q890056" start="14578" end="14582" title="Body area network" label="WBAN"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14687" end="14711" title="IPod Nano#6th generation" label="6th-generation iPod Nano"/>
<link wikidata="Q112649003" start="14888" end="14914" title="rehabilitation engineering" label="rehabilitation engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="15002" end="15006" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q4451540" start="15036" end="15051" title="Sony SmartWatch" label="Sony SmartWatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455414" start="15172" end="15178" title="Fitbit" label="Fitbit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15230" end="15242" title="List of Fitbit products#Fitbit Surge" label="Fitbit Surge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362345" start="15251" end="15261" title="smartwatch" label="smartwatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="15286" end="15293" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="15298" end="15301" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q477634" start="15322" end="15328" title="Pebble (watch)" label="Pebble"/>
<link wikidata="Q34755" start="15340" end="15351" title="Kickstarter" label="Kickstarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q19521131" start="15553" end="15564" title="Pebble Time" label="Pebble Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105103" start="15615" end="15643" title="optical head-mounted display" label="optical head-mounted display"/>
<link wikidata="Q541265" start="15793" end="15812" title="ubiquitous computing" label="ubiquitous computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="15844" end="15854" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q30642" start="15918" end="15934" title="Natural language processing" label="natural language"/>
<link wikidata="Q133928" start="16227" end="16235" title="Google X" label="Google X"/>
<link wikidata="Q25053782" start="16277" end="16282" title="Thync" label="Thync"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16549" end="16561" title="Macrotellect Ltd" label="Macrotellect"/>
<link wikidata="Q179965" start="16595" end="16598" title="Electroencephalography" label="EEG"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="16844" end="16849" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15057406" start="16930" end="16941" title="Intel Quark" label="Intel Quark"/>
<link wikidata="Q192940" start="16997" end="17010" title="accelerometer" label="accelerometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="17160" end="17165" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q117715451" start="17572" end="17582" title="Apple Vision Pro" label="Vision Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q8045332" start="17814" end="17823" title="Xybernaut" label="Xybernaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009947" start="17825" end="17828" title="CDI Corporation" label="CDI"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17833" end="17842" title="ViA, Inc." label="ViA, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="17960" end="17963" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="17968" end="17972" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401431" start="18084" end="18095" title="First Person Shooter (The X-Files)" label="The X-Files"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062835" start="18160" end="18170" title="Chapter 11" label="Chapter 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q322601" start="18391" end="18396" title="Seiko" label="Seiko"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380451" start="18410" end="18417" title="Ruputer" label="Ruputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="18578" end="18583" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q356212" start="18713" end="18725" title="Fossil, Inc." label="Fossil, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q8564894" start="18740" end="18756" title="Fossil Wrist PDA" label="Fossil Wrist PDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q274582" start="18772" end="18779" title="Palm OS" label="Palm OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806635" start="18906" end="18920" title="Timex Datalink" label="Timex Datalink"/>
<link wikidata="Q53238" start="18974" end="18981" title="Hitachi" label="Hitachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3734951" start="19032" end="19040" title="Eurotech (company)" label="Eurotech"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063312" start="19052" end="19057" title="ZYPAD" label="ZYPAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="19103" end="19106" title="GPS" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="19108" end="19113" title="Wi-Fi" label="Wi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q39531" start="19118" end="19127" title="Bluetooth" label="Bluetooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="19287" end="19290" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q53247" start="19350" end="19359" title="Panasonic" label="Panasonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497072" start="19467" end="19476" title="Toughbook" label="Toughbook"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19625" end="19639" title="brick computer" label="brick computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q938054" start="19848" end="19852" title="Wireless WAN" label="WWAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q918090" start="20347" end="20358" title="thin client" label="thin client"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333980" start="20446" end="20466" title="head-mounted display" label="head-mounted display"/>
<link wikidata="Q254183" start="20488" end="20505" title="augmented reality" label="augmented reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q575092" start="20526" end="20538" title="Google Glass" label="Google Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q136778" start="20778" end="20780" title="LG" label="LG"/>
<link wikidata="Q283856" start="20785" end="20791" title="iriver" label="iriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q856" start="21198" end="21205" title="barcode" label="barcode"/>
<link wikidata="Q244604" start="21958" end="21973" title="Minority Report (film)" label="Minority Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q13014087" start="22034" end="22064" title="The Matrix (franchise)" label="&amp;quot;The Matrix&amp;quot; trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q626483" start="22174" end="22178" title="Tron" label="Tron"/>
<link wikidata="Q18954" start="22193" end="22199" title="Tron Legacy" label="sequel"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="22215" end="22221" title="Science fiction" label="sci-fi"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22335" end="22347" title="Terminator 2: Judgment Day" label="Terminator 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q29550245" start="22419" end="22430" title="Kill Switch (2017 film)" label="Kill switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q180704" start="22738" end="22746" title="Iron Man" label="Iron Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q844794" start="22758" end="22766" title="Predator (fictional species)" label="Predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q12400" start="22784" end="22801" title="Samus Aran" label="Samus Aran&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q12397" start="22842" end="22849" title="Metroid" label="Metroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q372514" start="23046" end="23060" title="RoboCop" label="Robocop&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23146" end="23179" title="Metroid Prime: Trilogy" label="&amp;quot;Metroid Prime&amp;quot; trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q125507102" start="23425" end="23432" title="Fallout (franchise)" label="Fallout"/>
<link wikidata="Q121841" start="23449" end="23454" title="Leela (Futurama)" label="Leela"/>
<link wikidata="Q73622" start="23490" end="23498" title="Futurama" label="Futurama"/>
<link wikidata="Q192686" start="23637" end="23647" title="Prometheus (2012 film)" label="Prometheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192724" start="23664" end="23672" title="Iron Man (2008 film)" label="Iron Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845080" start="23805" end="23826" title="Wearable technologies" label="Wearable technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554101" start="23907" end="23921" title="medical device" label="medical device"/>
<link wikidata="Q176691" start="25556" end="25602" title="National Institute of Standards and Technology" label="National Institute of Standards and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q575092" start="26285" end="26297" title="Google Glass" label="Google Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q65077112" start="27754" end="27764" title="HoloLens 2" label="Hololens 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q99620218" start="27808" end="27822" title="Oculus Quest 2" label="Oculus Quest 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q944780" start="27901" end="27922" title="Single-board computer" label="Single-board computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q245" start="28015" end="28027" title="Raspberry Pi" label="Raspberry Pi"/>
<link wikidata="Q24702384" start="28131" end="28141" title="LattePanda" label="LattePanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6509916" start="28865" end="28876" title="Leap Motion" label="Leap Motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="29559" end="29566" title="US Army" label="US Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127814" start="29574" end="29586" title="Land Warrior" label="Land Warrior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475592" start="29636" end="29656" title="Future Force Warrior" label="Future Force Warrior"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013011" start="29750" end="29757" title="F-INSAS" label="F-INSAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q16001686" start="30057" end="30073" title="Activity tracker" label="Activity tracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q18010946" start="30075" end="30086" title="Apple Watch" label="Apple Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801091" start="30088" end="30114" title="Artificial neural membrane" label="Artificial neural membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q254183" start="30128" end="30145" title="Augmented reality" label="Augmented reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q104954" start="30147" end="30157" title="Radio-frequency identification" label="Active tag"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018889" start="30159" end="30175" title="Calculator watch" label="Calculator watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157399" start="30177" end="30202" title="Computer-mediated reality" label="Computer-mediated reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930" start="30204" end="30211" title="eHealth" label="eHealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385694" start="30213" end="30219" title="EyeTap" label="EyeTap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097300" start="30221" end="30231" title="E-textiles" label="E-textiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q25052165" start="30233" end="30249" title="Extended reality" label="Extended reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505170" start="30251" end="30258" title="FrogPad" label="FrogPad"/>
<link wikidata="Q919036" start="30260" end="30279" title="Retro-futurism" label="Futuristic clothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572132" start="30281" end="30290" title="Glove One" label="Glove One"/>
<link wikidata="Q575092" start="30292" end="30304" title="Google Glass" label="Google Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579081" start="30306" end="30314" title="Golden-i" label="Golden-i"/>
<link wikidata="Q5514343" start="30316" end="30325" title="GPS watch" label="GPS watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333980" start="30327" end="30347" title="Head-mounted display" label="Head-mounted display"/>
<link wikidata="Q518461" start="30349" end="30364" title="Head-up display" label="Head-up display"/>
<link wikidata="Q925303" start="30366" end="30384" title="Heart rate monitor" label="Heart rate monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q251212" start="30386" end="30404" title="Internet of Things" label="Internet of Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q763835" start="30406" end="30413" title="Lifelog" label="Lifelog"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631684" start="30415" end="30445" title="Open-source computing hardware" label="Open-source computing hardware"/>
<link wikidata="Q104954" start="30447" end="30459" title="Radio-frequency identification" label="Identity tag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758389" start="30462" end="30475" title="Mixed reality" label="Mixed reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="30477" end="30489" title="Mobile phone" label="Mobile phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6887140" start="30491" end="30509" title="Mobile interaction" label="Mobile interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105103" start="30511" end="30539" title="Optical head-mounted display" label="Optical head-mounted display"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148202" start="30541" end="30544" title="OQO" label="OQO"/>
<link wikidata="Q162768" start="30546" end="30572" title="Personal digital assistant" label="Personal digital assistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q206190" start="30574" end="30589" title="Pocket computer" label="Pocket computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17126142" start="30591" end="30597" title="Skully (helmet)" label="Skully"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="30608" end="30618" title="Smartphone" label="Smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q15978715" start="30620" end="30632" title="Smartglasses" label="Smartglasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362345" start="30634" end="30644" title="Smartwatch" label="Smartwatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q85802496" start="30646" end="30663" title="Spatial computing" label="Spatial computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141977" start="30665" end="30679" title="Real-time locating system" label="Staff locators"/>
<link wikidata="Q155972" start="30681" end="30690" title="Tablet computer" label="Tablet PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q467178" start="30692" end="30715" title="Virtual retinal display" label="Virtual retinal display"/>
<link wikidata="Q17090099" start="30717" end="30740" title="Wireless ambulatory ECG" label="Wireless ambulatory ECG"/>
<link wikidata="Q62899" start="30837" end="30847" title="Steve Mann (inventor)" label="Steve Mann"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33110" wikidata="Q77888" url="?curid=33110" title="Wilhelm von Humboldt">
<text>Friedrich Wilhelm Christian Karl Ferdinand von Humboldt (22 June 1767 – 8 April 1835) was a German philosopher, linguist, government functionary, diplomat, and founder of the Humboldt University of Berlin. In 1949, the university was named after him and his younger brother, Alexander von Humboldt, a naturalist.

He was a linguist who made contributions to the philosophy of language, ethnolinguistics, and to the theory and practice of education. He made a major contribution to the development of liberalism by envisioning education as a means of realizing individual possibility rather than a way of drilling traditional ideas into youth to suit them for an already established occupation or social role. In particular, he was the architect of the Humboldtian education ideal, which was used from the beginning in Prussia as a model for its system of public education, as well as in the United States and Japan. He was elected as a member of the American Philosophical Society in 1822.

== Biography ==
Humboldt was born in Potsdam, Margraviate of Brandenburg, and died in Tegel, Province of Brandenburg.

His father, Alexander Georg von Humboldt (1720–1779), belonged to a prominent German noble family from Pomerania. Although not one of the titled gentry, he was a major in the Prussian Army, who had served with the Duke of Brunswick. At age 42, Alexander Georg was rewarded for his services in the Seven Years&#x27; War with the post of royal chamberlain. He profited from the contract to lease state lotteries and tobacco sales. 

Wilhelm&#x27;s grandfather was Johann Paul von Humboldt (1684–1740), who married Sophia Dorothea von Schweder (1688-1749), daughter of Prussian General Adjutant Michael von Schweder (1663–1729). In 1766, his father, Alexander Georg married Maria Elisabeth Colomb, a well-educated woman and widow of Baron Friedrich Ernst von Holwede (1723–1765), with whom she had a son Heinrich Friedrich Ludwig Ferdinand (1762–1817). Alexander Georg and Maria Elisabeth had four children: two daughters, Karoline and Gabriele, who died young, and then two sons, Wilhelm and Alexander. Her first-born son Heinrich, Wilhelm and Alexander&#x27;s half-brother, Rittmaster in the Gendarme regiment was something of a ne&#x27;er do well, not often mentioned in the family history.

In June 1791, Humboldt married Caroline von Dacheröden. They had eight children, of whom five (amongst them Gabriele von Humboldt) survived to adulthood.

== Philosopher ==

Humboldt was a philosopher; he wrote &quot;The Limits of State Action&quot; in 1791–1792 (though it was not published until 1850, after Humboldt&#x27;s death), one of the boldest defences of the liberties of the Enlightenment. It influenced John Stuart Mill&#x27;s essay &quot;On Liberty&quot; through which von Humboldt&#x27;s ideas became known in the English-speaking world. Humboldt outlined an early version of what Mill would later call the &quot;harm principle&quot;. His house in Rome became a cultural hub, run by Caroline von Humboldt.

The section dealing with education was published in the December 1792 issue of the &quot;Berlinische Monatsschrift&quot; under the title &quot;On public state education&quot;. With this publication, Humboldt took part in the philosophical debate regarding the direction of national education that was in progress in Germany, as elsewhere, after the French Revolution.

== Educational reforms ==
Humboldt had been home schooled and never finished his comparatively short university studies at the universities of Frankfurt (Oder) and Göttingen. Nevertheless, he became one of the most influential officials in German education. Actually, Humboldt had intended to become Minister of education, but failed to attain that position. The Prussian King asked him to leave Rome in 1809 and to lead the directorate of education under Friedrich Ferdinand Alexander zu Dohna-Schlobitten. Humboldt did not reply to the appointment for several weeks and would have preferred to stay on at the embassy in Rome. His wife did not return with him to Prussia; the couple met again when Humboldt stepped down from the educational post and was appointed head of the Embassy in Vienna.

Humboldt installed a standardized system of public instruction, from basic schools till secondary education, and founded Berlin University. He imposed a standardization of state examinations and inspections and created a special department within the ministry to oversee and design curricula, textbooks and learning aids.

Humboldt&#x27;s educational model went beyond vocational training. In a letter to the Prussian king, he wrote: &quot;There are undeniably certain kinds of knowledge that must be of a general nature and, more importantly, a certain cultivation of the mind and character that nobody can afford to be without. People obviously cannot be good craftworkers, merchants, soldiers or businessmen unless, regardless of their occupation, they are good, upstanding and – according to their condition – well-informed human beings and citizens. If this basis is laid through schooling, vocational skills are easily acquired later on, and a person is always free to move from one occupation to another, as so often happens in life.&quot; The philosopher Julian Nida-Rümelin has criticized discrepancies between Humboldt&#x27;s ideals and modern European education policy, which narrowly understands education as a preparation for the labor market, and argued that we need to decide between McKinsey and Humboldt.

== Diplomat ==
As a successful diplomat between 1802 and 1819, Humboldt was plenipotentiary Prussian minister at Rome from 1802, ambassador at Vienna from 1812 during the closing struggles of the Napoleonic Wars, at the congress of Prague (1813) where he was instrumental in drawing Austria to ally with Prussia and Russia against Napoleon; a signer of the peace treaty at Paris and the treaty between Prussia and defeated Saxony (1815), and at the congress at Aachen in 1818. However, the increasingly reactionary policy of the Prussian government made him give up political life in 1819; and from that time forward he devoted himself solely to literature and study.

== Linguist ==

Wilhelm von Humboldt was an adept linguist and studied the Basque language. He translated Pindar and Aeschylus into German.

Humboldt&#x27;s work as a philologist in Basque has had more extensive impact than his other work. His two visits to the Basque country resulted in &quot;Researches into the Early Inhabitants of Spain by the help of the Basque language&quot; (1821). In this work, Humboldt endeavored to show by examining geographical placenames that at one time a race or races speaking dialects allied to modern Basque extended throughout Spain, southern France and the Balearic Islands; he identified these people with the &quot;Iberians&quot; of classical writers, and further surmised that they had been allied with the Berbers of northern Africa. Humboldt&#x27;s pioneering work has been superseded in its details by modern linguistics and archaeology, but is sometimes still uncritically followed even today. He was elected a member of the American Antiquarian Society in 1820, and a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1822.

Humboldt died while preparing his greatest work, on the ancient Kawi language of Java, but its introduction was published in 1836 as &quot;The Heterogeneity of Language and its Influence on the Intellectual Development of Mankind&quot;. His 1836 book on the philosophy of speech introduces the concept of &quot;the inner form of language&quot; (according to Encyclopædia Britannica 1911):

[F]irst clearly laid down that the character and structure of a language expresses the inner life and knowledge of its speakers, and that languages must differ from one another in the same way and to the same degree as those who use them. Sounds do not become words until a meaning has been put into them, and this meaning embodies the thought of a community. What Humboldt terms the inner form of a language is just that mode of denoting the relations between the parts of a sentence which reflects the manner in which a particular body of men regards the world about them. It is the task of the morphology of speech to distinguish the various ways in which languages differ from each other as regards their inner form, and to classify and arrange them accordingly.

Noam Chomsky frequently quotes Humboldt&#x27;s description of language as a rule-governed system which &quot;makes infinite use of finite means&quot;, meaning that an infinite number of sentences can be created using a finite number of grammatical rules. Humboldt scholar Tilman Borsche notes profound differences between von Humboldt&#x27;s view of language and that of Chomsky.

More recently, Humboldt has also been credited as an originator of the linguistic relativity hypothesis (more commonly known as the Sapir–Whorf hypothesis), developed by linguists Edward Sapir or Benjamin Whorf a century later.

The reception of Humboldt&#x27;s work remains problematic in English-speaking countries, despite the work of Langham Brown, Manchester and James W. Underhill (&quot;Humboldt, Worldview and Language&quot;, 2009), on account of his concept of what he called &quot;Weltansicht&quot;, the linguistic worldview, with &quot;Weltanschauung&quot; being translated simply as &#x27;worldview&#x27;, a term associated with ideologies and cultural mindsets in both German and English. The centrality of distinction in understanding Humboldt&#x27;s work was set out by one of the leading contemporary German Humboldt scholars, Jürgen Trabant, in his works in both German and French. Polish linguists at the Lublin School (see Jerzy Bartmiński), in their research of Humboldt, also stress this distinction between the worldviews of a personal or political kind and the worldview that is implicit in language as a conceptual system.

However, little rigorous research in English has gone into exploring the relationship between the linguistic worldview and the transformation and maintenance of this worldview by individual speakers. One notable exception is the work of Underhill, who explores comparative linguistic studies in both &quot;Creating Worldviews: Language&quot;, &quot;Ideology &amp; Metaphor&quot; (2011) and in &quot;Ethnolinguistics and Cultural Concepts: Truth, Love, Hate &amp; War&quot; (2012). In Underhill&#x27;s work, a distinction is made between five forms of worldview: world-perceiving, world-conceiving, cultural mindset, personal world and perspective, in order to convey the distinctions Humboldt was concerned with preserving in his ethnolinguistics. Probably the best-known linguist working with a truly Humboldtian perspective writing in English today is Anna Wierzbicka, who has published a number of comparative works on semantic universals and conceptual distinctions in language.

The Rouen Ethnolinguistics Project, in France, published online a 7-hour series of lectures on Humboldt&#x27;s thought on language, with the Berlin specialist Professor Trabant.

In Charles Taylor&#x27;s important summative work, &quot;The Language Animal: The Full Shape of the Human Linguistic Capacity&quot; (2016), von Humboldt is given credit, along with Johann Georg Hamann and Johann Gottfried Herder, for inspiring Taylor&#x27;s &quot;HHH&quot; approach to the philosophy of language, emphasizing the creative power and cultural specificity of language.

== Bibliography ==
* &quot;Socrates and Plato on the Divine&quot; (orig. &quot;Sokrates und Platon über die Gottheit&quot;). 1787–1790
* Humboldt. &quot;On the Limits of State Action&quot;, first seen in 1792. &quot;Ideen zu einem Versuch, die Grenzen der Wirksamkeit des Staates zu bestimmen&quot;, p. ii. Published by E. Trewendt, 1851 (German)
* &quot;Ueber den Geschlechtsunterschied&quot;. 1794
* &quot;Ueber männliche und weibliche Form&quot;. 1795
* &quot;Outline of a Comparative Anthropology&quot; (orig. &quot;Plan einer vergleichenden Anthropologie&quot;). 1797.
* &quot;The Eighteenth Century&quot; (orig. &quot;Das achtzehnte Jahrhundert&quot;). = 1797.
* &quot;Ästhetische Versuche I. – Ueber Göthes Herrmann und Dorothea&quot;. 1799.
* &quot;Latium und Hellas&quot; (1806)
* &quot;Geschichte des Verfalls und Untergangs der griechischen Freistaaten&quot;. 1807–1808.
* &quot;Pindars &quot;Olympische Oden&quot;&quot;. Translation from Greek, 1816.
* &quot;Aischylos&#x27; &quot;Agamemnon&quot;&quot;. Translation from Greek, 1816.
* &quot;Ueber das vergleichende Sprachstudium in Beziehung auf die verschiedenen Epochen der Sprachentwicklung&quot;. 1820.
* &quot;Ueber die Aufgabe des Geschichtsschreibers&quot;. 1821.
* &quot;Researches into the Early Inhabitants of Spain with the help of the Basque language&quot; (orig. &quot;Prüfung der Untersuchungen über die Urbewohner Hispaniens vermittelst der vaskischen Sprache&quot;). 1821.
* &quot;Ueber die Entstehung der grammatischen Formen und ihren Einfluss auf die Ideenentwicklung&quot;. 1822.
* &quot;Upon Writing and its Relation to Speech&quot; (orig. &quot;Ueber die Buchstabenschrift und ihren Zusammenhang mit dem Sprachbau&quot;). 1824.
* &quot;Notice sur la grammaire japonaise du P. Oyanguren&quot; (1826), a review of Melchor Oyanguren de Santa Inés&#x27;s Japanese grammar, read online.
* &quot;Ueber die unter dem Namen Bhagavad-Gítá bekannte Episode des Mahá-Bhárata&quot;. 1826.
* &quot;Ueber den Dualis&quot;. 1827.
* &quot;On the languages of the South Seas&quot; (orig. &quot;Über die Sprache der Südseeinseln&quot;). 1828.
* &quot;On Schiller and the Path of Spiritual Development&quot; (orig. &quot;Ueber Schiller und den Gang seiner Geistesentwicklung&quot;). 1830.
* &quot;Rezension von Goethes Zweitem römischem Aufenthalt&quot;. 1830.
* &quot;The Heterogeneity of Language and its Influence on the Intellectual Development of Mankind&quot; (orig. &quot;Ueber die Verschiedenheit des menschlichen Sprachbaus und ihren Einfluss auf die geistige Entwicklung des Menschengeschlechts&quot;). 1836. New edition: On Language. On the Diversity of Human Language Construction and Its Influence on the Mental Development of the Human Species, Cambridge University Press, 2nd rev. edition 1999

=== Collected writings ===
* Humboldt, Wilhelm von. &quot;Gesammelte Schriften. Ausgabe der preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.&quot; Vols. I–XVII, Berlin 1903–36. (Cited as &quot;GS&quot;; the Roman numeral indicates the volume and the Arabic figure the page; the original German spelling has been modernized.)

== See also ==
* Contributions to liberal theory
* Ferdinand de Saussure

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==

== Further reading ==
* Craig, Gordon. &quot;Wilhelm von Humboldt as a diplomat&quot;, in Craig, &quot;Studies in International History&quot; (1967).
* Forster, Michael N. &quot;German Philosophy of Language: From Schlegel to Hegel and Beyond&quot;, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2011. .
* Mueller-Vollmer, Kurt, and Markus Messling. &quot;Wilhelm von Humboldt.&quot; &quot;Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy&quot; (2016). online
* Östling, Johan, &quot;Humboldt and the Modern German University: An Intellectual History&quot; (Lund: Lund University Press/Manchester University Press, 2018)
* Roberts, John. &quot;German Liberalism and Wilhelm von Humboldt: A Reassessment&quot;, Mosaic Press, 2002 
* Sorkin, David. &quot;Wilhelm Von Humboldt: The Theory and Practice of Self-Formation (Bildung), 1791–1810&quot; &quot;Journal of the History of Ideas&quot;, 44#1 (1983), pp. 55–73. online
* Stubb, Elsina. &quot;Wilhelm Von Humboldt&#x27;s Philosophy of Language, Its Sources and Influence&quot;, Edwin Mellen Press, 2002. 
* Sweet, Paul S. &quot;Wilhelm von Humboldt: A Biography&quot; (2 vols., 1978–80, Ohio University Press).
* Underhill, James W. &quot;Humboldt, Worldview and Language&quot;, (Edinburgh University Press, 2009). 
* Underhill, James W. &quot;Ethnolinguistics and Cultural Concepts: Truth, Love, Hate &amp; War&quot; (Cambridge University Press, 2012).

===In other languages===
* Azurmendi, Joxe. &quot;Humboldt. Hizkuntza eta pentsamendua&quot;, Bilbo, UEU, 2007. .
* Azurmendi, Joxe: &quot;Ein Denkmal der Achtung und Liebe. Humboldt über die baskische Landschaft&quot;, &quot;RIEV&quot;, 48–1: 125–142, Eusko Ikaskuntza, 2003 
* Berman, Antoine. &quot;L&#x27;épreuve de l&#x27;étranger. Culture et traduction dans l&#x27;Allemagne romantique: Herder, Goethe, Schlegel, Novalis, Humboldt, Schleiermacher, Hölderlin&quot;, Paris, Gallimard, Essais, 1984. .
* Borsche, Tilman. &quot;Wilhelm von Humboldt&quot;, München, Beck, 1990. .
* Daum, Andreas W. &quot;Alexander und Wilhelm von Humboldt: Vom Orinoco nach Java&quot;. In &quot;Deutschland. Globalgeschichte einer Nation&quot;. Munich, C. H. Beck: 2020, pp. 303‒307.
* Lalatta Costerbosa, Marina. &quot;Ragione e tradizione: il pensiero giuridico ed etico-politico di Wilhelm von Humboldt&quot;, Milano, Giuffrè, 2000. .
* Marra, Realino. &quot;La ragione e il caso. Il processo costituente nel realismo storico di Wilhelm von Humboldt&quot;, &quot;Materiali per una storia della cultura giuridica&quot;, XXXII–2, 2002, pp. 453–464.
* Pajević, Marko/David Nowell Smith (eds.). &quot;Thinking Language: Wilhelm von Humboldt Now&quot; Special Issue of Forum for Modern Language Studies 53/1, 2017
* Schultheis, Franz. &quot;Le cauchemar de Humboldt: les réformes de l&#x27;enseignement supérieur européen&quot;, Paris, Raisons d&#x27;agir éditions, 2008. .
* Trabant, Jürgen. &quot;Humboldt ou le sens du language&quot;, Mardaga, 1995.
* Trabant, Jürgen. &quot; Sprachsinn: le sens du langage, de la linguistique et de la philosophie du langage &quot; in &quot;La pensée dans la langue. Humboldt et après,&quot; P.U.V., 1995.
* Trabant, Jürgen. &quot;Traditions de Humboldt, Éditions de la Maison des Sciences de l&#x27;homme&quot;, Paris, 1999. 
* Trabant, Jürgen. &quot;Quand l&#x27;Europe oublie Herder: Humboldt et les langues&quot;, &quot;Revue Germanique Internationale&quot;, 2003, 20, 153–165 (mise à jour avril 2005)
* Valentin, Jean-Marie. &quot;Alexander von Humboldt: 150e anniversaire de sa mort&quot;, Paris, Didier Érudition. 2011. .

== External links ==

* &quot;Lives of the Brothers Humboldt&quot;, an extensive biography available from the Million Book Project
* Humboldt University site: Brief eulogy
* Wilhelm v. Humboldt – Brief information page from the Acton Institute
* 
* Works by Wilhelm von Humboldt – Partial list from Zeno.org
* &quot;The German classics of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries&quot; (two sections by Humboldt)
* Wilhelm von Humboldt, The Sphere and Duties of Government – passages (1792)
* Thinking Language: Wilhelm von Humboldt Now Event Videos, Conference Papers recorded at Queen Mary University of London, April 2016, organiser Marko Pajević. Papers on Humboldt&#x27;s &quot;thinking language&quot; by Marko Pajevic, John Joseph, Jürgen Trabant, Ute Tintemann, Barbara Cassin (presented by David Nowell Smith), James W. Underhill, John Walker.
* Virtual exhibition on Paris Observatory digital library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q77888" start="0" end="55" title="Wilhelm von Humboldt" label="Friedrich Wilhelm Christian Karl Ferdinand von Humboldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="112" end="120" title="linguist" label="linguist"/>
<link wikidata="Q599151" start="122" end="144" title="government functionary" label="government functionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q152087" start="175" end="204" title="Humboldt University of Berlin" label="Humboldt University of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694" start="275" end="297" title="Alexander von Humboldt" label="Alexander von Humboldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q484591" start="301" end="311" title="Natural history" label="naturalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="323" end="331" title="linguist" label="linguist"/>
<link wikidata="Q484761" start="362" end="384" title="philosophy of language" label="philosophy of language"/>
<link wikidata="Q853085" start="386" end="402" title="ethnolinguistics" label="ethnolinguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790374" start="415" end="447" title="Learning theory (education)" label="theory and practice of education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202245" start="550" end="582" title="potential" label="realizing individual possibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q375159" start="604" end="641" title="indoctrination" label="drilling traditional ideas into youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q18618758" start="752" end="779" title="Humboldtian education ideal" label="Humboldtian education ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7253169" start="818" end="825" title="Prussian education system" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080794" start="855" end="871" title="public education" label="public education"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="950" end="980" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711" start="1028" end="1035" title="Potsdam" label="Potsdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q148499" start="1037" end="1063" title="Margraviate of Brandenburg" label="Margraviate of Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q700055" start="1077" end="1082" title="Tegel" label="Tegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q700264" start="1084" end="1107" title="Province of Brandenburg" label="Province of Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q479867" start="1188" end="1207" title="German nobility" label="German noble family"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520" start="1213" end="1222" title="Pomerania" label="Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q706042" start="1285" end="1298" title="Prussian Army" label="Prussian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q58773" start="1324" end="1341" title="Charles William Ferdinand, Duke of Brunswick" label="Duke of Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="1407" end="1428" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q264323" start="1452" end="1463" title="Chamberlain (office)" label="chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618375" start="1781" end="1803" title="Marie-Elisabeth von Humboldt" label="Maria Elisabeth Colomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q640375" start="2183" end="2193" title="Rittmaster" label="Rittmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q109293552" start="2201" end="2218" title="Gendarme (historical)" label="Gendarme regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q96140" start="2333" end="2356" title="Caroline von Humboldt" label="Caroline von Dacheröden"/>
<link wikidata="Q15447620" start="2410" end="2431" title="Gabriele von Bülow" label="Gabriele von Humboldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q27963472" start="2519" end="2545" title="The Limits of State Action" label="The Limits of State Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="2684" end="2701" title="The Age of Enlightenment" label="the Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q50020" start="2717" end="2733" title="John Stuart Mill" label="John Stuart Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055881" start="2753" end="2763" title="On Liberty" label="On Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q987355" start="2830" end="2852" title="English-speaking world" label="English-speaking world"/>
<link wikidata="Q831403" start="2929" end="2943" title="harm principle" label="harm principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q96140" start="2999" end="3020" title="Caroline von Humboldt" label="Caroline von Humboldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="3372" end="3389" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q149481" start="3535" end="3551" title="Viadrina European University" label="Frankfurt (Oder)"/>
<link wikidata="Q152838" start="3556" end="3565" title="University of Göttingen" label="Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q76241" start="3848" end="3898" title="Friedrich Ferdinand Alexander zu Dohna-Schlobitten" label="Friedrich Ferdinand Alexander zu Dohna-Schlobitten"/>
<link wikidata="Q152087" start="4310" end="4327" title="Berlin University" label="Berlin University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869278" start="4558" end="4577" title="vocational training" label="vocational training"/>
<link wikidata="Q450" start="4762" end="4766" title="mind" label="mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q12504525" start="4771" end="4780" title="Moral character" label="character"/>
<link wikidata="Q91865" start="5252" end="5271" title="Julian Nida-Rümelin" label="Julian Nida-Rümelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q310207" start="5488" end="5496" title="McKinsey &amp;amp; Company" label="McKinsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q15217354" start="5588" end="5603" title="plenipotentiary" label="plenipotentiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="5708" end="5723" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="6231" end="6239" title="linguistics" label="linguist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8752" start="6256" end="6271" title="Basque language" label="Basque language"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="6287" end="6293" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q40939" start="6298" end="6307" title="Aeschylus" label="Aeschylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="6348" end="6359" title="philology" label="philologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8752" start="6363" end="6369" title="Basque language" label="Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q47588" start="6443" end="6457" title="Basque Country (historical territory)" label="Basque country"/>
<link wikidata="Q8752" start="6719" end="6725" title="Basque language" label="Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q5765" start="6777" end="6793" title="Balearic Islands" label="Balearic Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q190992" start="6837" end="6845" title="Iberians" label="Iberians"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="6930" end="6937" title="Berber people" label="Berbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="7035" end="7046" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="7051" end="7062" title="archaeology" label="archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742987" start="7152" end="7180" title="American Antiquarian Society" label="American Antiquarian Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="7227" end="7264" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q49341" start="7339" end="7352" title="Kawi language" label="Kawi language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="7356" end="7360" title="Java (island)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049" start="8433" end="8445" title="Noam Chomsky" label="Noam Chomsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q179976" start="8542" end="8576" title="Recursion" label="makes infinite use of finite means"/>
<link wikidata="Q179677" start="8885" end="8906" title="linguistic relativity" label="linguistic relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q179677" start="8946" end="8968" title="Sapir–Whorf hypothesis" label="Sapir–Whorf hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q191095" start="8994" end="9006" title="Edward Sapir" label="Edward Sapir"/>
<link wikidata="Q331853" start="9010" end="9024" title="Benjamin Whorf" label="Benjamin Whorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185354" start="9756" end="9772" title="Jerzy Bartmiński" label="Jerzy Bartmiński"/>
<link wikidata="Q262474" start="10816" end="10831" title="Anna Wierzbicka" label="Anna Wierzbicka"/>
<link wikidata="Q311757" start="11128" end="11142" title="Charles Taylor (philosopher)" label="Charles Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q76499" start="11306" end="11325" title="Johann Georg Hamann" label="Johann Georg Hamann"/>
<link wikidata="Q155547" start="11330" end="11353" title="Johann Gottfried Herder" label="Johann Gottfried Herder"/>
<link wikidata="Q12263354" start="13306" end="13337" title="Melchor Oyanguren de Santa Inés" label="Melchor Oyanguren de Santa Inés"/>
<link wikidata="Q22670" start="13630" end="13638" title="Schiller" label="Schiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q831027" start="14621" end="14652" title="Contributions to liberal theory" label="Contributions to liberal theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q13230" start="14655" end="14676" title="Ferdinand de Saussure" label="Ferdinand de Saussure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090538" start="16122" end="16137" title="Joxe Azurmendi" label="Azurmendi, Joxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384842" start="16374" end="16389" title="Antoine Berman" label="Berman, Antoine"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16397" end="16558" title="L&amp;#x27;épreuve de l&amp;#x27;étranger. Culture et traduction dans l&amp;#x27;Allemagne romantique: Herder, Goethe, Schlegel, Novalis, Humboldt, Schleiermacher, Hölderlin" label="L&amp;#x27;épreuve de l&amp;#x27;étranger. Culture et traduction dans l&amp;#x27;Allemagne romantique: Herder, Goethe, Schlegel, Novalis, Humboldt, Schleiermacher, Hölderlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q501116" start="16678" end="16693" title="Andreas Daum" label="Daum, Andreas W"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33111" wikidata="Q1378456" url="?curid=33111" title="World War I casualties">
<text>The total number of military and civilian casualties in World War I was about 40 million: estimates range from around 15 to 22 million deaths and about 23 million wounded military personnel, ranking it among the deadliest conflicts in human history.

The total number of deaths includes from 9 to 11 million military personnel. The civilian death toll was about 6 to 13 million. The Triple Entente (also known as the Allies) lost about 6 million military personnel while the Central Powers lost about 4 million. At least 2 million died from diseases and 6 million went missing, presumed dead. This article lists the casualties of the belligerent powers based on official published sources.

About two-thirds of military deaths in World War I were in battle, unlike the conflicts that took place in the 19th century when the majority of deaths were due to disease. Nevertheless, disease, including the 1918 flu pandemic and deaths while held as prisoners of war, still caused about one third of total military deaths for all belligerents.
== Classification of casualty statistics ==

Casualty statistics for World War I vary to a great extent; estimates of total deaths range from 9 million to over 15 million. Military casualties reported in official sources list deaths due to all causes, including an estimated 7 to 8 million combat related deaths (killed or died of wounds) and another two to three million military deaths caused by accidents, disease and deaths while prisoners of war. Official government reports listing casualty statistics were published by the United States and Great Britain. These secondary sources published during the 1920s, are the source of the statistics in reference works listing casualties in World War I. This article summarizes the casualty statistics published in the official government reports of the United States and Great Britain as well as France, Italy, Belgium, Germany, Austria and Russia. More recently the research of the Commonwealth War Graves Commission (CWGC) has revised the military casualty statistics of the UK and its allies; they include in their listing of military war dead personnel outside of combat theaters and civilians recruited from Africa, the Middle East and China who provided logistical and service support in combat theaters. The casualties of these support personnel recruited outside of Europe were previously not included with British war dead, however the casualties of the Labour Corps recruited from the British Isles were included in the rolls of British war dead published in 1921. The methodology used by each nation to record and classify casualties was not uniform, a general caveat regarding casualty figures is that they cannot be considered comparable in all cases. First World War civilian deaths are &quot;hazardous to estimate&quot; according to Micheal Clodfelter who maintains that &quot;the generally accepted figure of noncombatant deaths is 6.5 million.&quot;

== Casualties in the borders of 1914–1918 ==

The source of population data is: Haythornthwaite, Philip J., &quot;The World War One Source Book&quot; pp. 382–383

== Casualties by post-war (1924) borders ==
The war involved multi-ethnic empires such as Great Britain, France, Germany, Russia, Austria-Hungary and Turkey. Many ethnic groups in these territories were conscripted for military service. The casualties listed by modern borders are also included in the above table of figures for the countries that existed in 1914. The casualty figures by 1924 post war borders are rough estimates by Russian historian Vadim Erlikman in a 2004 handbook of human losses in the 20th century, the sources of his figures were published in the Soviet era and in post-Soviet Russia.

According to the 1914–1918 Online Encyclopedia &quot;In addition to losses suffered by African military personnel and the laborers supporting their operations, very large, but unknown numbers of African civilians perished during the war.&quot; They made an estimate of civilian losses in Africa of 750,000 based on the study by the Vadim Erlikman. They noted that Erlikman&#x27;s figures are based on the work of the Russian demographer Boris Urlanis, they noted that these estimates were &quot;imprecise&quot; and &quot;could be used to provide a frame of reference for further inquiry&quot;. The &quot;Oxford History of World War One&quot; notes that &quot;In east and central Africa the harshness of the war resulted in acute shortages of food with famine in some areas, a weakening of populations, and epidemic diseases which killed hundreds of thousands of people and also cattle.&quot;
The following estimates of Austrian deaths, within contemporary borders, were made by a Russian historian in a 2004 handbook of human losses in the 20th century. Total dead 175,000: including military losses 120,000 with the Austro-Hungarian forces and POW deaths in captivity of 30,000. Civilian dead due to famine and disease were 25,000.
The following estimates of Belarusian deaths, within contemporary borders, were made by a Russian historian in a 2004 handbook of human losses in the 20th century. Total dead 130,000: including military losses 70,000 with the Russian forces. Civilian dead were 60,000.
The following estimates of Ukrainian deaths, within contemporary borders, were made by a Russian historian in a 2004 handbook of human losses in the 20th century. Total dead 590,000: including military losses 450,000,(Erlikman did not break out military losses between Austro-Hungarian and Russian armed forces). Civilian dead were 140,000.
The Belgian Congo was part of the Kingdom of Belgium during the war. A Russian historian Vadim Erlikman in a 2004 handbook of human losses in the 20th century based on sources published in the Soviet Union and Russia estimated a total of 155,000 deaths in the Belgian Congo during the war.
Czechoslovakia was part of Austro-Hungary during the war. The estimates of Czechoslovak deaths within 1991 borders were made by a Russian historian in a 2004 handbook of human losses in the 20th century. Total dead 185,000: including military losses 110,000 with the Austro-Hungarian forces and POW deaths in captivity of 45,000. Civilian dead due to famine and disease were 30,000. The Czechoslovak Legions fought with the armies of the Allies during the war.
Estonia was part of the Russian Empire during the war and about 100,000 Estonians served in the Russian Army. Of them about 10,000 were killed.
From 1809 Finland was an autonomous Grand Duchy in the Russian Empire until the end of 1917. Finland&#x27;s autonomous status meant that Finns were exempt from conscription into the Russian Army. Approximately 800 Finns voluntarily served during World War I. According to data regarding Finnish war casualties, 317 Finns were killed between 1914 and 1917.
* French colonies

The following estimates of deaths, within contemporary borders, during World War I were made by a Russian historian Vadim Erlikman in a 2004 handbook of human losses in the 20th century. Erlikman&#x27;s estimates are based on sources published in the Soviet Union and Russia. These numbers only include military deaths, total civilian deaths in Africa could amount up to 750,000.

:&quot; (1914 known as French Algeria)&quot;: 26,000
: &quot;(1914 known as French Indochina)&quot;: 12,000
: &quot;(1914 part of French West Africa)&quot;: 10,000
: &quot;(1914 known as the French protectorate of Morocco)&quot;: 8,000
: &quot;(1914 part of French West Africa)&quot;: 6,000
: &quot;(1914 part of French West Africa)&quot;: 2,500
:: 2,500 military
: &quot;(1914 part of French West Africa)&quot;: 2,000
: &quot;(1914 part of French West Africa)&quot;: 2,000
: &quot;(1914 part of French Equatorial Africa)&quot;: 2,000
: &quot;(1914 part of French West Africa)&quot;: 2,000
: &quot;(1914 known as French Tunisia)&quot;: 2,000
: &quot;(1914 part of French Equatorial Africa)&quot;: 1,500
: &quot;(1914 known as French Oubangui-Chari)&quot;: 1,000
: &quot;(1914 part of French West Africa)&quot;: 1,000
: &quot;(1914 part of French Equatorial Africa)&quot;: 500
: &quot;(French Establishments in India)&quot;: 195
 Total: 82,000
The following estimates of Georgian deaths, within contemporary borders, were made by a Russian historian in a 2004 handbook of human losses in the 20th century. Georgia was part of the Russian Empire during the war and about 150,000 Georgians served in the Russian Army. Of them about 10,000 were killed.
* German colonies
The following estimates of deaths, within contemporary borders, during World War I were made by a Russian historian Vadim Erlikman in a 2004 handbook of human losses in the 20th century. Erlikman&#x27;s estimates are based on sources published in the Soviet Union and Russia. These numbers only include military deaths, total civilian deaths in Africa could amount up to 750,000.

: &quot;(1914 part of German East Africa)&quot;: 20,000
: &quot;(1914 known as German South-West Africa)&quot;: 1,000
: &quot;(1914 known as Kamerun)&quot;: 5,000 military and 50,000 civilian
: &quot;(1914 known as German Togoland)&quot;: 2,000
: &quot;(1914 part of German East Africa)&quot;: 15,000
 Total: 48,000
The following estimates of Hungarian deaths, within contemporary borders, during World War I were made by a Russian historian in a 2004 handbook of human losses in the 20th century. Total dead 385,000: including military losses 270,000 with the Austro-Hungarian forces and POW deaths in captivity of 70,000. Civilian dead due to famine and disease were 45,000.
Ireland was a part of the United Kingdom during World War I. Five-sixths of the island left to form the Irish Free State, now the Republic of Ireland, in 1922. A total of 206,000 Irishmen served in the British forces during the war. The number of Irish deaths in the British Army recorded by the registrar general was 27,405. A significant number of these casualties were from what, in 1920, became Northern Ireland. While 49,400 soldiers died serving in Irish divisions (the 10th, 16th and 36th), although not all of the men serving in these divisions were natives of Ireland and many Irish who died in non-Irish regiments are not listed. For example, 29% of the casualties in the 16th Division were not natives of Ireland. Neither does it include Irish emigrants in Britain who enlisted there and are not categorised as Irish. Australia lists 4,731 of its first World War soldiers as having been born in Ireland and more than 19,000 Irish-born soldiers served in the Canadian Corps. According to research done by John Horne of Trinity College Dublin, there are at least 30,986 soldiers who were born in Ireland that died; however, that&#x27;s considered a &quot;conservative&quot; estimate and is very likely to raise.
The losses of Portuguese Mozambique were estimated by a Russian historian Vadim Erlikman in a 2004 handbook of human losses in the 20th century. Erlikman&#x27;s estimates are based on sources published in the Soviet Union and Russia. 52,000
Poland was territory of Germany, Austria-Hungary and partially annexed by Russia, from 1795 to 1918. By late 1915, Germany had complete control over modern-day Poland. A 2005 Polish study estimated 3,376,800 Poles were conscripted into the armed forces of these countries during World War I, an additional 300,000 were conscripted for forced labor by the Germans. The Russians and Austrians forcibly resettled 1.6 to 1.8 million persons from the war zone in Poland. According to Micheal Clodfelter, Polish war dead were 1,080,000, whilst 200,000 Polish civilians were killed in the fighting on the Eastern Front; 870,000 men served in the German, Austrian and Russian armies. Another estimate made by a Russian historian in a 2004 handbook of human losses in the 20th century, put total Polish war dead at 640,000, including military losses of 270,000 Poles conscripted, civilian losses of 120,000 due to military operations and 250,000 caused by famine and disease. The ethnic Polish Blue Army served with the French Army. The ethnic Polish Legions fought as part of the Austro-Hungarian Army on the Eastern Front.
The territory of Transylvania was part of Austria-Hungary during World War I. The following estimates of Romanian deaths, within contemporary borders, during World War I were made by a Russian historian in a 2004 handbook of human losses in the 20th century. Total dead: 748,000, including military losses of 220,000 with the Romanian forces, 150,000 with the Austro-Hungarian forces and POW deaths in captivity of 48,000. Civilian dead were as follows due to famine and disease: 200,000, killed in military operations 120,000 and 10,000 dead in Austrian prisons.

* British colonies
Britain recruited Indian, Chinese, native South African, Egyptian and other overseas labour to provide logistical support in the combat theatres. Included with British casualties in East Africa are the deaths of 44,911 recruited labourers. The CWGC reports that nearly 2,000 workers from the Chinese Labour Corps are buried with British war dead in France.

The following estimates of British Empire colonial military deaths, within contemporary borders, during World War I were made by a Russian historian Vadim Erlikman in a 2004 handbook of human losses in the 20th century. Erlikman&#x27;s estimates are based on sources published in the Soviet Union and Russia.
: &quot;(1914 known as the Gold Coast)&quot;: 1,200
: &quot;(1914 known as British East Africa)&quot;: 2,000
: &quot;(1914 known as Nyasaland)&quot;: 3,000
: &quot;(1914 part of British West Africa)&quot;: 5,000
: &quot;(1914 part of British West Africa)&quot;: 1,000
: &quot;(1914 known as the Uganda Protectorate)&quot;: 1,500
: &quot;(1914 known as Northern Rhodesia)&quot;: 3,000
: &quot;(1914 known as Southern Rhodesia)&quot;: 5,716 persons of European origin served in the war, of whom about 700 were killed, or died of wounds or other causes. In explicitly Rhodesian units, 127 were killed, 24 died of wounds, 101 died of disease or other causes and 294 were wounded. Of the territory&#x27;s black African servicemen, 31 were killed in action, 142 died of other causes and 116 were wounded.
 Total: 18,000

The following estimates are for Yugoslavia within the 1991 borders.

Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia and Vojvodina (Now part of Serbia) were part of Austria-Hungary during World War I. Serbia, which included Macedonia, and Montenegro was an independent nation. The Yugoslav historian Vladimir Dedijer put the total losses of the Yugoslav lands at 1.9 million, of which 43% were from Serbia. The following estimates of Yugoslav deaths, within 1991 borders, during World War I were made by a Russian historian in a 2004 handbook of human losses in the 20th century. Total dead: 996,000 including military losses, 260,000 with the Serbian forces, 80,000 with the Austro-Hungarian forces, 13,000 with Montenegrin forces and POW deaths in captivity of 93,000. Civilian dead were as follows due to famine and disease: 400,000, killed in military operations: 120,000 and 30,000 dead in Austrian prisons or executed.
During World War I, the Nepalese army was expanded and six new regiments, totaling more than 20,000 troops—all volunteers—were sent to India, most of them to the North-West Frontier Province, to release British and Indian troops for service overseas. Simultaneously, the Nepalese government agreed to maintain recruitment at a level that would sustain the existing British Gurkha units and allow the establishment of additional ones. The battalions were increased to thirty-three with the addition of 55,000 new recruits and Gurkha units were placed at the disposal of the British high command for service on all fronts. Many volunteers were assigned to non-combat units, such as the Army Bearer Corps and the labour battalions but they also were in combat in France, Turkey, Palestine and Mesopotamia. The Rana prime ministers urged Nepalese males to fight in the war. Of the more than 200,000 Nepalese who served in the British army, there were some 20,000 Gurkha casualties included above with the British Indian Army.

== Footnotes ==


 East and Central Africa
* The conflict in East Africa caused enormous civilian casualties. The &quot;Oxford History of World War One&quot; notes that &quot;In east and central Africa the harshness of the war resulted in acute shortages of food with famine in some areas, a weakening of populations, and epidemic diseases which killed hundreds of thousands of people and also cattle.&quot; According to the 1914–1918 Online Encyclopedia &quot;In addition to losses suffered by African military personnel and the laborers supporting their operations, very large, but unknown numbers of African civilians perished during the war.&quot; They made an estimate of civilian losses in Africa of 750,000 The following estimates of civilian deaths in East Africa during World War I were made by a Russian historian in a 2004 handbook of human losses in the 20th century: Kenya 30,000; Tanzania 100,000; Mozambique 50,000; Rwanda 15,000; Burundi 20,000 and the Belgian Congo 150,000.
* The military casualties of the UK, France, Germany, Belgium and Portugal include Africans who served with their armed forces, the details are noted above in the list of the various colonies.
Australia
* The Australian War Memorial puts their war dead at 61,513.
* The Australian War Memorial maintains a database listing the names of war dead.
* The Commonwealth War Graves Commission figure for Australian war dead is 62,149.
* The report of the UK War Office listed 59,330 Army war dead, 152,171 wounded and 4,084 taken prisoner.
* In 1924, the Australian government in a reply to a questionnaire from the International Labour Office, an agency of the League of Nations, reported 412,953 men mobilized and 59,337 dead and missing in World War I.
* The Soviet demographer Boris Urlanis estimated that included in total military deaths are 54,000 killed and died of wounds.

 Belgium
* Belgian government figures for military losses in Europe were 40,367 (26,338 killed, died of wounds or accidents and 14,029 died of disease or missing). In Africa: 2,620 soldiers were killed and 15,650 porters died. The combined total for Europe and Africa is 58,637.
* United States War Dept. figures for Belgium are: Total mobilized force 267,000; total casualties 93,061 including killed and died 13,716; wounded 44,686; Prisoners and missing 34,659.
* The report of the UK War Office listed 93,061 casualties up until 11 November 1918 including 13,716 killed and died; 24,456 missing; 44,686 wounded and 10,208 POW. &quot;These figures are approximate only, the records being incomplete.&quot;
* In 1924, the Belgian government in a reply to a questionnaire from the International Labour Office, an agency of the League of Nations, reported 365,000 men mobilized and 40,936 dead and missing in World War I.
* The Soviet demographer Boris Urlanis estimated that included in total Belgian military deaths are 35,000 killed and died of wounds
* Civilian deaths according to Belgian government statistics were 23,700 (6,000 killed in the 1914 German massacres and 17,700 victims in prisons, deportations and by military tribunals). According to a demographic study, there were 92,000 indirect deaths in Belgium (62,000 deaths due to wartime privations and 30,000 in the Spanish flu pandemic). John Horne estimated that 6,500 Belgian and French civilians were killed in German reprisals.

Canada
* According to the Canadian War Museum Close to 61,000 Canadians were killed during the war, and another 172,000 were wounded. The small Dominion of Newfoundland suffered 1,305 killed and several thousand wounded. The Canadian Expeditionary Force lost 59,544 in the war, including 51,748 due to enemy action; the Royal Canadian Navy reported 150 deaths from all causes and 1,388 Canadians died while serving with the British Flying Services.
* The Commonwealth War Graves Commission figure for Canadian war dead is 64,996.
* The report of the UK War Office listed 56,639 Canadian war dead, 149,732 wounded and 3,729 taken prisoner.
* In 1924, the Canadian government in a reply to a questionnaire from the International Labour Office, an agency of the League of Nations, reported 628,964 men mobilized and 51,674 dead and missing in World War I.
* The Soviet demographer Boris Urlanis estimated that included in total Canadian military deaths are 53,000 killed and died of wounds.
* The Canadian Virtual War Memorial contains a registry of information about the graves and memorials of Canadians and Newfoundlanders who served valiantly and gave their lives for their country.
* The 2,000 civilian deaths were due to the Halifax Explosion.

France
* French casualty figures up until 1 June 1919 were listed in a French government report of 1 August 1919 presented to the French Chamber of Deputies. Total Army dead and missing up until 11 November 1918 were 1,357,800; in addition there were 28,600 deaths after 11 November 1918 of those wounded and 11,400 Navy dead which brings total dead and missing to 1,397,800. These figures include 35,200 French Colonial Forces, 35,900 &quot;north Africans&quot; and 4,600 French Foreign Legion personnel.
* According to the French Army official report &quot;La Statistique médicale de l&#x27;armée&quot; Total dead were 1,325,000 (675,000 killed in action, 225,000 missing and prisoners killed, 250,000 died of wounds and 175,000 died of disease.)
* A breakdown of French casualties published in the Official History of the Australian Army Medical Services, 1914–1918 lists 674,700 killed in action, 250,000 died of wounds, 225,300 missing and presumed dead and 175,000 dead from disease and injury. Wounded amounted to 2,300,000.
* United States War Dept. figures for French casualties are: Total mobilized force 8,410,000; total casualties 6,160,800 including killed and died: 1,357,800, wounded: 4,266,000, prisoners and missing: 537,000.
* The UK War Office put French dead, killed and missing at 1,385,300 dead and missing, including 58,000 colonial soldiers up until 1 November 1918. They noted that a government report of 1 August 1919, listed the number of killed and died at 1,357,000. There were no figures available of the wounded.
* In 1924, the French government in a reply to a questionnaire from the International Labour Office, an agency of the League of Nations, reported 7,935,000 men mobilized and 1,400,000 dead and missing in World War I.
* The names of the soldiers who died for France during World War I are listed on-line by the French government.
* The Soviet demographer Boris Urlanis estimated that included in total French military deaths are 1,126,000 killed and died of wounds.
* According to the French encyclopedia Quid 30–40,000 foreign volunteers from about 40 nationalities served in the French army, including 12,000 with the Czechoslovak Legion and the ethnic Polish Blue Army; 5,000 Italians served in a &quot;Legion&quot; commanded by Colonel Garibaldi. There were also 1,000 Spaniards and 1,500 Swiss in French service, 200 American volunteers served with the French from 1914 to 1916, including the Lafayette Escadrille. Luxembourg was occupied by Germany during the war. According to the Mobile Reference travel Guide 3,700 Luxembourg citizens served in the French armed forces, 2,800 gave their lives in the war. They are commemorated at the Gëlle Fra in Luxembourg. The French Armenian Legion served as part of the French armed forces during the war. French colonies, such as Algeria and Vietnam, also sent troops to fight and serve on the battlefront. American military historian Douglas Porch reported of the French Foreign Legion, in which most non-French nationals served, that some estimates put Legion casualties during the war as high as 31,000 of the 44,150 men who served in the Legion, a 70 per cent casualty rate.
* According to a demographic study, there were 500,000 indirect deaths in France (300,000 deaths due to wartime privations and 200,000 in the Spanish flu pandemic). Another estimate of the demographic loss of the civilian population in the France during the war, put total excess deaths at 264,000 to 284,000, not including an additional 100,000 to 120,000 Spanish flu deaths. Civilian dead include 1,509 merchant sailors and 3,357 killed in air attacks and long range artillery bombardments Kramer quotes Huber as estimating 600,000 excess deaths, though it&#x27;s unclear what proportion are due to influenza.
* Tertiary sources put French civilian war dead at 40,000.

Greece
* The Soviet demographer Boris Urlanis estimated total military dead of 26,000, including 15,000 deaths due to disease and 11,000 killed and died of wounds
* United States War Dept. figures for Greek casualties are: Total mobilized force 230,000; total casualties 27,000 (killed and died 5,000; wounded 21,000; prisoners and missing 1,000).
* The report of the UK War Office listed 27,000 casualties (5,000 killed or died of wounds; 21,000 wounded and 1,000 prisoners and missing).
* In 1924, the Greek government in a reply to a questionnaire from the International Labour Office, an agency of the League of Nations, reported 355,000 men mobilized and no dead and missing in World War I.
* Jean Bujac in a campaign history of the Greek Army in World War I, listed 8,365 combat related deaths and 3,255 missing.
* According to a demographic study there were 150,000 indirect deaths in Greece due to wartime privations.

India (British)
* The Commonwealth War Graves Commission figure for Indian war dead is 73,905.
* The report of the UK War Office listed 64,449 Army war dead, 69,214 wounded and 11,264 taken prisoner, these figures include British serving in the Indian Army (2,393 dead, 2,325 wounded and 194 taken prisoner).
* The Soviet demographer Boris Urlanis estimated that included in total Indian military deaths are 27,000 killed and died of wounds.

Italy 
* The Italian government put military war deaths at 651,000 (killed in action or died of wounds 378,000; died of disease 186,000 plus an additional 87,000 deaths of invalids from 12 November 1918 until 30 April 1920, due to war related injuries.) These official figures were published in an Italian study of war losses by G. Mortara, however he estimated actual losses until the war&#x27;s end in Nov. 1918, at 600,000 (400,000 killed or died of wounds and 200,000 deaths due to disease). A brief summary of data from this study can be found online.
* United States War Dept. figures for Italian casualties are: Total mobilized force 5,615,000; total casualties 2,197,000 (killed and died 650,000; wounded 947,000; prisoners and missing 600,000).
* The report of the UK War Office listed 1,937,000 casualties up until 11 November 1918 (460,000 dead; 947,000 wounded and 530,000 prisoners).
* In 1924, the Italian government in a reply to a questionnaire from the International Labour Office, an agency of the League of Nations, reported 5,615,000 men mobilized and 750,000 dead and missing in World War I.
* The Soviet demographer Boris Urlanis estimated that included in total Italian military deaths are 433,000 killed and died of wounds.
* According to a demographic study there were 1,021,000 indirect deaths in Italy (589,000 deaths due to wartime privations and 432,000 in the Spanish flu pandemic). Another estimate of the demographic loss of the civilian population in the Italy during the war, put total excess deaths at 324,000 not including an additional 300,000 Spanish flu deaths. Civilian deaths due to military action were 3,400 (including 2,293 by attacks on shipping, 965 during air raids and 142 by sea bombardment). Kramer cites Mario Isnenghi and Giorgio Rochat, La Grande Guerra, 1914–1918 (Florence: Scandicci, 2000), pp. 301–2. They give excess war-related civilian mortality for the period 1915–18 of 606,407, of which influenza accounts for 274,041.

 Japan
* In 1924, the Japanese government in a reply to a questionnaire from the International Labour Office, an agency of the League of Nations, reported 800,000 men mobilized and 4,661 dead and missing in World War I.
* The Yasukuni Shrine lists 4,850 dead in World War I.
* United States War Dept. figures for Japanese casualties are: total mobilized force 800,000; total casualties 1,210 (including Killed and died 300; wounded 907; Prisoners and missing 3).

 Montenegro
* In 1924, the Yugoslav government in a reply to a questionnaire from the International Labour Office, an agency of the League of Nations, reported Montenegro mobilized 50,000 men and 13,325 were dead and missing in World War I.
* United States War Dept. figures for Montenegrin casualties are: total mobilized force 50,000; total casualties 20,000 including killed and died 3,000; wounded 10,000; prisoners and missing 7,000.

 New Zealand
* The Auckland War Memorial Museum commemorates the 18,060 New Zealand World War I dead.
* The Auckland War Memorial Museum maintains a database listing the names of the New Zealand war dead.
* The Commonwealth War Graves Commission figure for New Zealand war dead is 18,060.
* The report of the UK War Office listed 16,711 army war dead, 41,317 wounded and 498 taken prisoner.
* The Soviet demographer Boris Urlanis estimated that included in total New Zealand military deaths are 14,000 killed and died of wounds.

 Newfoundland
* The Dominion of Newfoundland was not part of Canada during World War I. The report of the UK War Office listed 1,204 Army war dead, 2,314 wounded and 150 taken prisoner.
* An academic journal published in Newfoundland has given the details of Newfoundland&#x27;s military casualties. Fatalities totaled 1,570 The Royal Newfoundland Regiment suffered 1,297 dead; there were an additional 171 dead in the Royal Navy and 101 in the Merchant Navy.

 Portugal
* United States War Dept. figures for Portuguese casualties are: total mobilized force 100,000; total casualties 33,291 (including killed and died 7,222; wounded 13,751; prisoners and missing 12,318).
* The report of the UK War Office listed 33,291 casualties: 7,222 dead (1,689 in Europe and 5,533 in Africa); 13,751 wounded (figure for Europe only) and 12,318 prisoners and missing (6,678 in Europe and &quot;a large number of missing in Mozambique).
* In 1924, the Portuguese government in a reply to a questionnaire from the International Labour Office, an agency of the League of Nations, reported 100,000 men mobilized and 4,000 dead and missing in World War I.
* The Soviet demographer Boris Urlanis estimated that included in total Portuguese military deaths are 6,000 killed or missing in action and died of wounds.
* According to a demographic study there were 220,000 indirect deaths in Portugal (82,000 deaths due to wartime privations and 138,000 in the Spanish flu pandemic).
* 13 Portuguese civilians that were killed during bombardment of Funchal, Madeira Island on 3 December 1916, and 12 December 1917, by German submarines.
 Romania
* In 1924, the Romanian government in a reply to a questionnaire from the International Labour Office, an agency of the League of Nations, reported 1,000,000 men mobilized and 250,000 dead and missing in World War I.
* United States War Dept. figures for Romanian casualties are: total mobilized force 750,000; total casualties 535,706 (including killed and died 335,706; wounded 120,000; prisoners and missing 80,000).
* The report of the UK War Office listed military casualties of 335,706 killed or missing. In addition 265,000 civilians were killed or missing.
* The Soviet demographer Boris Urlanis estimated that included in total Romanian military deaths are 177,000 killed and died of wounds.
* According to a demographic study there were 430,000 indirect deaths in Romania due to wartime privations.
* A Russian historian in a 2004 handbook of human losses in the 20th century estimated 330,000 civilian dead (120,000 due to military activity, 10,000 as prisoners and 200,000 caused by famine and disease).

 Russian Empire
* According to the Soviet demographer Boris Urlanis the sources for Russian casualties are difficult to ascertain. Casualty figures, compiled from the field reports during the war, were published in 1925 by the Soviet Central Statistical office They put Russia&#x27;s total losses at 775,400 dead and missing, 348,500 disabled and 3,343,900 POW. Those evacuated to the rear area were 1,425,000 sick and 2,844,500 wounded. Included in these figures are battle casualties of 7,036,087. (626,440 killed in action, 17,174 died of wounds, 228,838 missing, 3,409,433 held as prisoners of war and 2,754,202 wounded in action). Urlanis believes that the figures for those killed were considerably underestimated, because a large part of the reports were lost in retreats. Urlanis estimated the actual total military war dead at 1,811,000 (killed 1,200,000, died of wounds 240,000, gassed 11,000, died from disease 155,000, POW deaths 190,000, deaths due to accidents and other causes 15,000).
* A study by the Russian military historian G.F. Krivosheev estimated the total war dead at 2,254,369 (killed in action 1,200,000; missing and presumed dead 439,369; died of wounds 240,000, gassed 11,000, died from disease 155,000, POW deaths 190,000, deaths due to accidents and other causes 19,000). Wounded 3,749,000. POW 3,343,900. Total mobilized force 15,378,000.
* United States War Dept. figures for Russian casualties are: Total mobilized force 12,000,000. Total casualties 9,150,000 (including Killed and died 1,700,000, wounded 4,950,000, prisoners and missing 2,500,000).
* The UK War Office Based on a telegram from Petrograd to Copenhagen in December 1918 listed military casualties of 9,150,000 (including 1,700,000 killed, 1,450,000 disabled, 3,500,000 wounded and 2,500,000 POW).
* In 1924, the Soviet government in a reply to a questionnaire from the International Labour Office, an agency of the League of Nations, reported for Russia 15,070,000 men mobilized and 1,700,000 dead and missing in World War I.
* According to the Soviet demographer Boris Urlanis there were 1,500,000 civilian deaths due to wartime privations up until the end of 1917.
* A Russian historian in a 2004 handbook of human losses in the 20th century estimated 1,140,000 war related Russian civilian deaths, from 1914 to 1917 in 1914 borders (410,000 due to military operations and 730,000 caused by famine and disease).

 Serbia
* Sources for total Serbian casualties range from 750,000 to 1,250,000.
* A demographic study in 1927, put total the war dead for Serbia and Montenegro at 750,000 (300,000 military and 450,000 civilians). The overall population loss from 1912 to 1920, based on the pre-war level was 1,236,000 persons (including 750,000 in World War I; 150,000 killed in the Balkan Wars and a decline in the number of births of 336,000), in addition there were 47,000 war related deaths during 1914–1920, that are included with deaths by natural causes.
* According to Frédéric Le Moal, Serbian historian Dušan T. Bataković puts their losses at 1,250,000 (450,000 military and 800,000 civilians). These losses are from 1912 to 1918 and include the Balkan Wars. In July 2014, Serbian poet and academic Matija Bećković said &quot;that 402,435 Serbian soldiers have been killed and 845,000 civilians hanged or exterminated in concentration camps during WWI. At a September 2014 conference sponsored by the Serbian Ministry of Defense, Dr. Alexander Nedok put Serbian war dead at 1,247,435 persons.
* According to the Soviet demographer Boris Urlanis regarding Serbia &quot;it is particularly difficult to ascertain the number of killed&quot;. Based on a demographic analysis of the population, Urlanis estimated total Serbian and Montenegrin casualties of 728,000 including military dead: 278,000 (140,000 killed in action; 25,000 died of wounds; 50,000 disease; 60,000 POW and 3,000 from other causes) and total civilian dead of 450,000.
* In 1924, the Serbian government in a reply to a questionnaire from the International Labour Office, an agency of the League of Nations, reported 1,008,240 men mobilized and 365,164 dead and missing in World War I.
* United States War Dept. figures for Serbian casualties are: total mobilized force 707,343; total casualties 331,106 (including killed and died 45,000; wounded 133,148; prisoners and missing 152,958).
* The report of the UK War Office listed military casualties of 331,106 including 45,000 killed, 133,148 wounded and 70,243 prisoners and 82,535 missing.
* A Russian historian in a 2004 handbook of human losses in the 20th century, estimated 120,000 Serbian civilian deaths due to military activity and 30,000 executed (казнено и убито) by the Austro-Hungarians. His estimate for total Yugoslav civilian casualties including Austro-Hungarian territory was 550,000.

 South Africa
* The Commonwealth War Graves Commission figure for South Africa war dead is 9,726
* The report of the UK War Office listed 7,121 Army war dead, 12,029 wounded and 1,538 taken prisoner.
* In 1924, the South African government in a reply to a questionnaire from the International Labour Office, an agency of the League of Nations, reported 136,070 men mobilized and 7,134 dead and missing in World War I.
* The Soviet demographer Boris Urlanis estimated that included in total South African military deaths are 5,000 killed and died of wounds.
 United Kingdom
* UK military casualties were reported separately by branch of service: Total of 744,000 dead and missing from the British Isles: Army 702,410 &quot;soldiers&quot;; Royal Navy 32,287 Losses at sea were 908 UK civilians and 63 fisherman killed in U-boat attacks.
* Overseas labor units serving with the British and French forces. The UK employed about 300,000 Indian, Chinese, native South African, Egyptian and other nations as laborers during the war. By the end of 1917, there were 50,000 Chinese workers in France, rising to 96,000 by August 1918 (with another 30,000 working for the French). 100,000 Egyptians were working in France and the Middle East, alongside 21,000 Indians and 20,000 South Africans, who were also in East Africa. A total of about 140,000 Chinese workers recruited in the Beiyang government, served on the Western Front during and after the war with the British and French Armed Forces. According to the Commonwealth war Graves Commission &quot;In all, nearly 2,000 men from the Chinese Labour Corps died during the First World War, some as a direct result of enemy action, or of wounds received in the course of their duties, but many more in the influenza epidemic that swept Europe in 1918–19&quot; One historical controversy is the number who died in the war. Some Chinese scholars say the number was as high as 20,000 but records kept by the British and French recruiters, show just under 2,000 lost their lives, many from the flu pandemic that swept the world starting in 1919. According to the Commonwealth War Graves Commission, &quot;The African combatant troops raised for the East African campaign numbered 34,000. The non-combatant porters, stevedores and followers of the Military Labour Corps 600,000. Almost 50,000 of these men were lost, killed in action died of sickness or wounds&quot; According to The Africa Research Institute official British figures the death toll exceeded 105,000 native African troops and military carriers
* Kramer gives 600,000 excess civilian deaths, of which 200,000 are due to the influenza pandemic, citing Brill’s Encyclopedia of the First World War, pp. 732–3.

United States
* US Dept. of Defense figures from 2010, list 116,516 war dead from all causes for the period ending 31 December 1918, including 106,378 in the Army, 7,287 in the Navy and 2,851 in the Marine Corps. There were 53,402 battle deaths, including 50,510 in the Army, 431 in the navy and 2,461 in the Marines. There were 63,114 non-combat deaths, 55,868 in the Army, 6,856 in the Navy and 390 in the Marines. Wounded: 204,002 (Army: 193,663, Navy: 819, Marines: 9,520). The figures include 279 deaths during the Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War from 1918 to 1920. The U.S. casualty figures were revised by the US Dept. of Defense in 1957. The US Coast Guard lost 192 dead (111 deaths in action and 81 from other causes).
* United States War Dept. figures from 1924 for U.S. casualties were: total mobilized force 4,355,000; total casualties 350,300 (including killed and died from all causes 126,000; wounded 234,300 (including 14,500 died of wounds); prisoners and missing 4,500).
* In 1924, the U.S. government in a reply to a questionnaire from the International Labour Office, an agency of the League of Nations, reported 4,272,521 men mobilized and 67,813 dead and missing in World War I.
* United States civilian losses include 128 killed in the sinking of the RMS &quot;Lusitania&quot; (before the U.S. became a belligerent) as well as 629 Merchant Mariners killed in enemy submarine attacks on their merchant ships.
 Austria-Hungary
* The official history of Austria-Hungary&#x27;s involvement in the First World War put total military dead at 1,494,200: (1,016,200 killed and 478,000 while prisoners of war).
* In 1924, the Austrian government in a reply to a questionnaire from the International Labour Office, an agency of the League of Nations, reported 9,000,000 men mobilized and 1,542,817 dead and missing in World War I.
* United States War Dept. figures for Austro-Hungarian casualties are: total mobilized force 7,800,000; total casualties 7,020,000 (including killed and died 1,200,000; wounded 3,620,000; prisoners and missing 2,200,000).
* The UK War Office estimate for Austro-Hungarian casualties up to 31 December 1918: total casualties of 7,020,000 including 1,200,000 killed, 3,620,000 wounded and 2,200,000 prisoners. Preliminary figures up to the end of May 1918, given by the U. K. Director of Military Intelligence give the following estimated totals: 800,000 killed, 1,800,000 prisoners/missing, and 3,200,000 wounded/sick, for a total of 5,800,000. An additional 80,000 killed, 320,000 wounded/sick, and 20,000 prisoners are estimated in the Austrian offensive against Italy from 1 June to 24 October 1918. At the same time there 72,500 casualties on the Balkans and Western Fronts. Finally, during the last Italian offensive the prisoners claimed by the Italians amounted to 448,000, while a further 30,000 Austro-Hungarians were killed and 50,000 wounded.
* The Soviet demographer Boris Urlanis estimated that included in total Austro-Hungarian military deaths are 900,000 killed and died of wounds.
* A study published by the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace estimated that there were 467,000 civilian deaths attributable to wartime privations caused by the allied blockade.
* A Russian historian in a 2004 handbook of human losses in the 20th century estimated 120,000 civilian deaths due to military activity in Austro-Hungarian Galicia.

 Bulgaria
* United States War Dept. figures for Bulgarian casualties are: total mobilized force 1,200,000; total casualties 266,919 (including Killed and died 87,500; wounded 152,930; Prisoners and missing 27,029).
* The UK War Office listed casualties reported by the Bulgarian War Office: 87,500 total dead (48,917 killed, 13,198 died of wounds, 888? accidentally killed, 24,497 died of disease); 13,729 missing; 152,390 wounded and 10,623 prisoners. The Bulgarian War Office stated that &quot;losses during the retreat from sickness and privations were much greater than the figures they possess&quot;.
* In 1924, the Bulgarian government in a reply to a questionnaire from the International Labour Office, an agency of the League of Nations, reported 400,000 men mobilized and 32,772 dead and missing in World War I.
* The Soviet demographer Boris Urlanis estimated that included in total Bulgarian military deaths are 62,000 killed and died of wounds.
* According to the Soviet demographer Boris Urlanis there were 100,000 civilian deaths due to wartime privations.
 German Empire
* In 1934, the official German war history listed 2,037,000 military dead. Confirmed dead from all causes 1,936,897 (Army 1,900,876, Navy 34,836, Colonial troops 1,185); wounded 4,215,662; prisoners and missing 974,977 of which an estimated 100,000 were presumed dead.
* United States War Dept. figures for German casualties are: total mobilized force 11,000,000; total casualties 7,142,558 (including Killed and died 1,773,700; wounded 4,216,058; prisoners and missing 1,152,800).
* The UK War Office listed official German figures from 1921 of 1,808,545 killed and 4,247,143 wounded, exclusive of 14,000 African conscript deaths during the war.
* In 1924, the German government in a reply to a questionnaire from the International Labour Office, an agency of the League of Nations, reported 13,250,000 men mobilized and 2,000,000 dead and missing in World War I.
* The Soviet demographer Boris Urlanis estimated that included in total German military deaths are 1,796,000 killed and died of wounds.
* The UK War Office listed official German figures from 1919 of 720 German civilians who were killed by allied air raids.
* The figures for civilian deaths due to the Blockade of Germany are disputed. The German Board of Public Health in December 1918 maintained that 763,000 German civilians died from malnutrition and disease caused by the blockade up until the end of December 1918. A German academic study in 1928 put the death toll at 424,000. A study sponsored by the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace in 1940, estimated the German civilian death toll due to the war at over 600,000. Based on the above-mentioned German study of 1928, they maintained that &quot;A thorough inquiry has led to the conclusion that the number of &quot;civilian&quot; deaths traceable to the war was 424,000, to which number must be added about 200,000 deaths caused by the influenza epidemic&quot;. Finally, Kramer cites Jay Winter, who estimates 478,500 civilian war-related excess deaths, of which 180,000 was due to the influenze pandemic.

 Ottoman Empire
* Based on his analysis of the non-published individual World War I campaign histories in the Ottoman Archives, Edward J. Erickson estimated Ottoman military casualties in the study Ordered to Die: A History of the Ottoman Army in the First World War. The casualties included total war dead of 771,844, (243,598 killed in action, 61,487 missing action and 466,759 deaths due to disease). The number of wounded was 763,753 and POWs 145,104.
* The Ottoman official casualty statistics published in 1922 were: total dead 325,000 including (killed in action 50,000, 35,000 died of wounds, 240,000 died of disease). Wounded 400,000. POWs, sick and missing 1,565,000 and total mobilized: 2,850,000.
* United States War Dept. figures for Ottoman casualties are: total mobilized force 2,850,000; total casualties 975,000 (including killed and died 325,000; wounded 400,000; prisoners and missing 250,000).
* The UK War Office figures for Ottoman casualties were: total accounted for 725,000 (killed 50,000, died of wounds 35,000, died of disease 400,000, wounded 400,000). Total unaccounted for: 1,565,000 (prisoners, deserters, invalids and missing).
* The Soviet demographer Boris Urlanis estimated that included in total Ottoman military deaths are 318,000 killed and died of wounds.
* Estimates of Ottoman civilian casualties in western sources range from 2,000,000 to 2,150,000. A Russian historian in a 2004 handbook of human losses in the 20th century estimated total Ottoman civilian dead from 1915 to 1918 at about 3.2 million including the deaths of 2.2 million Armenian, Assyrian, and Greek victims of genocides committed by the Ottomans and 1,000,000 war-related civilian deaths in the Ottoman Empire due to famine and disease.(In current borders Turkey 500,000; Syria 160,000; Lebanon 110,000; Iraq 150,000; Israel/Palestine 35,000 and Jordan 20,000) According to the BBC 200,000 persons perished in the Great Famine of Mount Lebanon during the war.
* Civilian casualties include the Armenian genocide. The total number of resulting Armenian deaths is generally held to have been 1.5 million. Other ethnic groups were similarly attacked by the Ottoman Empire during this period, including Assyrians and Greeks. Some scholars consider those events to be part of the same policy of extermination. The overwhelming majority of historians as well as academic institutions on Holocaust and Genocide Studies recognize the Armenian Genocide. &quot;Despite the vast amount of evidence that points to the historical reality of the Armenian Genocide, eyewitness accounts, official archives, photographic evidence, the reports of diplomats, and the testimony of survivors, denial of the Armenian Genocide by successive regimes in Turkey has gone on from 1915 to the present&quot;.

 Denmark
* Denmark was neutral in the war but Germany at that time included part of Danish Schleswig. Men from this area were conscripted into the German forces and their losses are included with German casualties. Over 700 Danish merchant sailors and fisherman died, mostly due to vessels torpedoed by German submarines.
* The Danish National Archives estimated the losses of Danes in the German forces at 6,000.

 Luxembourg
* Luxembourg remained under German occupation during the war. The government, led by Paul Eyschen, chose to remain neutral. This strategy had the approval of Marie-Adélaïde, Grand Duchess of Luxembourg. Some citizens were conscripted into the German forces and others escaped to volunteer for the Allies. According to the Mobile Reference travel Guide, 3,700 Luxembourgeois citizens served in the French armed forces and 2,800 gave their lives in the war. They are commemorated at the Gëlle Fra in Luxembourg.

Norway
* Norway was neutral in the war but lost ships and merchant sailors in trading through the war zones. Norway is at times referred to as the Neutral Ally due to its close relationship with the United Kingdom during the war. In 1924, the Norwegian government in a reply to a questionnaire from the International Labour Office, an agency of the League of Nations, reported 1,180 persons dead and missing in World War I.

Qajar Persia
* Though Qajar Persia maintained a neutral stance, the country was divided into many factions and militaries, some allying with the Allied powers such as the Persian Cossack Brigade and others with the Central Powers such as the Persian Central Government Gendarmerie and Khamseh Tribesmen. The presence of British and Russian troops led to blockades of food distribution, which culminated into the Persian famine of 1917–1919, which under most modern estimates caused 2 million deaths.

Sweden
* Sweden was neutral in the war but lost ships and merchant sailors in trading through the war zones. In 1924, the Swedish government in a reply to a questionnaire from the International Labour Office, an agency of the League of Nations, reported 800 persons dead and missing in World War I.

Albania
* Albania was invaded and occupied by both Allied and Central powers despite its neutrality. During occupation, Albanians were massacred on numerous occasions, both inside and outside of Albania. The total number of Albanian deaths is approximately 70,000 according to Spencer Tucker, roughly 8.75% to 10% of the pre-war population.
Liechtenstein

* Liechtenstein was neutral in the war yet held sympathies to the Central Powers, particularly Austria-Hungary. As such, a number of Liechtensteiner citizens volunteered for both the German and Austro-Hungarian armies, of which 4 were confirmed to have been killed.
* Foreign nationals living in Liechtenstein who were conscripted into the armies of their home countries are not counted.

== Sources ==


* The Commonwealth War Graves Commission (CWGC) Annual Report 2014–2015 provides current statistics on the military dead for the British Empire. The war dead totals listed in the report are based on the research by the CWGC to identify and commemorate Commonwealth war dead. The statistics tabulated by The Commonwealth War Graves Commission are representative of the number of names commemorated for all servicemen/women of the Armed Forces of the Commonwealth and former UK Dependencies, whose death was attributable to their war service. Some auxiliary and civilian organizations are also accorded war grave status if death occurred under certain specified conditions. For the purposes of CWGC the dates of inclusion for Commonwealth War Dead are 4 August 1914 to 31 August 1921. Total World War I dead were 1,116,371 (UK and former colonies 887,711; Undivided India 73,895; Canada 64,997; Australia 62,123; New Zealand 18,053; South Africa 9,592). The Commonwealth War Graves Commission figures also include the Merchant Navy.
* &quot;Statistics of the Military Effort of the British Empire During the Great War 1914–1920&quot;, The War Office March 1922. This official report lists Army casualties (including Royal Naval Division) of 908,371 killed in action, died of wounds, died as prisoners of war and were missing in action from 4 August 1914 to 31 December 1920, (British Isles 702,410; India 64,449; Canada 56,639; Australia 59,330; New Zealand 16,711; South Africa 7,121 and Newfoundland 1,204, other colonies 507). Figures of the Royal Navy war dead and missing of 32,287 were listed separately. These figures do not include the Merchant Navy dead of 14,661. The losses of France, Belgium, Italy, Portugal, Romania, Serbia, Greece, Russia, the USA, Bulgaria, Germany, Austria-Hungary and Turkey were also listed in the UK War Office report.
* The official &quot;final and corrected&quot; casualty figures for British Army, including the Territorial Force (not including allied British Empire forces) were issued on 10 March 1921. The losses were for the period 4 August 1914 until 30 September 1919, included 573,507 &quot;killed in action, died from wounds and died of other causes&quot;; 254,176 missing less 154,308 released prisoners; for a net total of 673,375 dead and missing. There were 1,643,469 wounded also listed in the report.
* Sources for British Empire casualties are divergent and contradictory. The report of the War Office published in 1922 put the total number of British Empire &quot;soldiers who lost their lives&quot; at 908,371. On a separate schedule the War Office listed the losses of the Royal Navy at 32,237 dead and missing. It is implicit in this presentation that the figures for &quot;soldiers who lost their lives&quot; do not include the Royal Navy. However many published reference works list total British Empire(including the Dominions) losses at 908,371, it is implicit in these presentations that the figures for total losses include the Royal Navy.
* The War Office report puts the number of &quot;soldiers who lost their lives&quot; from the British Regular Army and Royal Naval Division at 702,410. This is not in agreement with the &quot;final and corrected&quot; figures in the 1921 report for the army published in the General Annual Report of the British Army 1912–1919, which put British Army dead and missing at 673,375 and the official compilation of Army war dead published in 1921 that put total losses at about 673,000. The War Office report did not explain the reason for this discrepancy; the difference is more than likely due to their inclusion of the Royal Naval Division and deaths outside of combat theaters.
* &quot;Casualties and Medical Statistics&quot; published in 1931. was the final volume of the &quot;Official Medical History of the War&quot;, gives British Empire, including the Dominions, for Army losses by cause of death. Total war dead in combat theaters from 1914 to 1918 were 876,084, which included 418,361 killed, 167,172 died of wounds, 113,173 died of disease or injury, 161,046 missing and presumed dead and 16,332 prisoner of war deaths. Also listed were 2,004,976 wounded and 6,074,552 sick and injured. Total losses were not broken out for the UK and each Dominion, the figures are for losses in combat theaters only and do not include casualties of forces stationed in the UK from accidents or disease, casualties of the Royal Naval Division are also not included in these figures; the losses of the Gallipoli Campaign are for British forces only, since records for Dominion forces were incomplete. Figures do not include the Royal Navy.
* &quot;Military Casualties–World War–Estimated,&quot; Statistics Branch, General Staff, U.S. War Department, 25 February 1924&quot;. This report prepared by the U.S. War Department estimated the casualties of the belligerents in the war. The figures from this report are listed in the Encyclopædia Britannica and often cited in historical literature.
* Huber, Michel &quot;La Population de la France pendant la guerre&quot;, Paris 1931. This study published by the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, lists official French government figures for war-related military deaths and missing of France and its colonies.
* Mortara, Giorgo &quot;La Salute pubblica in Italia durante e dopo la Guerra&quot;, New Haven: Yale University Press 1925. The official government Italian statistics on war dead are listed here. A brief summary of data from this report can be found online. go to Vol 13, No. 15
* The demographer Boris Urlanis, analysis of the military dead for the belligerents in the war including his estimates for the combat related deaths included in total deaths.
* The Belgian government published statistics on their war losses in the &quot;Annuaire statistique de la Belgique et du Congo Belge 1915–1919&quot;
* Heeres-Sanitätsinspektion im Reichskriegsministeriums, &quot;Sanitätsbericht über das deutsche Heer, (Deutsches Feld- und Besatzungsheer), im Weltkriege 1914–1918&quot;, Volume 3, Sec. 1, Berlin 1934. The official German Army medical war history listed German losses.
* Grebler, Leo and Winkler, Wilhelm &quot;The Cost of the World War to Germany and Austria-Hungary&quot; This study published by the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace details the losses of Austria-Hungary and Germany in the war.
* Erickson, Edward J. Ordered to Die: A History of the Ottoman Army in the First World War The authors estimates were made based data from official Ottoman sources.
* Hersch, Liebmann, &quot;La mortalité causée par la guerre mondiale&quot;, Metron. The International Review of Statistics, 1927, Vol 7. No 1. This study published in an academic journal, detailed the demographic impact of the war on France, the UK, Italy, Belgium, Portugal, Serbia, Romania and Greece. The total estimated increase in the number of civilian deaths due to the war was 2,171,000, not including an additional 984,000 Spanish flu deaths. These losses were due primarily wartime privations.
* Dumas, Samuel (1923). &quot;Losses of Life Caused by War&quot; published by Oxford University Press. This study detailed the impact of the war on the civilian population. The study estimated excess civilian deaths at: France (264,000 to 284,000), the UK (181,000), Italy (324,000) and Germany(692,000).
* In The International Labour Office, an agency of the League of Nations, published statistics on the military dead and missing for the belligerents in the war.

The source of population data is:
* Haythornthwaite, Philip J., &quot;The World War One Source Book&quot; pp. 382–383

== See also ==

* General Pershing WWI casualty list
* List of nurses who died in World War I
* Thankful Villages – villages in England and Wales which lost no men in World War I
* World War I memorials
* World War II casualties

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Cabanes Bruno. &quot;August 1914: France, the Great War, and a Month That Changed the World Forever&quot; (2016) argues that the extremely high casualty rate in very first month of fighting permanently transformed France.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


=== Other languages ===
* 
* 
* 
* 


== External links ==

* 1914–1918 online. International Encyclopedia of the First World War
** Prost, Antoine: War Losses
** Schmied-Kowarzik, Anatol: War Losses (Austria-Hungary)
** Lunn, Joe Harris: War Losses (Africa)
** Majerus, Benoît: War Losses (Belgium)
** Lafon, Alexandre: War Losses (France)
** Scolè, Pierluigi: War Losses (Italy)
** Tang, Chi-hua: War Losses and Reparations (China)
** Whalen, Robert Weldon: War Losses (Germany)
** Noonan, David C.: War Losses (Australia)
** Byerly, Carol R.: War Losses (US)
** Cook, Tim; Stewart, William: War Losses (Canada)
** Baş, Mehmet Fatih: War Losses (Ottoman Empire/Middle East)
* World War I casualties from Historical Atlas of the Twentieth Century
* Long way to Tipperary – an Irish story of the great war</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="20" end="28" title="military" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044143" start="33" end="52" title="civilian casualties" label="civilian casualties"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="56" end="67" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q47064" start="308" end="326" title="military personnel" label="military personnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q206887" start="332" end="340" title="civilians" label="civilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q177859" start="383" end="397" title="Triple Entente" label="Triple Entente"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="417" end="423" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="475" end="489" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q178275" start="901" end="918" title="1918 flu pandemic" label="1918 flu pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="944" end="960" title="prisoners of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="1472" end="1488" title="prisoners of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q905511" start="1607" end="1624" title="secondary sources" label="secondary sources"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117074" start="1970" end="2004" title="Commonwealth War Graves Commission" label="Commonwealth War Graves Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559975" start="2228" end="2233" title="Chinese Labour Corps" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606162" start="2450" end="2462" title="Royal Pioneer Corps" label="Labour Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q465727" start="2912" end="2924" title="noncombatant" label="noncombatant"/>
<link wikidata="Q213510" start="5576" end="5589" title="Belgian Congo" label="Belgian Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17073388" start="6249" end="6269" title="Czechoslovak Legion in France" label="Czechoslovak Legions"/>
<link wikidata="Q62633" start="6503" end="6514" title="Grand Duchy of Finland" label="Grand Duchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="6522" end="6536" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q179023" start="6825" end="6840" title="French colonial empire" label="French colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q218272" start="7246" end="7260" title="French Algeria" label="French Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q185682" start="7299" end="7315" title="French Indochina" label="French Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q210682" start="7353" end="7371" title="French West Africa" label="French West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q907234" start="7414" end="7444" title="French protectorate of Morocco" label="French protectorate of Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q210682" start="7481" end="7499" title="French West Africa" label="French West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q210682" start="7536" end="7554" title="French West Africa" label="French West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q210682" start="7609" end="7627" title="French West Africa" label="French West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q210682" start="7664" end="7682" title="French West Africa" label="French West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q271894" start="7719" end="7743" title="French Equatorial Africa" label="French Equatorial Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q210682" start="7780" end="7798" title="French West Africa" label="French West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q385820" start="7836" end="7850" title="French occupation of Tunisia" label="French Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q271894" start="7887" end="7911" title="French Equatorial Africa" label="French Equatorial Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421888" start="7956" end="7970" title="Ubangi-Shari" label="Oubangui-Chari"/>
<link wikidata="Q210682" start="8007" end="8025" title="French West Africa" label="French West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q271894" start="8062" end="8086" title="French Equatorial Africa" label="French Equatorial Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q646374" start="8108" end="8138" title="French India" label="French Establishments in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q329618" start="8474" end="8489" title="German colonial empire" label="German colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q153963" start="8893" end="8911" title="German East Africa" label="German East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q153665" start="8950" end="8974" title="German South-West Africa" label="German South-West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q668294" start="9012" end="9019" title="Kamerun" label="Kamerun"/>
<link wikidata="Q161062" start="9086" end="9101" title="Togoland" label="German Togoland"/>
<link wikidata="Q153963" start="9138" end="9156" title="German East Africa" label="German East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q31747" start="9652" end="9668" title="Irish Free State" label="Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="9678" end="9697" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="9947" end="9963" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477538" start="10039" end="10043" title="36th (Ulster) Division" label="36th"/>
<link wikidata="Q258464" start="10577" end="10599" title="Trinity College Dublin" label="Trinity College Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q889394" start="10783" end="10804" title="Portuguese Mozambique" label="Portuguese Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q154573" start="11608" end="11621" title="Eastern Front (World War I)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q882462" start="11995" end="12004" title="Blue Army (Poland)" label="Blue Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q685455" start="12045" end="12059" title="Polish Legions in World War I" label="Polish Legions"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="12143" end="12155" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="12693" end="12709" title="British Empire" label="British colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="12752" end="12764" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="13095" end="13109" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q503623" start="13404" end="13414" title="Gold Coast (British colony)" label="Gold Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q876185" start="13452" end="13471" title="British East Africa" label="British East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649306" start="13509" end="13518" title="Nyasaland" label="Nyasaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q918150" start="13555" end="13574" title="British West Africa" label="British West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q918150" start="13611" end="13630" title="British West Africa" label="British West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097943" start="13672" end="13691" title="Uganda Protectorate" label="Uganda Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155572" start="13729" end="13746" title="Company rule in Rhodesia" label="Northern Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155572" start="13784" end="13801" title="Company rule in Rhodesia" label="Southern Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570430" start="13843" end="13860" title="Southern Rhodesia in World War I" label="served in the war"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="14261" end="14269" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="14271" end="14278" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="14280" end="14286" title="Bosnia" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44749" start="14291" end="14300" title="Vojvodina" label="Vojvodina"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="14358" end="14369" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="14371" end="14377" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="14394" end="14403" title="Republic of Macedonia" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="14409" end="14419" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q636637" start="14470" end="14486" title="Vladimir Dedijer" label="Vladimir Dedijer"/>
<link wikidata="Q642932" start="16096" end="16115" title="British Indian Army" label="British Indian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q705571" start="16167" end="16190" title="East African Campaign (World War I)" label="conflict in East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="16998" end="17003" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="17012" end="17020" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="17030" end="17040" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037" start="17049" end="17055" title="Rwanda" label="Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q967" start="17064" end="17071" title="Burundi" label="Burundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q213510" start="17087" end="17100" title="Belgian Congo" label="Belgian Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q782783" start="17319" end="17342" title="Australian War Memorial" label="Australian War Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q782783" start="17380" end="17403" title="Australian War Memorial" label="Australian War Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117074" start="17462" end="17496" title="Commonwealth War Graves Commission" label="Commonwealth War Graves Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="17562" end="17572" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="17720" end="17747" title="International Labour Office" label="International Labour Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="17766" end="17783" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="18475" end="18485" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="18769" end="18796" title="International Labour Office" label="International Labour Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="18815" end="18832" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q178275" start="19368" end="19379" title="Spanish flu" label="Spanish flu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915952" start="19711" end="19739" title="Canadian Expeditionary Force" label="Canadian Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117074" start="19941" end="19975" title="Commonwealth War Graves Commission" label="Commonwealth War Graves Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="20039" end="20049" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="20199" end="20226" title="International Labour Office" label="International Labour Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="20245" end="20262" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q502073" start="20714" end="20731" title="Halifax Explosion" label="Halifax Explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q867359" start="21139" end="21161" title="French Colonial Forces" label="French Colonial Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q188559" start="21207" end="21228" title="French Foreign Legion" label="French Foreign Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="21986" end="21996" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="22350" end="22377" title="International Labour Office" label="International Labour Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="22396" end="22413" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q681685" start="22762" end="22786" title="Quid (encyclopedia)" label="French encyclopedia Quid"/>
<link wikidata="Q17073388" start="22897" end="22916" title="Czechoslovak Legion in France" label="Czechoslovak Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q882462" start="22939" end="22948" title="Blue Army (Poland)" label="Blue Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q371917" start="23175" end="23195" title="Lafayette Escadrille" label="Lafayette Escadrille"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102519" start="23420" end="23429" title="Gëlle Fra" label="Gëlle Fra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463296" start="23449" end="23471" title="French Armenian Legion" label="French Armenian Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301895" start="23660" end="23673" title="Douglas Porch" label="Douglas Porch"/>
<link wikidata="Q188559" start="23690" end="23711" title="French Foreign Legion" label="French Foreign Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q178275" start="24046" end="24057" title="Spanish flu" label="Spanish flu"/>
<link wikidata="Q178275" start="24261" end="24272" title="Spanish flu" label="Spanish flu"/>
<link wikidata="Q753063" start="24362" end="24395" title="Paris Gun" label="long range artillery bombardments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063801" start="24518" end="24526" title="tertiary source" label="Tertiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="24947" end="24957" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="25136" end="25163" title="International Labour Office" label="International Labour Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="25182" end="25199" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117074" start="25525" end="25559" title="Commonwealth War Graves Commission" label="Commonwealth War Graves Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="25621" end="25631" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="26723" end="26733" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="26916" end="26943" title="International Labour Office" label="International Labour Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="26962" end="26979" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q178275" start="27336" end="27347" title="Spanish flu" label="Spanish flu"/>
<link wikidata="Q178275" start="27527" end="27538" title="Spanish flu" label="Spanish flu"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="28010" end="28037" title="International Labour Office" label="International Labour Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="28056" end="28073" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q242803" start="28155" end="28170" title="Yasukuni Shrine" label="Yasukuni Shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="28479" end="28506" title="International Labour Office" label="International Labour Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="28525" end="28542" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q758657" start="28852" end="28880" title="Auckland War Memorial Museum" label="Auckland War Memorial Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q758657" start="28941" end="28969" title="Auckland War Memorial Museum" label="Auckland War Memorial Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117074" start="29044" end="29078" title="Commonwealth War Graves Commission" label="Commonwealth War Graves Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="29145" end="29155" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q38610" start="29383" end="29407" title="Dominion of Newfoundland" label="Dominion of Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="29472" end="29482" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375560" start="29692" end="29719" title="Royal Newfoundland Regiment" label="Royal Newfoundland Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="29782" end="29792" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q865132" start="29808" end="29821" title="Merchant Navy" label="Merchant Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="30058" end="30068" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="30363" end="30390" title="International Labour Office" label="International Labour Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="30409" end="30426" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q178275" start="30801" end="30812" title="Spanish flu" label="Spanish flu"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="31060" end="31087" title="International Labour Office" label="International Labour Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="31106" end="31123" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="31429" end="31439" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q730645" start="33048" end="33063" title="G.F. Krivosheev" label="G.F. Krivosheev"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="33597" end="33607" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="33873" end="33900" title="International Labour Office" label="International Labour Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="33919" end="33936" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q165725" start="34785" end="34796" title="Balkan Wars" label="Balkan Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438541" start="34938" end="34962" title="death by natural causes" label="deaths by natural causes"/>
<link wikidata="" start="34979" end="34995" title=":fr:Frédéric Le Moal" label="Frédéric Le Moal"/>
<link wikidata="Q739839" start="35015" end="35033" title="Dušan T. Bataković" label="Dušan T. Bataković"/>
<link wikidata="Q165725" start="35158" end="35169" title="Balkan Wars" label="Balkan Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q937062" start="35211" end="35226" title="Matija Bećković" label="Matija Bećković"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="36019" end="36046" title="International Labour Office" label="International Labour Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="36065" end="36082" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="36387" end="36397" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117074" start="36850" end="36884" title="Commonwealth War Graves Commission" label="Commonwealth War Graves Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="36950" end="36960" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="37109" end="37136" title="International Labour Office" label="International Labour Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="37155" end="37172" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q814959" start="38201" end="38219" title="Beiyang government" label="Beiyang government"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689590" start="39250" end="39275" title="Africa Research Institute" label="Africa Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001082" start="40060" end="40104" title="Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War" label="Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="40612" end="40639" title="International Labour Office" label="International Labour Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="40658" end="40675" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551560" start="40812" end="40852" title="Sinking of the RMS Lusitania" label="sinking of the RMS &amp;quot;Lusitania&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772052" start="40907" end="40924" title="United States Merchant Marine" label="Merchant Mariners"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="41252" end="41279" title="International Labour Office" label="International Labour Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="41298" end="41315" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="41628" end="41638" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q662961" start="42295" end="42317" title="Battle of Vittorio Veneto" label="last Italian offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153595" start="42621" end="42663" title="Carnegie Endowment for International Peace" label="Carnegie Endowment for International Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q180086" start="42936" end="42943" title="Galicia (Eastern Europe)" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="43170" end="43180" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="43627" end="43654" title="International Labour Office" label="International Labour Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="43673" end="43690" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="44523" end="44533" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="44751" end="44778" title="International Labour Office" label="International Labour Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="44797" end="44814" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906848" start="45200" end="45219" title="Blockade of Germany (1914–1919)" label="Blockade of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153595" start="45507" end="45549" title="Carnegie Endowment for International Peace" label="Carnegie Endowment for International Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7109926" start="46182" end="46198" title="Ottoman Archives" label="Ottoman Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048561" start="46200" end="46218" title="Edward J. Erickson" label="Edward J. Erickson"/>
<link wikidata="" start="46270" end="46338" title="Ordered to Die: A History of the Ottoman Army in the First World War" label="Ordered to Die: A History of the Ottoman Army in the First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="46995" end="47005" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q19544704" start="47997" end="48026" title="Great Famine of Mount Lebanon" label="Great Famine of Mount Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q80034" start="48077" end="48094" title="Armenian genocide" label="Armenian genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q852236" start="48282" end="48291" title="Assyrian genocide" label="Assyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q911233" start="48296" end="48302" title="Greek genocide" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748640" start="48495" end="48526" title="Armenian genocide recognition" label="recognize the Armenian Genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q786536" start="48755" end="48786" title="Armenian genocide denial" label="denial of the Armenian Genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q153214" start="49293" end="49351" title="German occupation of Luxembourg in World War I" label="Luxembourg remained under German occupation during the war"/>
<link wikidata="Q945406" start="49376" end="49388" title="Paul Eyschen" label="Paul Eyschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q159075" start="49449" end="49492" title="Marie-Adélaïde, Grand Duchess of Luxembourg" label="Marie-Adélaïde, Grand Duchess of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102519" start="49776" end="49785" title="Gëlle Fra" label="Gëlle Fra"/>
<link wikidata="Q23042686" start="49945" end="49961" title="the Neutral Ally" label="the Neutral Ally"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="50001" end="50015" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="50105" end="50132" title="International Labour Office" label="International Labour Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="50151" end="50168" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q63158027" start="50249" end="50261" title="Qajar Persia" label="Qajar Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515896" start="50398" end="50421" title="Persian Cossack Brigade" label="Persian Cossack Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q620039" start="50469" end="50507" title="Persian Central Government Gendarmerie" label="Persian Central Government Gendarmerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725862" start="50512" end="50529" title="Khamseh" label="Khamseh Tribesmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5957422" start="50639" end="50666" title="Persian famine of 1917–1919" label="Persian famine of 1917–1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="50908" end="50935" title="International Labour Office" label="International Labour Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="50954" end="50971" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q121854908" start="51148" end="51194" title="Massacres of Albanians in World War I" label="Albanians were massacred on numerous occasions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117074" start="51795" end="51829" title="Commonwealth War Graves Commission" label="Commonwealth War Graves Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="51918" end="51932" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q865132" start="52805" end="52818" title="Merchant Navy" label="Merchant Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="52926" end="52936" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="53332" end="53342" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q865132" start="53431" end="53444" title="Merchant Navy" label="Merchant Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="53779" end="53793" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q646534" start="55411" end="55431" title="Royal Naval Division" label="Royal Naval Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="55621" end="55635" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q223832" start="56042" end="56050" title="Dominion" label="Dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q646534" start="56208" end="56228" title="Royal Naval Division" label="Royal Naval Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q164983" start="56287" end="56305" title="Gallipoli Campaign" label="Gallipoli Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q223832" start="56353" end="56361" title="Dominion" label="Dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="56413" end="56423" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="" start="58181" end="58249" title="Ordered to Die: A History of the Ottoman Army in the First World War" label="Ordered to Die: A History of the Ottoman Army in the First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q17626797" start="58326" end="58342" title="Liebmann Hersch" label="Hersch, Liebmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q178275" start="58756" end="58767" title="Spanish flu" label="Spanish flu"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="59142" end="59169" title="International Labour Office" label="International Labour Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="59188" end="59205" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q48798411" start="59432" end="59466" title="General Pershing WWI casualty list" label="General Pershing WWI casualty list"/>
<link wikidata="Q27177916" start="59469" end="59507" title="List of nurses who died in World War I" label="List of nurses who died in World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519572" start="59510" end="59527" title="Thankful Villages" label="Thankful Villages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238324" start="59595" end="59616" title="World War I memorials" label="World War I memorials"/>
<link wikidata="Q471779" start="59619" end="59642" title="World War II casualties" label="World War II casualties"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856642" start="60072" end="60086" title="Antoine Prost" label="Prost, Antoine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33112" wikidata="Q687013" url="?curid=33112" title="World War I reparations">
<text>Following their defeat in World War I, the Central Powers agreed to pay war reparations to the Allied Powers. Each defeated power was required to make payments in either cash or kind. Because of the financial situation in Austria, Hungary, and Turkey after the war, few to no reparations were paid and the requirements for reparations were cancelled. Bulgaria, having paid only a fraction of what was required, saw its reparation figure reduced and then cancelled. Historians have recognized the German requirement to pay reparations as the &quot;chief battleground of the post-war era&quot; and &quot;the focus of the power struggle between France and Germany over whether the Versailles Treaty was to be enforced or revised.&quot;

The Treaty of Versailles (signed in 1919) and the 1921 London Schedule of Payments required the Central Powers to pay 132 billion gold marks at the time which is US$605. billion in 2025) in reparations to cover civilian damage caused during the war. This figure was divided into three categories of bonds: A, B, and C. Of these, Germany was required to pay towards &#x27;A&#x27; and &#x27;B&#x27; bonds totaling 50 billion marks () unconditionally. The payment of the remaining &#x27;C&#x27; bonds was interest-free and without any specific schedule for payment, instead being contingent on the Weimar Republic&#x27;s eventual ability to pay, as was to be assessed at some future point by an Allied committee.

Due to the lack of reparation payments by Germany, France occupied the Ruhr in 1923 to enforce payments, causing an international crisis that resulted in the implementation of the Dawes Plan in 1924. This plan outlined a new payment method and raised international loans to help Germany to meet its reparation commitments. Despite this, by 1928 Germany called for a new payment plan, resulting in the Young Plan that established the German reparation requirements at 112 billion marks () and created a schedule of payments that would see Germany complete payments by 1988. As a result of the severe impact of the Great Depression on the German economy, reparations were suspended for a year in 1931, and after the failure to implement the agreement reached in the 1932 Lausanne Conference, no additional reparations payments were made. Between 1919 and 1932, Germany paid less than 21 billion marks in reparations, mostly funded by foreign loans that Adolf Hitler reneged on in 1939.

Many Germans saw reparations as a national humiliation; the German Government worked to undermine the validity of the Treaty of Versailles and the requirement to pay. British economist John Maynard Keynes called the treaty a Carthaginian peace that would economically destroy Germany. The consensus of contemporary historians is that reparations were not as intolerable as the Germans or Keynes had suggested and were within Germany&#x27;s capacity to pay had there been the political will to do so.

Reparations played a significant role in Nazi propaganda, and after coming to power in 1933, Hitler ceased payment of reparations, although Germany still paid interest to holders of reparation bonds until 1939. Following the Second World War, West Germany took up payments. The 1953 London Agreement on German External Debts resulted in an agreement to pay 50 percent of the remaining balance. The final payment was made on 3 October 2010, settling German loan debts in regard to reparations.

==Background==
===Course of the war===
In 1914, following the assassination of Archduke Franz-Ferdinand by a Serb nationalist, the First World War broke out, with Austria-Hungary declaring war on Serbia, and Germany declaring war on and invading France and Belgium. For the next four years fighting raged across Europe, the Middle East, Africa, and Asia. On 8 January 1918, United States President Woodrow Wilson issued a statement that became known as the Fourteen Points. In part, this speech called for Germany to withdraw from the territory it had occupied and for the formation of a League of Nations. During the fourth quarter of 1918, the Central Powers began to collapse. In particular, Austria-Hungary collapsed putting southern Germany at risk of invasion, Turkey surrendered freeing up Allied troops for action elsewhere, the German military was decisively defeated on the Western Front, and the German navy mutinied, all of which prompted domestic uprisings that became known as the German Revolution.

Germany signed an armistice with the allies on 11 November 1918. The armistice agreement included an agreement to pay &quot;reparation for damage done&quot; to the Allied countries.

===Allied damages===
Most of the war&#x27;s major battles occurred in France and Belgium, with both the French countryside and Belgian countryside being heavily scarred in the fighting. Furthermore, in 1918 during the German retreat, German troops devastated France&#x27;s most industrialized region in the north-east (Nord-Pas de Calais Mining Basin) as well as Belgium. Extensive looting took place as German forces removed whatever material they could use and destroyed the rest. Hundreds of mines were destroyed along with railways, bridges, and entire villages. Prime Minister of France Georges Clemenceau was determined, for these reasons, that any just peace required Germany to pay reparations for the damage it had caused. Clemenceau viewed reparations as a way of weakening Germany to ensure it could never threaten France again. His position was shared by the French electorate. Reparations would also go towards the reconstruction costs in other countries, including Belgium, which were also directly affected by the war. Despite domestic pressure for a harsh settlement, British Prime Minister David Lloyd George opposed overbearing reparations. He argued for a smaller sum, which would be less damaging to the German economy with a long-term goal of ensuring Germany would remain a viable economic power and trading partner. He also argued that reparations should include war pensions for disabled veterans and allowances for war widows, which would reserve a larger share of the reparations for the British Empire. Wilson opposed these positions and was adamant that no indemnity should be imposed upon Germany.

Damages in France and Belgium included the complete demolition of more than 300,000 houses in German-occupied France, the stripping of more than 6,000 factories of their machinery and the smashing of textile industry in Lille and Sedan, the destruction of nearly 2,000 breweries, the blowing up of 112 mineshafts in Roubaix and Tourcoing, the flooding or blocking-off of more 1,000 miles of mine galleries, the ripping up of more than 1,000 miles of railway, the dropping of more than 1,000 bridges, as well as the looting of churches. German wartime requisitions of farm animals imposed on the civilian population within occupied France and Belgium included roughly 500,000 head of cattle, approximately 500,000 head of sheep, and more than 300,000 head of horses and donkeys. In cleaning up after the war, the French authorities had to remove over 3 hundred million metres of barbed wire and fill in more than a quarter of a billion cubic metres of trenches, with much farmland rendered essentially useless for years after the war due to unexploded ordinance and contamination by poison gas that continued to leak from buried gas-cylinders which had to be removed.

Allied losses of civilian shipping at sea due to the primarily-German U-boat campaign had also been severe, particularly for Britain. Nearly 8 million tons of British civilian shipping had been sunk by German U-boats, with many civilian crew killed. France, Italy, and the United States of America had lost another 2 million tons of merchant shipping, again with heavy losses amongst crew. Another 1.2 million tons of neutral Norwegian, Danish, and Swedish shipping had also been sunk. The sinking of five British hospital ships also caused considerable bitterness.

===Versailles===
The Paris Peace Conference opened on 18 January 1919, aiming to establish a lasting peace between the Allied and Central Powers. Demanding compensation from the defeated party was a common feature of peace treaties, including the Treaty of Versailles that Germany had imposed on France in 1871. However, the financial terms of treaties signed during the peace conference were labelled reparations to distinguish them from punitive settlements usually known as indemnities. Reparations were intended for reconstruction and compensating families who had been bereaved by the war. The opening article of the reparation section of the Treaty of Versailles, Article 231, served as a legal basis for the following articles, which obliged Germany to pay compensation and limited German responsibility to civilian damages. The same article, with the signatory&#x27;s name changed, was also included in the treaties signed by Germany&#x27;s allies.

==German reaction==

In February 1919, Foreign Minister Count Ulrich von Brockdorff-Rantzau informed the Weimar National Assembly that Germany would have to pay reparations for the devastation caused by the war, but would not pay for actual war costs. After the drafting of the Treaty of Versailles on 7 May that year, the German and Allied delegations met and the treaty was handed over to be translated and for a response to be issued. At this meeting Brockdorff-Rantzau stated, &quot;We know the intensity of the hatred which meets us, and we have heard the victors&#x27; passionate demand that as the vanquished we shall be made to pay, and as the guilty we shall be punished&quot;. However, he proceeded to deny that Germany was solely responsible for the war.

Article 231 of the Treaty of Versailles was not correctly translated. Instead of stating &quot;... Germany accepts responsibility of Germany and her allies causing all the loss and damage ...&quot;, the German Government&#x27;s edition reads, &quot;Germany admits it, that Germany and her allies, as authors of the war, are responsible for all losses and damages ...&quot;. This resulted in a prevailing belief of humiliation among Germans; the article was seen as an injustice and there was a view that Germany had signed &quot;away her honor&quot;. Despite the public outrage, German government officials were aware &quot;that Germany&#x27;s position on this matter was not nearly so favorable as the imperial government had led the German public to believe during the war&quot;. Politicians seeking international sympathy would continue to use the article for its propaganda value, persuading many who had not read the treaties that the article implied full war guilt. German revisionist historians who later tried to ignore the validity of the clause found a ready audience among revisionist writers in France, Britain, and the US. The objective of both the politicians and historians was to prove that Germany was not solely guilty for causing the war; this was with the idea that, if that guilt could be disproved, the legal requirement to pay reparations would disappear.

==Evolution of reparations==

===Initial demands===

The Treaty of Versailles stated that a Reparation Commission would be established in 1921. This commission would consider the resources available to Germany and her capacity to pay, provide the German Government with an opportunity to be heard on the subject, and decide on the final reparation figure that Germany would be required to pay. In the interim, Germany was required to pay an equivalent of gold marks in gold, commodities, ships, securities, or other forms. The money would be used to pay Allied occupation costs and to buy food and raw materials for Germany. Article 121 of the Treaty of Neuilly acknowledged that &quot;the resources of Bulgaria are not sufficient to enable her to make complete reparation&quot;. Therefore, the treaty required Bulgaria to pay a sum equivalent of 2.250 billion Gold francs in reparations.

The treaties of Saint-Germain-en-Laye, Trianon, and Sèvres acknowledged that Austria, Hungary, and Turkey did not have the resources to pay reparations, and delayed the establishment of a final figure until the Reparation Commission was established. In addition, Bulgaria was required to hand over thousands of livestock to Greece, Romania, and the Serb-Croat-Slovene State &quot;in restitution for animals taken away by Bulgaria during the war&quot;. This would not be credited towards the reparation figure. Likewise, Bulgaria had to dispatch 50,000 tons of coal a year to the Serb-Croat-Slovene State in restitution for destroyed mines. These shipments would not be credited against Bulgaria&#x27;s reparation sum. Germany, Austria, and Hungary all had commitments to handover timber, ore, and livestock to the Allied Powers. They would, however, be credited for these goods.

In January 1921, the Allied Powers grew impatient and established the reparation sum at 226 billion gold marks. The Germans countered with an offer of 30 billion. On 24 April 1921, the German Government wrote to the American Government expressing &quot;her readiness to acknowledge for reparation purposes a total liability of 50 billion gold marks&quot;, but was also prepared &quot;to pay the equivalent of this sum in annuities adapted to her economic capacity totalling 200 billion gold marks&quot;. In addition, the German Government stated that &quot;to accelerate the redemption of the balance&quot; and &quot;to combat misery and hatred created by the war&quot;, Germany was willing to provide the resources needed and &quot;to undertake herself the rebuilding of townships, villages, and hamlets&quot;.

===London Schedule of Payments===
The London Schedule of Payments of 5 May 1921 established &quot;the full liability of all the Central Powers combined, not just Germany alone,&quot; at gold marks. This sum was a compromise promoted by Belgiumagainst higher figures demanded by the French and Italians and the lower figure the British supportedthat &quot;represented an assessment of the lowest amount that public opinion ... would tolerate&quot;.

This figure was divided into three series of bonds: &quot;A&quot; and &quot;B&quot; Bonds together had a nominal value of gold marks less than the sum Germany had previously offered to pay. &quot;C&quot; Bonds, comprising the remainder of the reparation figure, &quot;were deliberately designed to be chimerical&quot;, with the Germans being informed that they would not be expected to pay them under realistic conditions.&lt;ref name=&quot;Working Papers No. 163/12&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; They were &quot;a political bargaining chip&quot; that served the domestic policies of France and the United Kingdom. The figure was completely unreal; its primary function was to mislead public opinion &quot;into believing that the 132-billion-mark figure was being maintained&quot;. Furthermore, &quot;Allied experts knew that Germany could not pay 132 billion marks and that the other Central Powers could pay little. Thus, the A and B Bonds, which were genuine, represented the actual Allied assessment of German capacity to pay.&quot; Taking into account the sum already paid between 1919 and 1921, Germany&#x27;s immediate obligation was 41 billion gold marks.

To pay towards this sum, Germany could pay in kind or in cash. Commodities paid in kind included coal, timber, chemical dyes, pharmaceuticals, livestock, agricultural machines, construction materials, and factory machinery. The gold value of these would be deducted from what Germany was required to pay. Germany&#x27;s assistance with the restoration of the university library of Louvain, which was destroyed by the Germans on 25 August 1914, was also credited towards the sum, as were some of the territorial changes the treaty imposed upon Germany. The payment schedule required within twenty-five days and then annually, plus 26 per cent of the value of German exports. The German Government was to issue bonds at five per cent interest and set up a sinking fund of one per cent to support the payment of reparations.

In the London ultimatum of 5 May, Germany was given six days to recognize the Schedule of Payments and to comply with the Treaty of Versailles&#x27; demands for disarmament and the extradition of German &quot;war criminals&quot;. If it did not, the Allies threatened to occupy the Ruhr. In anticipation of such an ultimatum, the German government of Constantin Fehrenbach, finding itself unable to reach agreement on the issue, had resigned on 4 May. The government of the new chancellor, Joseph Wirth, accepted the ultimatum on 11 May and began the &quot;policy of fulfillment&quot; – by attempting to meet the demands, it tried to show the impossibility of complying with the scheduled payments.

===End of reparations for Austria, Bulgaria, Hungary and Turkey===

Between the signing of the Treaty of Neuilly-sur-Seine and April 1922, Bulgaria paid 173 million gold francs in reparations. In 1923, the Bulgarian reparation sum was revised downwards to 550 million gold francs, &quot;plus a lump sum payment of 25 million francs for occupation costs&quot;. Towards this figure, Bulgaria paid 41 million gold francs between 1925 and 1929. In 1932, the Bulgarian reparation obligation was abandoned following the Lausanne Conference.

Because Austria was &quot;so impoverished&quot; after the war, and because of the collapse of the Bank of Vienna, the country paid no reparations &quot;beyond credits for transferred property&quot;. Likewise, Hungary paid no reparations beyond coal deliveries because of the collapse of the Hungarian economy. Turkish reparations had been &quot;sharply limited in view of the magnitude of Turkish territorial losses&quot;. However, the Treaty of Sèvres was never ratified. When the Treaty of Lausanne was signed in 1923, Turkish reparations were &quot;eliminated altogether&quot;.

===German defaults===

From the initiation of reparations, German coal deliveries were below the level agreed. In an attempt to rectify this situation, the Spa Conference was held in July 1920. At this conference it was decided that Germany would be paid five marks per coal ton delivered to facilitate coal shipments and help feed the miners. Despite this, Germany continued to default on her obligations. By late 1922, the German defaults on payments had grown so serious and regular that a crisis engulfed the Reparations Commission. French and Belgian delegates urged the seizure of the Ruhr to encourage the Germans to make more effort to pay, while the British supported postponing payments to facilitate the financial reconstruction of Germany. On 26 December 1922, Germany defaulted on timber deliveries. The timber quota was based upon a German proposal and the default was massive.

The Allies were unanimous that the default was in bad faith. Whilst Germany had lost important coal-fields in Silesia when these were transferred to Poland under the Versailles treaty, the required coal-quota had also been reduced. Exporting of German coal to Austria and Switzerland continued until December 1921 when the Reparations Committee banned all exports of German coal except to the Netherlands. In January 1923, despite quota reductions, the German Government defaulted on coal deliveries for the 34th time in three years.

On 9 January 1923, the Reparation Commission declared Germany to be in default of her coal deliveries and voted to occupy the Ruhr to enforce the country&#x27;s reparation commitments. Britain was the lone dissenting voice to both measures. On 11 January, French and Belgian soldierssupported by engineers including an Italian contingententered the region, initiating the Occupation of the Ruhr.

The French Premier Raymond Poincaré was deeply reluctant to order the occupation and had only taken this step after the British had rejected his proposals for more moderate sanctions against Germany. By December 1922, Poincaré was faced with Anglo-American-German hostility; coal supplies for French steel production were running low. Exasperated with Britain&#x27;s failure to act, he wrote to the French ambassador in London:
Judging others by themselves, the English, who are blinded by their loyalty, have always thought that the Germans did not abide by their pledges inscribed in the Versailles Treaty because they had not frankly agreed to them ... We, on the contrary, believe that if Germany, far from making the slightest effort to carry out the treaty of peace, has always tried to escape her obligations, it is because until now she has not been convinced of her defeat ... We are also certain that Germany, as a nation, resigns herself to keep her pledged word only under the impact of necessity.

The occupation proved marginally profitable; the occupying powers received 900 million gold marks, and much of this merely covered the military costs of occupation. However, the real issue behind the occupation was not German defaults on coal and timber deliveries, but the forcing of Germany &quot;to acknowledge her defeat in World War I and to accept the Versailles Treaty&quot;. Poincaré recognized that if Germany could get away with defying Versailles in regard to the reparations, a precedent would be created and inevitably the Germans would proceed to dismantle the rest of the Versailles treaty.

===Dawes Plan===

Although the French succeeded in their objective during the Ruhr occupation, the Germans had wrecked their economy by funding passive resistance and brought about hyperinflation. Under Anglo-American pressure and simultaneous decline in the value of the franc, France was increasingly isolated and her diplomatic position was weakened. In October 1923, a committee consisting of American, Belgian, British, French, German, and Italian experts and chaired by the former Director of the US Bureau of the Budget Charles G. Dawes was formed, to consider &quot;from a purely technical standpoint&quot;, how to balance the German budget, stabilize the economy and set an achievable level of reparations.

In April 1924, the Dawes Plan was accepted and it replaced the London schedule of payment. While the &quot;C&quot; Bonds were omitted from the plan&#x27;s framework, they were not formally rescinded. French troops were to withdraw from the Ruhr, and a bank independent of the German Government, with a ruling body at least , was to be established and the German currency was to be stabilized. The payment of reparations was also reorganized. In the first year following the implementation of the plan, Germany would have to pay marks. This figure would rise to marks per year by the fifth year of the plan. A Reparations Agency was established with Allied representatives to organize the payment of reparations. Furthermore, a loan of marks was to be raisedover 50 per cent coming from the United States, 25 per cent from Britain, and the balance from other European nationsto back the German currency and to aid in the payment of reparations.

===Young Plan===

The adoption of the plan was followed by the Locarno Treaties. The subsequent &quot;spirit of Locarno&quot; saw an apparent reconciliation between the European Powers. The implementation of the Dawes Plan also saw a positive economic impact in Europe, largely funded by American loans. Under the Dawes Plan, Germany always met her obligations. However, German long-term goals remained the same despite the apparent reconciliation: the revision of the Treaty of Versailles to end reparations. The Dawes Plan was seen only a temporary measure, with expected future revisions. In late 1927, the Agent-General for Reparations &quot;called for a more permanent scheme&quot; for payments and in 1928 the Germans followed suit. German Foreign Minister Gustav Stresemann called for a final reparation plan to be established alongside an early withdrawal of Allied troops from the Rhineland. The French, aware of their weakening political and financial position, acquiesced. On 16 September 1928, a joint Entente-German statement acknowledging the need for a new reparation plan was issued.

In February 1929, a new committee was formed to re-examine reparations. It was chaired by the American banker Owen D. Young and presented its findings in June 1929. The &quot;Young Plan&quot; was accepted and was ratified by the German Government on 12 March 1930. The plan established a theoretical final reparation figure at 112 billion gold marks , with a new payment schedule that would see reparations completed by 1988the first time a final date had been set. In addition, foreign oversight of German finances was to end with the withdrawal of the Reparations Agency, which would be replaced by the Bank for International Settlements. The bank was established to provide cooperation among central banks and to receive and disburse reparation payments. A further loan of was to be raised and given to Germany.

As a result of the plan, German payments were half the sum required under the Dawes Plan. The implementation of the Young Plan required the Anglo-French withdrawal from the Rhineland within months. Despite the reduction, there was increasing German hostility to the plan. For example, the Law against the Enslavement of the German People, or Freedom Law, was proposed by the nationalist politician Alfred Hugenberg. Hugenberg&#x27;s proposed law called for the end of the Ruhr occupation, the official renouncement of Article 231 (the &quot;war guilt&quot; clause) and the rejection of the Young Plan. While politicians rejected it, it attracted enough support from voters in order to be put up for a referendum. The plebiscite was held in December 1929, resulting in 5.8 million people out of 6.3 million voters voting in favor of the law. This fell below the required 21 million votes (50% of eligible voters) in order for it to take effect. While this was a political defeat for Hugenberg, it did result in significant national attention for Adolf Hitler, who had worked with Hugenberg to promote the referendum, and subsequently in valuable right-wing financing.

===End of German reparations===
In March 1930, the German Government collapsed and was replaced by a new coalition led by Chancellor Heinrich Brüning. In June, Allied troops withdrew from near Mainzthe last occupation zone in the Rhinelandand Brüning&#x27;s Government broached the subject of demanding further refinement to reparations, but this demand was refused by William Tyrrell, the British ambassador to France. During 1931, a financial crisis began in Germany. In May, Creditanstaltthe largest bank in Austriacollapsed, sparking a banking crisis in Germany and Austria. In response, Brüning announced that Germany was suspending reparation payments. This resulted in a massive withdrawal of domestic and foreign funds from German banks. By mid-July, all German banks had closed. Until this point, France&#x27;s policy had been to provide Germany with financial support to help Brüning&#x27;s Government stabilize the country. Brüning, now under considerable political pressure from the far-right and President Paul von Hindenburg, was unable to make any concessions or reverse policy. As a result, Brüning was unable to borrow money from foreign or domestic sources. Further attempts to enlist British support to end reparations failed; the British said it was a joint issue with France and the United States. In early July, Brüning announced &quot;his intention to seek the outright revision of the Young Plan&quot;. In light of the crisis and with the prospect of Germany being unable to repay her debts, United States President Herbert Hoover intervened. In June, Hoover publicly proposed a one-year moratorium to reparation and war debts. By July, the &quot;Hoover Moratorium&quot; had been accepted.

The moratorium was widely supported in both Germany and the United Kingdom. The French, initially hesitant, eventually agreed to support the American proposal. However, on 13 July, the German Darmstädter Bank collapsed, leading to further bankruptcies and a rise in unemployment further exacerbating Germany&#x27;s financial crisis. With the Great Depression now exerting its influence, the Bank for International Settlements reported that the Young Plan was unrealistic in light of the economic crisis and urged the world governments to reach a new settlement on the various debts they owed each other. During January 1932, Brüning said he would seek the complete cancellation of reparations. His position was supported by the British and Italians, and opposed by the French.

Because of the political differences between countries on the subject and impending elections in France and Germany, a conference could not be established until June. On 16 June, the Lausanne Conference opened. However, discussions were complicated by the ongoing World Disarmament Conference. At the latter conference, the US informed the British and French that they would not be allowed to default on their war debts. In turn, they recommended that war debts be tied into German reparation payments, to which the Germans objected. On 9 July, an agreement was reached and signed. The Lausanne Conference annulled the Young Plan and required Germany to pay a final, single installment of 3 billion marks. The Lausanne Treaty was to become effective as soon as a corresponding agreement had been reached with the United States on the repayment of the loans it had made to the Allied powers during World War I. Due to the failure to come to such an agreement, the Lausanne Treaty was not ratified by any of the states involved and therefore never became legally valid. Germany still paid interest on bonds created under the Dawes and Young plans until 1939, but did not resume paying reparations until after 1945.

===Amount paid by Germany===
The precise figure Germany paid is a matter of dispute. The German Government estimated it had paid the equivalent of 67.8 billion gold marks in reparations. The German figure includedother than gold or goods in kindthe scuttling of the German fleet at Scapa Flow, state property lost in lands ceded to other countries, and the loss of colonial territories. The Reparation Commission and the Bank for International Settlements state that gold marks was paid by Germany in reparations, of which was paid before the implementation of the London Schedule of Payments. Niall Ferguson provides a slightly lower figure. He estimates that Germany paid no more than gold marks. Ferguson further estimates that this sum amounted to 2.4 per cent of Germany&#x27;s national income between 1919 and 1932. Stephen Schuker, in his comprehensive econometric study, concedes that Germany transferred 16.8 billion marks over the whole period, but points out that this sum was vastly offset by the devaluation of Allied paper-mark deposits up to 1923, and by loans that Germany subsequently repudiated after 1924. The net capital transfer into Germany amounted to 17.75 billion marks, or 2.1% of Germany&#x27;s entire national income over the period 1919–1931. In effect, America paid Germany four times more, in price-adjusted terms, than the U.S. furnished to West Germany under the post-1948 Marshall Plan. According to Gerhard Weinberg, reparations were paid, towns were rebuilt, orchards replanted, mines reopened and pensions paid. However, the burden of repairs was shifted away from the German economy and onto the damaged economies of the war&#x27;s victors. Hans Mommsen wrote &quot;Germany financed its reparation payments to Western creditor nations with American loans&quot;, which the British and French then used to &quot;cover their long-term interest obligations and to retire their wartime debts with the United States.&quot;

===Loan payments===
Germany&#x27;s payment of reparations during the 1920s was funded mostly through foreign loans. In 1933, as well as stopping all reparations payments, the new German Chancellor Adolf Hitler in large part repudiated payment of these loans, including a default on all of debt owed in US Dollar bonds. In June 1953, an agreement was reached on this existing debt with West Germany. Germany agreed to repay 50 per cent of the loan amounts that had been defaulted on in the 1920s, but deferred some of the debt until West and East Germany were unified. In 1995, following reunification, Germany began making the final payments towards the loans. A final installment of was made on 3 October 2010, settling German loan debts in regard to reparations.

===Summary===

==Analysis==

===Effect on the German economy===

====Overall====
During the period of reparations, Germany received between 27 and 38 billion marks in loans. By 1931, German foreign debt stood at 21.514 billion marks; the main sources of aid were the United States, Britain, the Netherlands, and Switzerland. Detlev Peukert argued the financial problems that arose in the early 1920s, were a result of post-war loans and the way Germany funded her war effort, and not the result of reparations. During the First World War, Germany did not raise taxes or create new ones to pay for war-time expenses. Rather, loans were taken out, placing Germany in an economically precarious position as more money entered circulation, destroying the link between paper money and the gold reserve that had been maintained before the war. With its defeat, Germany could not impose reparations and pay off her war debts now, which were now colossal.

Historian Niall Ferguson partially supports this analysis: had reparations not been imposed, Germany would still have had significant problems caused by the need to pay war debts and the demands of voters for more social services. Ferguson argued that these problems were aggravated by a trade deficit and a weak exchange rate for the mark during 1920. Afterwards, as the value of the mark rose, inflation became a problem. None of these were the result of reparations. According to Ferguson, even without reparations total public spending in Germany between 1920 and 1923 was 33 per cent of total net national product. A.J.P. Taylor wrote &quot;Germany was a net gainer by the financial transactions of the nineteen-twenties: she borrowed far more from private American investors ... than she paid in reparations&quot;. P.M.H. Bell stated the creation of a multi-national committee, which resulted in the Dawes Plan, was done to consider ways the German budget could be balanced, the currency stabilized, and the German economy fixed to ease reparation payments. Max Winkler wrote that from 1924 onward, German officials were &quot;virtually flooded with loan offers by foreigners&quot;. Overall, the German economy performed reasonably well until the foreign investments funding the economy and the loans funding reparations payments were suddenly withdrawn after the 1929 Stock Market Crash. This collapse was magnified by the volume of loans provided to German companies by US lenders. Even the reduced payments of the Dawes Plan were mainly financed through a large volume of international loans.

While Germany initially had a trade deficit, British policy during the early 1920s was to reintegrate Germany into European trade as soon as possible. Likewise, France attempted to secure trade deals with Germany. During the mid-to-late 1920s, trade between France and Germany grew rapidly. French imports of German goods &quot;increased by 60 per cent&quot;, highlighting the close links between French industrial growth and German production, and the increase in cooperation between the countries.

Max Hantke and Mark Spoerer provide a different perspective on the effect of reparations on the German economy. They wrote that focusing on the reparations and inflation ignores &quot;the fact that the restriction of the German military to 115,000 men relieved the German central budget considerably&quot;. Hantke and Spoerer argue that their findings show &quot;that even under quite rigorous assumptions the net economic burden of the Treaty of Versailles was much less heavy than has been hitherto thought, in particular if we confine our perspective to the Reich&#x27;s budget&quot;. They say, &quot;though politically a humiliation&quot;, the limitation on the military &quot;was beneficial in fiscal terms&quot; and that their economic models show that &quot;the restriction of the size of the army was clearly beneficial for the Reich budget&quot;. Additionally, their economic scenarios indicate that while the Treaty of Versailles was &quot;overall clearly a burden on the German economy&quot;, it &quot;also offered a substantial peace dividend for Weimar&#x27;s non-revanchist budget politicians.&quot; They conclude that, &quot;The fact that [these politicians] did not make sufficient use of this imposed gift supports the hypothesis that the Weimar Republic suffered from home-made political failure&quot;.

====Hyperinflation====

Historians and economists differ on the subject of whether, and to what extent, reparations were a cause of hyper-inflation in the Weimar republic.

Amongst those stating that it was a cause, Erik Goldstein wrote that in 1921, the payment of reparations caused a crisis and that the occupation of the Ruhr had a disastrous effect on the German economy, resulting in the German Government printing more money as the currency collapsed. Hyperinflation began and printing presses worked overtime to print Reichsbank notes; by November 1923 one US dollar was worth Ferguson writes that the policy of the Economics Minister Robert Schmidt led Germany to avoid economic collapse from 1919 to 1920, but that reparations accounted for most of Germany&#x27;s budget deficit in 1921 and 1922 and that reparations were the cause of the hyperinflation.

Several historians counter the argument that reparations caused the inflation and collapse of the mark, particular on the grounds that reparations payments, and particularly hard-cash payments, were in large part not made during the period of hyper-inflation and so could not be the cause of it. Gerhard Weinberg writes that Germany refused to pay by, and that doing so destroyed their own currency. Anthony Lentin agrees and writes that inflation was &quot;a consequence of the war rather than of the peace&quot; and that hyperinflation was a result of the &quot;German government&#x27;s reckless issue of paper money&quot; during the Allied occupation of the Ruhr.

Contemporary British and French experts believed that the Mark was being sabotaged to avoid budgetary and currency reform and to evade reparations, a view supported by Reich Chancellery records. Historian Sally Marks endorsed that view, writing that historians who say reparations caused hyperinflation have overlooked &quot;that the inflation long predated reparations&quot; and the way &quot;inflation mushroomed&quot; between mid-1921 and the end of 1922 &quot;when Germany was actually paying very little in reparations&quot; and have failed to explain why &quot;the period of least inflation coincided with the period of largest reparation payments ... or why Germans claimed after 1930 that reparations were causing deflation&quot;. She writes &quot;there is no doubt that British and French suspicions late in 1922 were sound&quot;. Marks also writes that the &quot;astronomic inflation which ensued was a result of German policy&quot;, whereby the government paid for passive resistance in the Ruhr &quot;from an empty exchequer&quot; and paid off its domestic and war debts with worthless marks. Bell agrees and writes that &quot;inflation had little direct connection with reparation payments themselves, but a great deal to do with the way the German government chose to subsidize industry and to pay the costs of passive resistance to the occupation [of the Ruhr] by extravagant use of the printing press&quot;. Bell also writes that hyperinflation was not an inevitable consequence of the Treaty of Versailles, but was among the actual results.

===Criticism and commentary===

====Contemporaneous====
According to historian Claude Campbell, John Maynard Keynes &quot;set the fashion for critics of the economic aspects of the treaty&quot; and &quot;made probably the severest and most sweeping indictment of its economic provisions&quot;. Keynes was temporarily attached to the British Treasury during the war and was their official representative at the peace conference. He later resigned &quot;when it became evident that hope could no longer be entertained of substantial modifications in the draft Terms of Peace&quot; due to the &quot;policy of the Conference towards the economic problems of Europe&quot;.

In 1919, Keynes wrote &quot;The Economic Consequences of the Peace&quot; based on his objections to the Versailles treaty. He wrote that he believed &quot;that the campaign for securing out of Germany the general costs of the war was one of the most serious acts of political unwisdom for which our statesmen have ever been responsible&quot;, and called the treaty a &quot;Carthaginian peace&quot; that would economically affect all of Europe. Keynes said that the figures being bandied about by politicians at the time of the signing of the treaty, such as or even , as &quot;not within the limits of reasonable possibility&quot;. He instead calculated that was the &quot;safe maximum figure&quot;, but though he also &quot;not believe that [Germany could] pay as much&quot;. He predicted that the Reparation Commission was a tool that could &quot;be employed to destroy Germany&#x27;s commercial and economic organization as well as to exact payment&quot;.

Writing of his proposed figure, fixing reparations &quot;well within Germany&#x27;s capacity to pay&quot; would &quot;make possible the renewal of hope and enterprise within her territory&quot; and &quot;avoid the perpetual friction and opportunity of improper pressure arising out of the Treaty clauses&quot;. Keynes identified reparations as the &quot;main excursion into the economic field&quot; by the Treaty of Versailles, but said that the treaty excluded provisions for rehabilitating Europe&#x27;s economies, for improving relations between the Allies and the defeated Central Powers, for stabilizing Europe&#x27;s new nations, for &quot;reclaim[ing] Russia&quot;, or for promoting economic solidarity between the Allies. Coal provides an example of these destabilizing effects in Germany and beyond. Keynes said the &quot;surrender of the coal will destroy German industry&quot; but conceding that without coal shipments as reparations, the French and Italian industries damaged directly by the war or indirectly by damage to coal mines would be affected. He writes that this is &quot;not yet the whole problem&quot;. The repercussions would also affect Central and Northern Europe, and neutral states such as Switzerland and Sweden, which made up for their own coal deficiencies by trading with Germany. Likewise, Keynes said Austria would now be consigned to &quot;industrial ruin&quot; as &quot;nearly all the coalfields of the former Empire lie outside of what is now German-Austria&quot;.

Campbell writes that the &quot;apparent majority did not regard the treaty as perfect&quot;. Bernard Baruch writes in &quot;The Making of the Reparation and Economic Sections of the Treaty&quot; that most believed it to be the best agreement obtainable under the circumstances and that it was a minority that attacked the treaty, but these attacks &quot;centered upon its economic provisions&quot;. James T. Shotwell, writing in &quot;What Germany Forgot&quot;, said, &quot;the only &#x27;unendurable servitudes&#x27; in the treaty were in the sections on Reparation and the Polish settlement and raised the question as to what part of Germany&#x27;s grievance against the peace lay in the substance of its exactions and what part in the manner of their imposition&quot;. Sir Andrew McFayden, who also represented the British Treasury at the peace conference and later worked with the Reparation Commission, published his work &quot;Don&#x27;t Do it Again&quot;. McFayden&#x27;s position &quot;falls somewhere between the views of Keynes and Shotwell&quot;. His attack on reparations &quot;was as harsh as Keynes&quot; but he conceded that the &quot;fault did not lie primarily in the provisions of the treaty but in their execution&quot;. He also believed &quot;that the Polish settlement was the only readjustment ... which was decidedly unwise&quot;.

Albrecht-Carrié writes that before the German surrender, Woodrow Wilson dispatched a note to the German Government on 5 November 1918 stating that the Allies &quot;under-stand that compensation will be made by Germany for all damage done to the civilian population of the Allies and their property by the aggression of Germany by land, by sea, and from the air&quot;, the terms of which they accepted. Regardless of which, Albrecht-Carrié says the reparation section of the treaty proved &quot;to be a dismal failure&quot;. Campbell says, &quot;although there was much in the peace that was &#x27;petty, unjust, and humiliating&#x27;, there was little aside from reparation clauses and certain territorial concessions, which had much real bearing upon Germany&#x27;s economic future&quot;. Summarizing the view of economists throughout the 1920s, she says the territorial changes to Germany were &quot;not necessarily ... economically unsound&quot;, but than the removal of the Saar and territory to Poland &quot;depriv[ed] Germany of her resources in excess of the amount necessary to fulfill the legitimate economic demands of the victors ... [and] was indefensible&quot;. Campbell also said the treaty failed to include &quot;provisions looking to the restoration of Germany to her former position as the chief economic and financial stabilizing influence in central Europe&quot; and that this was economically shortsighted and was an economic failing of the treaty.

Étienne Mantoux, a French economist, was the harshest contemporaneous critic of Keynes. In his posthumously published book, &quot;The Carthaginian Peace, or the Economic Consequences of Mr. Keynes&quot;, Mantoux said that Keynes &quot;had been wrong on various counts, especially with respect to his predictions about Germany&#x27;s coal, iron and steel production ... and its level of national saving&quot;. Keynes said Europe&#x27;s overall output of iron would decrease; Mantoux said the opposite occurred. By 1929, European iron output had increased by ten per cent from that of 1913. Keynes believed that this European trend would also affect German iron and steel production. Mantoux says this prediction was also incorrect. By 1927, German steel output had increased by 30 per cent and iron output increased by 38 per cent from 1913. Keynes predicted that German coal extraction would also decrease and that Germany would not be able to export coal immediately after the war. Mantoux also counters these arguments. By 1920, German was exporting 15 million tons of coal a year and reached 35 million tons by 1926. By 1929, German coal mining had risen by 30 per cent on the 1913 figures because of her increased labor efficiency methods. In regard to national savings, Keynes stated that 2 billion marks would only be possible after the adoption of the treaty. Mantoux says that the 1925 German national savings figure was estimated at 6.4 billion marks, rising to 7.6 billion marks by 1927. Mantoux calculated that Germany borrowed between 8 billion and 35 billion marks in the period 1920–1931, while only paying 21 billion in reparations. This, he says, allowed Germany to re-equip, expand, and modernize her industry. Highlighting the rearmament under Hitler, Mantoux said Germany &quot;had been in a stronger position to pay reparations than Keynes had made out&quot;. He also says that Germany could have paid all of the reparations if she had wanted to, and that the problem was not that Germany was unable to pay, but that she was unwilling to pay.

In 1954, United States Secretary of State John Foster Dullesone of the authors of Article 231said that, &quot;Efforts to bankrupt and humiliate a nation merely incite a people of vigor and of courage to break the bonds imposed upon them ... Prohibitions thus incite the very acts that are prohibited.&quot;

====Modern====

Geoff Harcourt writes that Keynes&#x27; arguments that reparations would lead to German economic collapse have been adopted &quot;by historians of almost all political persuasions&quot; and have influenced the way historians and the public &quot;see the unfolding events in Germany and the decades between Versailles and the outbreak of the Second World War&quot;. He says Mantoux&#x27;s work &quot;is not simply a critique of Keynes&quot;, but &quot;a stimulus to question the received wisdom&#x27;s interpretation of the unfolding events in Germany&quot;. Harcourt says that despite it discussing Keynes&#x27; errors &quot;in great detail&quot;, Mantoux&#x27;s work &quot;has not led us to revise our general judgment of Keynes&quot;, yet &quot;it does make us question the soundness of theoretical and empirical aspects&quot; of his arguments. A.J.P. Taylor writes that in 1919 &quot;many people believed that the payment of reparations would reduce Germany to a state of Asiatic poverty&quot;, and that Keynes &quot;held this view, as did all Germans; and probably many Frenchmen&quot;. However, he also says these &quot;apprehensions of Keynes and the Germans were grotesquely exaggerated&quot;.

According to Martel, Taylor &quot;shrewdly concludes that Étienne Mantoux had the better of his controversy with John Maynard Keynes&quot;. Stephen Schuker writes that Keynes&#x27; &quot;tendentious but influential&quot; book was &quot;ably refuted&quot; by Mantoux. Richard J. Evans says &quot;the economic history of the 1920s and early 1930s seemed to confirm&quot; the arguments of Keynes, yet &quot;as we now know&quot; Keynes&#x27; reparation arguments were wrong. Evans says the economic problems that arose were a result of the inflation of 1923, which lay with the German government rather than reparations.

According to Slavieck, the &quot;traditional interpretation of the treaty&#x27;s impact on Germany&quot; was that it &quot;plunged the nation into an economic free fall&quot;. This view was shared by the German people, who believed the treaty was robbing Germany of its wealth. German banker Max Warburg said the terms of the treaty were &quot;pillage on a global scale&quot;. Niall Ferguson says the German view was incorrect and &quot;not many historians would today agree with Warburg&quot;. However, several historians agree with Warburg. Norman Davies writes that the treaty forced Germany to &quot;pay astronomic reparations&quot;, while Tim McNeese states, &quot;France and Britain had placed war damages on Germany to the tune of billions of gold marks, which the defeated Germans could not begin to pay in earnest&quot;. Ferguson says the reparations were &quot;less of a burden than Keynes and others claimed&quot; and that the &quot;potential burden on national income of the annuity vary from 5 percent to 10 percent&quot;. However, he cautions against underestimating the initial German effort to pay. Before the implementation of the Dawes Plan, Germany transferred between eight and 13 billion gold marks, which amounted to &quot;between 4 and 7 percent of total national income&quot;. Ferguson says &quot;the annuity demanded in 1921 put an intolerable strain on the state&#x27;s finances&quot; and that total expenditure between 1920 and 1923 amounted to &quot;at least 50 percent of Reich revenue, 20 percent of total Reich spending and 10 percent of total public spending&quot;. Thus, Ferguson says, reparations &quot;undermined confidence in the Reich&#x27;s creditworthiness&quot; and &quot;&quot;were&quot; therefore excessiveas the German government claimed&quot;.

Hantke and Spoerer write that &quot;reparation payments were indeed a severe economic burden for Germany&quot; and that &quot;the German economy was deprived of between one and 2.2 billion Reichsmark (RM) annually, which amounted in the late 1920s to nearly 2.5 per cent of Germany&#x27;s GDP&quot;. Gerald Feldman writes, &quot;there can be no question that the entire London schedule could be viewed as a way of reducing the reparations bill without the Allied publics being fully informed of what was going on. This was recognized by at least some German politicians, one of whom optimistically argued that &#x27;the entente will only demand the 50 billion marks, not the rest. They have only called for the rest for domestic political reasons.&#x27;&quot; Feldman also says the prospect that the &#x27;C&#x27; bonds would be evoked hung over the German Government like a &quot;Damocles Sword&quot;. In addition to Feldman and Ferguson&#x27;s opposition, Peter Kruger, Barry Eichengreen, and Steven Webb agree that &quot;the initial German effort to pay reparations&quot; was substantial and &quot;produced an immense strain&quot; on the German economy.

Several historians take the middle ground between condemning reparations and supporting the argument that they were not a complete burden upon Germany. Detlev Peukert states, &quot;Reparations did not, in fact, bleed the German economy&quot; as had been feared, however the &quot;psychological effects of reparations were extremely serious, as was the strain that the vicious circle of credits and reparations placed the international financial system&quot;. P.M.H. Bell writes that while reparations were unwelcome in Germany and caused a &quot;strain on the German balance of payments&quot;, they could be paid and were &quot;compatible with a general recovery in European commerce and industry&quot;. According to Martel, Robert Boyce said reparations were &quot;a heavy burden on Germany, both as a financial charge ... and as a charge on Germany&#x27;s balance of payments&quot;. However, he says that while &quot;Germany claimed it could not afford to pay reparations&quot; this was far from the truth, and that &quot; ... Germany had made little effort to pay reparations. It refused to levy the necessary taxes, and far from accumulating the foreign exchange required for their payment by collecting some of the overseas earnings of German exporters, it allowed them to leave their earnings abroad&quot;. William R. Keylor agrees with Boyce, and says, &quot;an increase in taxation and reduction in consumption in the Weimar Republic would have yielded the requisite export surplus to generate the foreign exchange needed to service the reparation debt&quot;. However, Charles Feinstein writes that these kind of arguments overlook the extreme reluctance of the Germans &quot;to accept even a modest increase in taxation to meet what was universally regarded as an unjustified and oppressive imposition by hostile adversaries&quot;. Feinstein says that &quot;even if the economic aspects ... were not as crippling as had been assumed in the 1920s, the exaction of reparations was still of deep political and psychological significance for Germany&quot;.

Sally Marks writes, &quot;There are those ... who claim reparations were unpayable. In financial terms, that is untrue ... Of course Germans did not want to pay; nobody ever wants to pay, and Weimar was determined not to do so ... Raising taxes would have provided ample funds ... Weimar could have borrowed from the citizenry, as France did after 1871 [to pay its indemnity to Germany]&quot;. Marks writes that Germany could have easily paid the 50 billion marks in reparations, but instead chose to repeatedly default on payments as part of a political strategy of undermining Versailles. Marks says that in 1921, Germany met her requirements in full because custom posts were occupied by Allied troops. Once the Allies had relinquished control of the customs posts, Germany made no further payments in cash until 1924 following the implementation of the Dawes Plan. Marks says that while Article 231 of the Treaty of Versailles &quot;established an unlimited theoretical liability&quot;, Article 232 limited German responsibility to pay only for civilian damages. When the 1921 London conference to determine how much Germany should pay was called, the Allies calculated on the basis of what Germany could pay, not on their own needs. In this way, Marks says, the Germans largely escaped paying for the war and instead shifted the costs onto American investors. Marks states that the delay in establishing a final total until 1921, &quot;was actually in Germany&#x27;s interest&quot; because the figures discussed at the peace conference were &quot;astronomic&quot;. She says, &quot;The British experts, Lords Sumner and Cunliffe, were so unrealistic that they were nicknamed &#x27;the heavenly twins&#x27;.&quot; Marks also says, &quot;much ink has been wasted on the fact that civilian damages were stretched to cover war widows&#x27; pensions and allowances for military dependents&quot;. As reparations were based on what Germany could pay, Marks says the inclusion of such items did not affect German liability but altered distribution of reparations; the &quot;inclusion of pensions and allowances increased the British share of the pie but did not enlarge the pie.&quot;

Bernadotte Schmitt writes that if &quot;pensions and separation allowances ... not been included, reparations would probably never have become the bogey that poisoned the post-war world for so many years. Taylor says, &quot;no doubt the impoverishment of Germany was caused by war, not by reparations. Not doubt the Germans could have paid reparations, if they had regarded them as an obligation of honour, honestly incurred.&quot; However, he says, &quot;reparations  ... kept the passions of war alive&quot;. Peter Liberman writes that while the Germans believed they could not meet such demands of them, the &quot;French believed that Germany could pay and only lacked the requisite will&quot; to do so. Liberman says this is &quot;a position that has gained support from recent historical research&quot;. In regard to Germany&#x27;s capacity to pay, he focuses on coal and says that German coal consumption per capita was higher than France&#x27;s despite coal shipments being consistently short. He also says, &quot;the reparations demanded at Versailles were not far out of proportion to German economic potential&quot; and that in terms of national income it was similar to what the Germans demanded of France following the Franco-Prussian War. Martin Kitchen also says the impression that Germany was crippled by the reparations is a myth. Rather than a weakened Germany, he states the opposite was true.

Keylor says that literature on reparations has &quot;long suffered from gross misrepresentation, exaggeration, and outright falsification&quot; and that it &quot;should finally succumb to the archive-based discoveries of scholars&quot;. Diane Kunz, summarizing the historiography on the subject, writes that historians have refuted the myth that reparations placed an intolerable burden on Germany. Marks says a &quot;substantial degree of scholarly consensus now suggests that paying ... was within Germany&#x27;s financial capacity&quot;. Ruth Henig writes, &quot;most historians of the Paris peace conference now take the view that, in economic terms, the treaty was not unduly harsh on Germany and that, while obligations and damages were inevitably much stressed in the debates at Paris to satisfy electors reading the daily newspapers, the intention was quietly to give Germany substantial help towards paying her bills, and to meet many of the German objections by amendments to the way the reparations schedule was in practice carried out&quot;.

==See also==

*Aftermath of World War I
*Legal remedy
*Restitution
*Reparation (legal)
*Reparations
*Reparations Agreement between Israel and West Germany, Holocaust reparations
*War reparations
*World War II reparations

==Notes==
===Footnotes===
===Citations===
==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==Further reading==
* Gomes, Leonard. &quot;German Reparations, 1919–1932: A Historical Survey&quot; (Springer, 2010). online</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="26" end="37" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="43" end="57" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q194181" start="72" end="87" title="war reparations" label="war reparations"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="95" end="108" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allied Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q518101" start="222" end="229" title="First Austrian Republic" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985296" start="231" end="238" title="Hungarian Republic (1919–20)" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="244" end="250" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q147909" start="351" end="359" title="Kingdom of Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="496" end="502" title="Weimar Republic" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="642" end="648" title="French Third Republic" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="738" end="758" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q560355" start="864" end="874" title="German gold mark" label="gold marks"/>
<link wikidata="Q11693" start="1033" end="1038" title="Bond (finance)" label="bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="1329" end="1344" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q40625" start="1503" end="1520" title="Occupation of the Ruhr" label="occupied the Ruhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q156528" start="1625" end="1635" title="Dawes Plan" label="Dawes Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q165119" start="1846" end="1856" title="Young Plan" label="Young Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="2058" end="2074" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q315250" start="2115" end="2135" title="Hoover Moratorium" label="suspended for a year"/>
<link wikidata="Q679793" start="2214" end="2233" title="Lausanne Conference of 1932" label="Lausanne Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q9317" start="2615" end="2634" title="John Maynard Keynes" label="John Maynard Keynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3888431" start="2655" end="2673" title="Carthaginian peace" label="Carthaginian peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3156" end="3172" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="3174" end="3186" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q320302" start="3214" end="3255" title="London Agreement on German External Debts" label="London Agreement on German External Debts"/>
<link wikidata="Q192050" start="3487" end="3528" title="Assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand" label="assassination of Archduke Franz-Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3556" end="3571" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410539" start="3737" end="3743" title="European theatre of World War I" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765465" start="3749" end="3760" title="Middle Eastern theatre of World War I" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q659991" start="3762" end="3768" title="African theatre of World War I" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047682" start="3774" end="3778" title="Asian and Pacific theatre of World War I" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="3823" end="3837" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q157648" start="3882" end="3897" title="Fourteen Points" label="Fourteen Points"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="4013" end="4030" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="4071" end="4085" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="4309" end="4322" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q702250" start="4344" end="4352" title="Kiel mutiny" label="mutinied"/>
<link wikidata="Q170306" start="4420" end="4437" title="German Revolution of 1918–19" label="German Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q219894" start="4727" end="4745" title="Zone rouge" label="French countryside"/>
<link wikidata="Q392215" start="4942" end="4973" title="Nord-Pas de Calais Mining Basin" label="Nord-Pas de Calais Mining Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587677" start="5190" end="5214" title="Prime Minister of France" label="Prime Minister of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q171730" start="5215" end="5233" title="Georges Clemenceau" label="Georges Clemenceau"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="5715" end="5729" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="5730" end="5748" title="David Lloyd George" label="David Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="6137" end="6151" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q34001" start="6567" end="6574" title="Roubaix" label="Roubaix"/>
<link wikidata="Q182481" start="6579" end="6588" title="Tourcoing" label="Tourcoing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302880" start="7291" end="7311" title="Unexploded ordnance" label="unexploded ordinance"/>
<link wikidata="Q199820" start="8007" end="8029" title="Paris Peace Conference, 1919" label="Paris Peace Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q548182" start="8233" end="8253" title="Treaty of Versailles (1871)" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q285466" start="8425" end="8445" title="Punitive damages" label="punitive settlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q708399" start="8463" end="8474" title="Indemnity" label="indemnities"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="8634" end="8654" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247294" start="8656" end="8667" title="Article 231 of the Treaty of Versailles" label="Article 231"/>
<link wikidata="Q568605" start="8983" end="8999" title="Minister for Foreign Affairs (Germany)" label="Foreign Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q213622" start="9000" end="9035" title="Ulrich von Brockdorff-Rantzau" label="Count Ulrich von Brockdorff-Rantzau"/>
<link wikidata="Q649746" start="9049" end="9073" title="Weimar National Assembly" label="Weimar National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144947" start="11183" end="11204" title="Reparation Commission" label="Reparation Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509365" start="11952" end="11962" title="Gold franc" label="Gold franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q518101" start="12058" end="12065" title="First Austrian Republic" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985296" start="12067" end="12074" title="Hungarian Republic (1919–20)" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="12080" end="12086" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q209065" start="12305" end="12311" title="Kingdom of Greece (Glücksburg)" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q203493" start="12313" end="12320" title="Kingdom of Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="12330" end="12354" title="Yugoslavia" label="Serb-Croat-Slovene State"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="13967" end="13975" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q11693" start="14168" end="14173" title="Bond (finance)" label="bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q182790" start="14424" end="14434" title="Chimera (mythology)" label="chimerical"/>
<link wikidata="Q118958" start="15661" end="15668" title="Leuven" label="Louvain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7524588" start="16034" end="16046" title="sinking fund" label="sinking fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q151993" start="16384" end="16388" title="Ruhr" label="Ruhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q449718" start="16439" end="16474" title="Fehrenbach cabinet" label="government of Constantin Fehrenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q449700" start="16592" end="16604" title="First Wirth cabinet" label="Joseph Wirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q679793" start="17316" end="17335" title="Lausanne Conference of 1932" label="Lausanne Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q193258" start="17820" end="17838" title="Treaty of Lausanne (1923)" label="Treaty of Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q653550" start="18076" end="18090" title="Spa Conference of 1920" label="Spa Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q151993" start="18511" end="18515" title="Ruhr" label="Ruhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q40625" start="19720" end="19742" title="Occupation of the Ruhr" label="Occupation of the Ruhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q191974" start="19764" end="19780" title="Raymond Poincaré" label="Raymond Poincaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q185565" start="21544" end="21558" title="hyperinflation" label="hyperinflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q284392" start="21866" end="21889" title="Office of Management and Budget" label="US Bureau of the Budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q184565" start="21890" end="21906" title="Charles G. Dawes" label="Charles G. Dawes"/>
<link wikidata="Q156528" start="22099" end="22109" title="Dawes Plan" label="Dawes Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q152925" start="23088" end="23104" title="Locarno Treaties" label="Locarno Treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q103955" start="23788" end="23805" title="Gustav Stresemann" label="Gustav Stresemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q944509" start="24236" end="24249" title="Owen D. Young" label="Owen D. Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q165119" start="24301" end="24311" title="Young Plan" label="Young Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q309195" start="24731" end="24765" title="Bank for International Settlements" label="Bank for International Settlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q65121" start="25340" end="25356" title="Alfred Hugenberg" label="Alfred Hugenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247294" start="25460" end="25471" title="Article 231 of the Treaty of Versailles" label="Article 231"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273161" start="25659" end="25669" title="German referendum, 1929" label="plebiscite"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="25987" end="25999" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q155398" start="26243" end="26259" title="Heinrich Brüning" label="Heinrich Brüning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720" start="26303" end="26308" title="Mainz" label="Mainz"/>
<link wikidata="Q337093" start="26479" end="26494" title="William Tyrrell, 1st Baron Tyrrell" label="William Tyrrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q694468" start="26588" end="26601" title="Creditanstalt" label="Creditanstalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q204481" start="27101" end="27114" title="Far-right politics" label="the far-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q157740" start="27119" end="27128" title="President of Germany (1919–1945)" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667" start="27129" end="27148" title="Paul von Hindenburg" label="Paul von Hindenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="27650" end="27664" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q730469" start="27722" end="27732" title="Moratorium (law)" label="moratorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q315250" start="27781" end="27798" title="Hoover Moratorium" label="Hoover Moratorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q927867" start="28017" end="28033" title="Danatbank" label="Darmstädter Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="28167" end="28183" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q691249" start="28867" end="28895" title="World Disarmament Conference" label="World Disarmament Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q699527" start="30066" end="30109" title="scuttling of the German fleet at Scapa Flow" label="scuttling of the German fleet at Scapa Flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q377638" start="30411" end="30425" title="Niall Ferguson" label="Niall Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q214357" start="31251" end="31267" title="Gerhard Weinberg" label="Gerhard Weinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q320302" start="32109" end="32152" title="London Agreement on German External Debts" label="agreement was reached on this existing debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="32314" end="32326" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="32332" end="32339" title="German reunification" label="unified"/>
<link wikidata="Q92524" start="32864" end="32878" title="Detlev Peukert" label="Detlev Peukert"/>
<link wikidata="Q706931" start="34108" end="34121" title="A.J.P. Taylor" label="A.J.P. Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q156528" start="34394" end="34404" title="Dawes Plan" label="Dawes Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q75049" start="34552" end="34563" title="Max Winkler" label="Max Winkler"/>
<link wikidata="Q201684" start="34858" end="34881" title="Wall Street Crash 1929" label="1929 Stock Market Crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q40625" start="37221" end="37243" title="occupation of the Ruhr" label="occupation of the Ruhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q72655" start="37557" end="37571" title="Robert Schmidt (German politician)" label="Robert Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16030119" start="38653" end="38664" title="Sally Marks" label="Sally Marks"/>
<link wikidata="Q9317" start="40103" end="40122" title="John Maynard Keynes" label="John Maynard Keynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q578269" start="40340" end="40356" title="HM Treasury" label="British Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299605" start="40704" end="40742" title="The Economic Consequences of the Peace" label="The Economic Consequences of the Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3888431" start="41049" end="41067" title="Carthaginian peace" label="Carthaginian peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q268970" start="43117" end="43131" title="Republic of German-Austria" label="German-Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q181662" start="43233" end="43247" title="Bernard Baruch" label="Bernard Baruch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43264" end="43328" title="The Making of the Reparation and Economic Sections of the Treaty" label="The Making of the Reparation and Economic Sections of the Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236629" start="43539" end="43556" title="James T. Shotwell" label="James T. Shotwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q28064902" start="44495" end="44510" title="René Albrecht-Carrié" label="Albrecht-Carrié"/>
<link wikidata="Q170361" start="45473" end="45477" title="Saar (League of Nations)" label="Saar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3592265" start="45966" end="45981" title="Étienne Mantoux" label="Étienne Mantoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="48039" end="48071" title="United States Secretary of State" label="United States Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q223677" start="48072" end="48090" title="John Foster Dulles" label="John Foster Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502988" start="48354" end="48368" title="Geoff Harcourt" label="Geoff Harcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q607427" start="49823" end="49839" title="Richard J. Evans" label="Richard J. Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q67580" start="50466" end="50477" title="Max Warburg" label="Max Warburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q376303" start="50717" end="50730" title="Norman Davies" label="Norman Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509820" start="52263" end="52277" title="Gerald Feldman" label="Gerald Feldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q116437" start="52844" end="52858" title="Damocles" label="Damocles Sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342261" start="53846" end="53858" title="Robert Boyce (historian)" label="Robert Boyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077613" start="54698" end="54715" title="Charles Feinstein" label="Charles Feinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1844223" start="56797" end="56803" title="John Hamilton, 1st Viscount Sumner" label="Sumner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964619" start="56808" end="56816" title="Walter Cunliffe, 1st Baron Cunliffe" label="Cunliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16842058" start="56863" end="56893" title="Heavenly Twins (Sumner and Cunliffe)" label="&amp;#x27;the heavenly twins&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="58597" end="58616" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6775895" start="58618" end="58632" title="Martin Kitchen" label="Martin Kitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271498" start="59017" end="59027" title="Diane Kunz" label="Diane Kunz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519948" start="59850" end="59874" title="Aftermath of World War I" label="Aftermath of World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q689247" start="59876" end="59888" title="Legal remedy" label="Legal remedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q818977" start="59890" end="59901" title="Restitution" label="Restitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313906" start="59903" end="59921" title="Reparation (legal)" label="Reparation (legal)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313909" start="59923" end="59934" title="Reparations (transitional justice)" label="Reparations"/>
<link wikidata="Q660521" start="59936" end="59989" title="Reparations Agreement between Israel and West Germany" label="Reparations Agreement between Israel and West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690760" start="59991" end="60012" title="Holocaust reparations" label="Holocaust reparations"/>
<link wikidata="Q194181" start="60014" end="60029" title="War reparations" label="War reparations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551464" start="60031" end="60055" title="World War II reparations" label="World War II reparations"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33116" wikidata="Q819961" url="?curid=33116" title="World Series of Poker">
<text>The World Series of Poker (WSOP) is a series of poker tournaments held annually in Paradise, Nevada, and since 2004, sponsored by Caesars Entertainment. It dates its origins to 1970, when Benny Binion invited seven of the best-known poker players to the Horseshoe Casino for a single tournament, with a set start and stop time, and a winner determined by a secret ballot of the seven players.

As of 2020, the WSOP consists of 101 events, with most major poker variants featured. However, in recent years, over half of the events have been variants of Texas hold &#x27;em. Events traditionally take place during one day or over several consecutive days during the series in June and July. However, starting in 2008, the Main Event final table was delayed until November. The 2012 and 2016 Main Event final tables commenced in October because of the United States presidential election. As of May 2017, the World Series of Poker has done away with the November Nine concept and instead gone back to the old format of crowning the Main Event winner in July. After adopting a hybrid online format in 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the World Series of Poker announced a return to in-person play for the next series in September 2021, in Paradise, Nevada.

The 2024 WSOP was held at the Horseshoe and Paris Las Vegas, and saw record-breaking attendance for the Main Event tournament. In August 2024, Caesars Entertainment announced it had sold the WSOP brand to GGPoker operator NSUS Group for $500 million.

==History==

The idea of a World Series of Poker began in 1969 with an event called the Texas Gamblers Reunion. It was an invitational event sponsored by Tom Moore of Castle Hills, Texas, and held at the Holiday Hotel and Casino in Reno. This inaugural event was won by Crandell Addington. The set of tournaments that the World Series of Poker (WSOP) would evolve into was the brainchild of Las Vegas casino owner and poker player Benny Binion. In 1970, the first WSOP at Binion&#x27;s Horseshoe took place as a series of cash games that included five-card stud, deuce to seven low-ball draw, razz, seven-card stud, and Texas hold &#x27;em. The format for the Main Event as a freeze-out Texas hold &#x27;em game came the next year. The winner in 1970, Johnny Moss, was elected by his peers as the first &quot;World Champion of Poker&quot; and received a silver cup as a prize.

===Acquisition by Harrah&#x27;s===
In 2004, Harrah&#x27;s Entertainment (now Caesars Entertainment) purchased Binion&#x27;s Horseshoe, retained the rights to the Horseshoe and World Series of Poker brands, sold the hotel and casino to MTR Gaming Group, and announced that the 2005 Series events would be held at the Harrah&#x27;s-owned Rio Hotel and Casino, located just off the Las Vegas Strip. Since 2004 the official sponsor of the World Series of Poker has been the Caesars Entertainment Corporation. The final two days of the 2005 WSOP Main Event were held downtown at what is now the MTR-operated &quot;Binion&#x27;s&quot; in celebration of the centennial of the founding of Las Vegas. The WSOP added a made-for-television $2 million &quot;freeroll&quot; invitational Tournament of Champions (TOC) event first won by Annie Duke as a &quot;winner-take-all&quot; event.

===2005 expansion – WSOP Circuit===

Starting in 2005, the WSOP began the World Series of Poker Circuit, a satellite series held at Harrah&#x27;s-owned properties in the United States. In addition to the $10,000 buy-in tournament at each site, qualifying players became eligible for a revamped Tournament of Champions. The 2005 TOC, made up of the top twenty qualifying players at each circuit event, along with the final table from the 2005 Main Event, and the winners of nine or more bracelets (Johnny Chan, Doyle Brunson, and Phil Hellmuth) would participate in the revamped TOC at Caesars Palace. Mike Matusow won the first prize of $1 million (US), and all the players at the final table were guaranteed a minimum of $25,000 for the eighth and ninth-place finishers.

During a break in the final table of the 2005 Main Event on July 16, Harrah&#x27;s announced that eleven properties — including the recently added Bally&#x27;s and Caesar&#x27;s properties — would host 2005–06 WSOP Circuit events that started on August 11 in Tunica, Mississippi. One event that was scheduled for Biloxi, Mississippi, was canceled after the Grand Casino Biloxi, which was scheduled to host the event, suffered major damage from Hurricane Katrina. The Rio also hosted the 2006 World Series of Poker, which began on June 25 with satellite events and formally began the day after with the annual Casino Employee event, won in 2006 by Chris Gros. 2006 featured the Tournament of Champions on June 25 and 26, won by Mike Sexton. Various events led up to the Main Event, which was held from July 28 until August 10. The first prize of $12 million was awarded to Jamie Gold.

===2007 expansion – WSOP Europe===

The World Series of Poker Europe (WSOPE) is the first expansion of the World Series of Poker in series history. In September 2007, the first WSOP championship events outside of Las Vegas, complete with bracelets, were held. The inaugural WSOPE consisted of three events held in London from September 6–17, 2007. The main event, a £10,000 buy-in no-limit hold &#x27;em tournament, was won by Norwegian online prodigy Annette Obrestad on the day before her 19th birthday. This made her the youngest person ever to win a WSOP bracelet, a record that cannot be broken in the Las Vegas WSOP under current laws because the minimum legal age for casino gaming in Nevada is 21. Obrestad could play in the WSOPE because the minimum age for casino gaming in the United Kingdom is 18. While no definitive plans have been announced, WSOP Commissioner Jeffrey Pollack has indicated that in the next one to three years that other venues may start holding WSOP events. Two locations that have been mentioned as possible expansion sites are Egypt and South Africa, and the World Series of Poker Africa was ultimately launched in South Africa in 2010. However, it is currently treated as a WSOP Circuit event, with no bracelets awarded. The next expansion of the WSOP that included bracelet events was ultimately to Australia.

The WSOPE moved from London to Cannes, France, in 2011. At that time, the buy-ins and payouts changed from being fixed in pounds to euros. The event moved again in 2013, this time to the Paris suburb of Enghien-les-Bains.

From 2013 to 2017 the WSOPE was held only in odd-numbered years, with the newly launched World Series of Poker Asia Pacific (WSOP APAC) conducted in even-numbered years. WSOPE has been held annually since 2017.

===2010 expansion – WSOP Africa===

In 2010, the WSOP expanded overseas once again, only this time to Gauteng, South Africa. Although the 2010 event was part of the WSOP Circuit, winners did not earn a gold ring or standing for the WSOP Circuit National Championship, both of which were common for other circuit events. This policy changed in 2012. The WSOPA did not occur in 2011 but would come back in 2012.

===2013 expansion – WSOP Asia Pacific===

On April 30, 2012, the WSOP and Australian casino Crown Melbourne jointly announced the creation of the World Series of Poker Asia-Pacific (WSOP APAC). The first edition of the event was held at Crown&#x27;s Melbourne Casino from April 4–15, 2013 and featured five bracelet events in the series.

===2015 expansion – WSOP International Circuit===
In 2015, the WSOP International Circuit was launched, with rounds in Canada, Latin America, the Caribbean, Europe, Asia-Pacific and Africa. The winners of each tournament join the WSOP Circuit winners to play the WSOP Global Casino Championship. The International Circuit has expanded to 13 tournaments for the 2017/18 season.

===2020 expansion – WSOP Online===
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic and subsequent restrictions on live poker events, there was a heavy focus on online events for 2020 and 2021, with dedicated online series during both years.

===2023 expansion – WSOP Paradise===
In 2023, the WSOP expanded to Atlantis Paradise Island in the Bahamas.
===Number of bracelet events per year===
==Format==

The winner of each event receives a World Series of Poker bracelet and a monetary prize based on the number of entrants and buy-in amounts. Over the years, the tournament has grown in both the number of events and in the number of participants. Each year, the WSOP culminates with the $10,000 no-limit hold&#x27;em &quot;Main Event,&quot; which, since 2004, has attracted entrants numbering in the thousands. The victor receives a multi-million dollar cash prize and a bracelet, which has become the most coveted award a poker player can win. The winner of the World Series of Poker Main Event is considered to be the World Champion of Poker.

Since 1971, all WSOP events have been tournaments with cash prizes. In 1973, a five-card stud event was added. Since then, new events have been added and removed. Since 1976, a bracelet has been awarded to the winner of every event at the annual WSOP; later on, the winners of events before 1976 were retroactively given bracelets.

The tournament grew slowly for over a decade, reaching 52 participants in 1982. In the early 1980s, satellite tournaments were introduced, allowing people to win their way into the various events. By 1987, there were over 2,100 entrants in the entire series. At the 2006 World Series of Poker, there were 45 events, covering the majority of poker variants. Participation in the Main Event peaked that year, with 8,773 players.

The number of participants in the WSOP grew every year from 2000 until 2006. Following 2006, new online gambling legislation restricted the number of online qualifiers to the event. 2007 was the first dip in numbers in the 21st century while in 2008 more people participated than the previous year. In 2000, there were 4,780 entrants in the various events, but in 2005, the number rose to over 23,000 players. In the main event alone, the number of participants grew from 839 in 2003 to 8,773 in 2006, and has hovered between 6,300 and 7,200 entrants in the eleven years since. Phil Hellmuth has won the most bracelets with 17 followed by Phil Ivey with 11 bracelets. Crandell Addington is the only player to place in the top ten of the World Series of Poker Main Event eight times, albeit in earlier years with small fields compared to modern times. Four players have won the Main Event multiple times: Johnny Moss (1970, 1971, and 1974), Doyle Brunson (1976 and 1977), Stu Ungar (1980, 1981, and 1997) and Johnny Chan (1987 and 1988). Bracelet winners who first achieved fame in other fields include French actor/singer Patrick Bruel (in 1998), Danish soccer player Jan Vang Sørensen (in 2002), American actress Jennifer Tilly (in 2005), and American musician/record producer Steve Albini (in 2018 and 2022). In recent years, there have been non-bracelet events at the WSOP; two of the most notable are the &quot;World Series of Rock Paper Scissors&quot; and &quot;Ante Up for Africa.&quot;

Currently, Texas hold &#x27;em, Omaha hold &#x27;em and Seven-card stud and their lowball variants are played. H.O.R.S.E. has been played in the past and returned in 2006. Also, S.H.O.E. has been played in the past, and returned in 2007. Other events played in the past include Chinese poker, Five card stud, and many others. Like most tournaments, the sponsoring casino takes an entry fee (a percentage between 6% and 10%, depending on the buy-in) and distributes the rest, hence the prize money increasing with more players. In 2024, entry fees across all events range from $300 to $250,000, the latter being for the Super High Roller event. The Main Event, which is the highlight of the entire WSOP festival, has a buy-in of $10,000. In the 2005 Main Event, US$52,818,610 in prize money was distributed among 560 players, with US$7.5 million as the first prize. The 2006 Main Event, won by Jamie Gold, was the largest single poker tournament by prize pool or by entrant numbers in history; Gold pocketed US$12 million for his victory. In July 2010, it was announced that the winner of the 2010 Main Event would receive just under US$9 million. The 2023 Main Event took the record for entries, first-place prize, and prize pool. The 2024 Main Event set a record for entries and prize pool.

On June 2, 2011, the World Series of Poker and Cirque du Soleil founder Guy Laliberté announced plans for an officially sanctioned special fundraising event, known as The Big One for One Drop, starting on July 1, 2012, with a record US$1 million entry fee. 11% of the money (more precisely, $111,111 from each buy-in) went to Laliberté&#x27;s charity, the One Drop Foundation, and the WSOP waived its normal 10% rake of the entry fees. At the time of the original announcement, 15 of the maximum 48 seats had been taken. By early December 2011, the field size had increased to 22, the minimum required for an official bracelet tournament. Among those who committed early to the event were Johnny Chan, Daniel Negreanu, Jonathan Duhamel, Tom Dwan, Laliberté, billionaire businessman Phil Ruffin and Erik Seidel. On April 12, 2012, the WSOP announced that 30 players had committed to the tournament, which brought the first prize to $12.3 million, exceeding the record amount won by Jamie Gold. In the end, all 48 seats were filled, resulting in a first prize of $18.3 million. Poker professional Antonio Esfandiari won the event, also receiving a special platinum WSOP bracelet.

 While the Main Event is the biggest - according to prize pool - event in the series; the Millionaire Maker ($1,500 buy-in) is next up top with its latest edition bearing a prize pool of $14,603,565. Inaugurated in 2018 the tournament has ever since held a $1,000,000 guarantee for first place.

 In 2023, the World Series of Poker introduced a $300 no-limit hold &#x27;em bracelet event called Gladiators of Poker, its lowest-priced event. The event has a guaranteed $3 million prize pool and attracted over 23,000 players in its inaugural year.

==Main Event== 
Since 1972, the Main Event of the WSOP has been the $10,000 buy-in no-limit Texas Hold &#x27;em (NLHE) tournament (in 1971 the buy-in was $5,000 and the inaugural 1970 event was an invitational with winner determined by a vote from the players). Winners of the event not only get the largest prize of the tournament and a gold bracelet, but additionally their picture is placed in the &quot;Gallery of Champions&quot; at Binion&#x27;s.

The winner of the Main Event has traditionally been given the unofficial title of World Champion. However, some believe that no-limit hold &#x27;em is not the optimal structure for determining a champion poker player. In 2002, Daniel Negreanu argued that the Main Event should switch to pot-limit hold &#x27;em, believing that pot-limit required a more complete set of poker skills than no-limit, although he admitted that such a change would likely never be made. However, after the $50,000 H.O.R.S.E./Poker Players Championship event was added, many of the game&#x27;s top professionals, including Negreanu, have since stated that this tournament ultimately decides the world&#x27;s best player. The $50,000 buy-in, being five times larger than the buy-in for the Main Event, has thus far tended to deter amateurs from playing in this event, and the variety of games played require a broader knowledge of poker. The first $50,000 event, conducted as a H.O.R.S.E. tournament, was won by Chip Reese in 2006. In 2010, the $50,000 event changed from H.O.R.S.E. to an &quot;8-game&quot; format, adding no-limit hold &#x27;em, pot-limit Omaha, and 2–7 triple draw to the mix, and was rechristened The Poker Players Championship, with Michael Mizrachi winning the first edition of the revamped event. Since Reese&#x27;s death in December 2007, the winner of this event receives the David &#x27;Chip&#x27; Reese Memorial Trophy in addition to the bracelet and the prize money.

There have been many memorable moments during the main events, including Jack Straus&#x27;s 1982 comeback win after discovering he had one $500 chip left when he thought he was out of the tournament. The end of the 1988 main event was featured in the movie &quot;Rounders&quot;. Chris Moneymaker and Greg Raymer, the winners in 2003 and 2004, both qualified for the main event through satellite tournaments at the PokerStars online card room. Jerry Yang, the winner in 2007, had only been playing poker for two years prior to his victory. He won his seat at a $225 satellite tournament at Pechanga Resort &amp; Casino, in California. With the passage of the Unlawful Internet Gambling Enforcement Act (UIGEA) of 2006 online poker sites have been barred from purchasing entrance directly for their users.

In the 2023 Main Event, a new record was set for entries and a first-place prize for the first time since 2006. The 2024 WSOP Main Event set a new record for entries.

===WSOP Main Event winners===
====WSOP Main Event records====
These records do not include WSOP Europe or Asia Pacific Main Events.
*Most Main Event wins: Johnny Moss (3), Stu Ungar (3)
*Most Main Event final tables: Jesse Alto (7)
*Most Main Event money finishes: Berry Johnston (10)
*Most Main Event wins in consecutive years: Doyle Brunson (2), Johnny Chan (2), Johnny Moss (2), Stu Ungar (2)
*Most Main Event final tables in consecutive years: Bob Hooks (4, 1973–1976), Johnny Moss (4, 1971–1974)
*Most Main Event money finishes in consecutive years: Ronnie Bardah (5, 2010–2014)
*Highest Main Event earnings: Daniel Weinman ($12,100,000)
*Youngest Main Event winner: Joe Cada ()
*Oldest Main Event winner: Johnny Moss ()
*Most Main Event participations: Howard Andrew (45, 1974–2018)
*Oldest Main Event participant: Eugene Calden (100 years, 2023)

===WSOP Europe Main Event winners===
===WSOP Asia Pacific Main Event winners===
===WSOP Online Main Event winners===
===WSOP Paradise Main Event winners===
===WSOP Paradise Super Main Event winners===
==Players==
===Poker Hall of Fame===

Since its inception in 1979, the WSOP Poker Hall of Fame has honored 42 individuals. Selection criteria for players include having competed against acknowledged top competition, played for high stakes, and played consistently well to gain the respect of their peers. For non-players, selection is based on positive and lasting contributions to the overall growth and success of poker.

===Player of the Year===
Since 2004, a Player of the Year (POY) award has been given to the player with the most points accumulated throughout the WSOP. As of 2019, fifteen different players have won the sixteen awards, with Daniel Negreanu as the only player to win the award more than once.

Only &quot;open&quot; events in which all players can participate count in the standings; this eliminates the Seniors, Ladies, and Casino Employee events. Beginning with the 2006 World Series of Poker, the Main Event and the $50,000 H.O.R.S.E. competition had no effect on the outcome of the winner of the Player of the Year award. In the 2008 World Series of Poker, the $50,000 H.O.R.S.E. event counted toward the Player of the Year award, but the Main Event did not. Since 2009, all open events, including the Main Event, count towards Player of the Year. The Player of the Year standings were based upon performance solely at the WSOP in Las Vegas up until 2010, but beginning in 2011 have also taken the World Series of Poker Europe into account, and starting in 2013 also include events in the World Series of Poker Asia Pacific. The 2011 WSOP Player of the Year organized by &quot;Bluff Magazine&quot; used a different scoring system which took into account field sizes and buy-in amounts when calculating points earned. This scoring system has been used ever since.

Since 2016, the WSOP payout a bigger percentage of the field (15% instead of 10% until then).

===Bracelets===

:Notes
===Money finishes===
&quot;Information correct as of December 23, 2023&quot;
===Career earnings===
&quot;Information correct as of December 23, 2023.&quot;
===Records===
Since its inception, Stu Ungar and Johnny Moss are the only players to have won the Main Event three times. However, Moss&#x27;s first victory came in a different format, as he was elected winner by vote of his fellow players at the conclusion of what was then a timed event. Moss, Ungar, Doyle Brunson, and Johnny Chan are the only people who have won the Main Event in consecutive years. Chan&#x27;s second victory in 1988 was featured in the 1998 film &quot;Rounders&quot;.

Phil Hellmuth holds multiple WSOP records including most bracelets, most WSOP cashes, and most WSOP final tables. He is also the only player to have won the Main Events of both the WSOP and WSOP Europe.

In recent years, the prize pool for the WSOP Main Event has become so large that the winner instantly becomes one of the top money winners of WSOP and even in tournament poker history. Before July 2012, the top seven players on the all-time WSOP Earnings list were Main Event champions from 2005 to 2011, among whom Jamie Gold topped those seven, he won the 2006 Main Event, which had then the biggest first prize for a single tournament, and still is the largest poker tournament by prize pool in history. However, the all-time leader is currently poker professional Daniel Negreanu, who has not won a Main Event, although he won the inaugural WSOP Asia Pacific Main Event in 2013. He is followed by professionals Antonio Esfandiari and Daniel Colman, both also yet to win a Main Event in Las Vegas.

The list below includes the WSOP Europe and WSOP Asia-Pacific, but excludes WSOP Circuit events and other non-bracelet events. The results are updated through the 2014 WSOP APAC.

===Women at the WSOP===
At present, women make up around 5% of the field in all the events at the annual WSOP tournament. Vanessa Selbst, Barbara Enright, Nani Dollison and Kristen Bicknell all have won three WSOP bracelets.

====Last Woman Standing====
In 2015, Kelly Minkin finished in 29th place in the Main Event earning the &quot;Last Woman Standing&quot;.

In the 2007 World Series of Poker, Maria Ho was the last woman remaining in the Championship Event, placing 38th out of 6,358 players and earning a $237,865 payday. She repeated this accomplishment in 2014, when she came in 77th place out of 6,683 players. Her 27th place &quot;Last Woman Standing&quot; finish at the 2011 World Series of Poker Europe Main Event along with a 2017 6th place final table finish makes Maria the only player to ever hold the title Last Woman Standing four times over and at both the WSOP and WSOPE Main Events.

In 1995, Barbara Enright became the only woman to make the Final Table of the World Series of Poker, finishing in fifth place. She also finished in the money of the Main Event in 2005. An Ambassador of Poker League of Nations, Barbara is the first woman to win two WSOP bracelets, the first woman to win three bracelets, and the first woman to win an open event at the World Series of Poker. Barbara is also the first woman to be inducted into the Poker Hall of Fame, the Women in Poker Hall of Fame, and the Senior Poker Hall of Fame, making her the only poker player to be in all three poker halls of fame.

====WSOP Ladies Championship Events====

In 1977, the first ladies-only event was introduced in the form of $100 buy-in Stud Poker Tournament. Jackie McDaniels won that event to become the first ladies champion. She won one of the smallest prizes ($5,580) in WSOP history. By 2007, the popularity of the Ladies Event had grown to the point that it became the first ladies-only event to have a prize pool greater than $1,000,000. Seven card stud was the game for the event&#x27;s first two decades, but it was replaced by Texas hold &#x27;em in 2001.

==WSOP television coverage==

===1970s===
The earliest filming of the World Series was a special produced by Binion&#x27;s Horseshoe in 1973 and narrated by Jimmy &quot;The Greek&quot; Snyder. CBS began covering the World Series in the late 1970s.

===1980s===
In the early 1980s, the event was again broadcast as specials. In the late 1980s, the World Series returned to television as ESPN took over broadcasting. Initially, coverage only consisted of just a single one-hour taped-delay broadcast of the Main Event.

===1990s===
ESPN Classic currently airs many of the old broadcasts from the mid-1990s and beyond. Since no &quot;pocket cam&quot; existed, very few hole cards were actually shown to television viewers. Generally, ESPN used poker-playing actors such as Dick Van Patten, Vince Van Patten, and Gabe Kaplan, with either the tournament director (usually Jim Albrecht) or a poker professional, of which one was Phil Hellmuth, joining the team. Unlike today&#x27;s coverage, ESPN featured no pre-taped interviews or profiles on the players. In addition, the commentators were generally on the casino floor itself.

===2000s===
====Early 2000s====
From 1999 to 2001, the World Series of Poker was broadcast by The Discovery Channel. These hour-long programs presented more of an overview or recap of the WSOP as opposed to broadcasting an actual live event with play-by-play analysis and color commentary. The Discovery Channel&#x27;s broadcast also featured final table players interviews interlaced throughout the show. ESPN would resume coverage the following year.

ESPN&#x27;s coverage in 2002 was typical of their coverage in the 1990s (recorded in video, little or no post-production commentary or player profiles, no card cams). However, the final table broadcast was expanded over two one-hour episodes. The 2002 WSOP was the first with the &quot;sneak peek&quot; (later called the pocket cam, or hole cam).

====2003 expansion====
In 2003, Fred Christenson secured the long-term rights acquisition for ESPN, and the channel expanded their coverage to new heights with their coverage of the WSOP. They included coverage of the entire tournament, with a &quot;Featured Table&quot;. At this table, the viewers could see the player&#x27;s hole cards and subsequent strategy. The action was also broadcast as if live, though on tape-delay. 2003 was the first year that the broadcast covered action preceding the final table. Since then, ESPN has greatly expanded its coverage to include many of the preliminary events of the WSOP, especially Texas Hold &#x27;Em. Also, their coverage of the main event now typically includes at least one hour program on each day. For the first two years of its existence, ESPN was broadcasting one hour programs of the &quot;circuit&quot; events that the WSOP has at various Harrah&#x27;s-owned casinos, but ESPN did not renew these events. ESPN&#x27;s coverage now includes many of the trappings of sports coverage, such as lighter segments (called &quot;The Nuts&quot;) and interviews. ESPN&#x27;s coverage has been largely driven by Matt Maranz, Executive Producer for the WSOP telecasts. Maranz previously worked on ESPN&#x27;s football pre-game show, and has also produced taped segments for NBC&#x27;s Olympic coverage.

====2004–2020====
Coverage would increase in 2004 and 2005 to include preliminary events from the WSOP, in addition to the &quot;Main Event&quot;. ESPN has expanded poker to all-new levels, especially with their coverage of the 2006 WSOP, including providing the entire final table of the 2006 Main Event via pay-per-view airing. In 2008, ESPN experimented with the idea of a delayed final table. This idea presented greater sponsorship opportunities and notoriety, culminating in a recap of the Main Event and the conclusion of the 2008 Main Event final table. In 2009, ESPN announced they would again move the final table to November 2009. The WSOP also decided there would be no rebuy events in 2009. The decision was reached because of complaints that rebuy events provided an unfair advantage to professionals with no limitation on how much money they can spend for an event. There were 57 bracelet events that year. The 2010 WSOP had the same number of bracelet events as in 2009, again with no rebuy events.

With 58 bracelet events and no rebuy events, the 2011 WSOP featured unprecedented &quot;nearly live&quot; coverage, with broadcasts being delayed by much smaller amounts of time while still satisfying Nevada Gaming Commission regulators. Caesars Entertainment, via WSOP.com, streamed final-table coverage of all bracelet events on a 5-minute delay, although without pocket cams. The ESPN family of networks aired 36 hours of Main Event coverage leading up to the November Nine on a 30-minute delay, showing the hole cards of all players who voluntarily entered the pot once the hand ended. The Main Event final table was broadcast on a 15-minute delay with the same policy regarding hole cards. The first day of the final table was aired on ESPN2 and the final day on ESPN, with both days also streamed on ESPN3 and WSOP.com. ESPN continued to have coverage of the WSOP in 2012.

POKER PROductions has produced the World Series of Poker Europe since 2008 and World Series of Poker since 2011. Former pro turned executive producer Mori Eskandani&#x27;s team pioneered the live broadcast format seen at the WSOP since 2011. POKER PROductions has filmed WSOP bracelet final tables and the WSOP Main Event for PokerGO, a subscription video on demand service. PokerGO has had exclusive WSOP broadcast rights since 2017, with shared coverage of select events appearing on PokerGO.

====2021–present====
Starting in 2021, CBS Sports Network became the official television home of the World Series of Poker through a multi-year deal reached with PokerGO. Per the terms of the new deal, CBS Sports was set to broadcast 15 hours of WSOP Main Event coverage plus 36 additional hours from select gold bracelet events. In an interview for Card Player Magazine, PokerGO President Mori Eskandani mentioned longtime WSOP broadcasters Lon McEachern and Norman Chad would be back in the booth, along with Ali Nejad, David Tuchman, and Jeff Platt.

Live broadcast coverage of the 2021 WSOP moved exclusively to PokerGO. PokerGO&#x27;s 2021 WSOP live streaming coverage began on Monday, October 4, and would include 36 days of live broadcasts from more than 20 unique events as part of the 52nd annual WSOP. As part of PokerGO&#x27;s live coverage of the 2021 WSOP, and for the first time ever, live streaming of the WSOP Main Event moved to the PokerGO platform and would be broadcast from start to finish.

===WSOP broadcasters===
*1973 (special) – Jimmy Snyder
*1978 (CBS) – Brent Musburger and Jimmy Snyder
*1979 (CBS) – Frank Glieber and Jimmy Snyder
*1981 (special) – Curt Gowdy
*1983 (special) – Curt Gowdy
*1987 (special) – Ted Robinson
*1988 (ESPN) – Chris Marlowe
*1989 (ESPN) – Chris Marlowe
*1990 (ESPN) – Chris Marlowe
*1991 (ESPN) – Chris Marlowe
*1992 (ESPN) – Chris Marlowe
*1993 (ESPN) – Dick Van Patten and Jim Albrecht
*1994 (ESPN) – Dick Van Patten and Jim Albrecht
*1995 (ESPN) – Dick Van Patten and Jim Albrecht
*1996 – No televised broadcast
*1997 (ESPN) – Gabe Kaplan and Jim Albrecht
*1998 (ESPN) – Vince Van Patten and Jim Albrecht
*1999 (The Discovery Channel)
*2000 (The Discovery Channel)
*2001 (The Discovery Channel)
*2002 (ESPN) – Lon McEachern and Gabe Kaplan; (ESPN Latin America – Spanish) – Gabriela Hill
*2003 (ESPN) – Lon McEachern and Norman Chad; (ESPN Latin America – Spanish) – Gabriela Hill
*2004 (ESPN) – Lon McEachern and Norman Chad; (ESPN Deportes and ESPN Latin America – Spanish) – Gabriela Hill
*2005 (ESPN) – Lon McEachern and Norman Chad; (ESPN Deportes and ESPN Latin America – Spanish) – Gabriela Hill and Andrés Agulla
*2006 (ESPN) – Lon McEachern and Norman Chad; Phil Gordon and Ali Nejad in Main Event Pay-Per-View; (ESPN Deportes and ESPN Latin America – Spanish) – Gabriela Hill and Andrés Agulla
*2007 (ESPN) – Lon McEachern and Norman Chad; Phil Gordon and Ali Nejad in Main Event Pay-Per-View; (ESPN Deportes and ESPN Latin America – Spanish) – Fernando Álvarez and Gabriela Hill
*2008 (ESPN) – Lon McEachern and Norman Chad; (ESPN Deportes and ESPN Latin America – Spanish) – Fernando Álvarez and Gabriela Hill
*2009 (ESPN) – Lon McEachern and Norman Chad; (ESPN Deportes and ESPN Latin America – Spanish) – Georgina Ruiz Sandoval and Fernando Álvarez
*2010 (ESPN) – Lon McEachern and Norman Chad; (ESPN3) – James Hartigan and Phil Hellmuth; (ESPN Deportes and ESPN Latin America – Spanish) – Georgina Ruiz Sandoval and Fernando Álvarez
*2011 (ESPN) – Lon McEachern, Norman Chad and Kara Scott; (ESPN2 &amp; 3 LIVE) Lon McEachern, Norman Chad, and David Tuchman
*2012 (ESPN) – Lon McEachern, Norman Chad, Antonio Esfandiari, Kara Scott, and Olivier Busquet
*2013 (ESPN) – Lon McEachern, Norman Chad, Antonio Esfandiari, Kara Scott, Marianela Pereyra, and Phil Hellmuth
*2013 (ESPN Australia) – Lon McEachern, Norman Chad, Antonio Esfandiari and Lynn Gilmartin
*2014 (ESPN) – Lon McEachern, Norman Chad, and Kara Scott
*2015 (ESPN) – Lon McEachern, Norman Chad, Antonio Esfandiari, Kara Scott, Daniel Negreanu, and Phil Hellmuth
*2016 (ESPN) – Lon McEachern, Norman Chad, Antonio Esfandiari, Kara Scott, and Phil Laak
*2017 (ESPN) – Lon McEachern, Norman Chad, Antonio Esfandiari, Joe Stapleton, Phil Hellmuth, David Tuchman, and Kara Scott
*2018 (ESPN) – Lon McEachern, Norman Chad, and Antonio Esfandiari
*2019 (ESPN) – Lon McEachern, Norman Chad, Jamie Kerstetter, and Kara Scott
*2020 (ESPN) – Lon McEachern, Jamie Kerstetter, and Jeff Platt
*2021 (PokerGO/CBS Sports) – Lon McEachern, Norman Chad, Maria Ho, Jamie Kerstetter, Ali Nejad, and Jeff Platt

*2022 (PokerGO/CBS Sports) – Lon McEachern, Norman Chad, and Jamie Kerstetter
*2023 (PokerGO/CBS Sports) – Lon McEachern and Norman Chad
*2024 – Lon McEachern and Norman Chad (Main Event)
==Marketing==
The WSOP has corporate sponsors and licensed products which pay fees to market themselves as an official sponsors and/or licensees and exclusively use the WSOP insignia and cross-promote with their events. Besides the hosting casino and ESPN, major sponsors have included Jack Links Beef Jerky, Miller Brewing&#x27;s &quot;Milwaukee&#x27;s Best&quot; brand of beers, Pepsi&#x27;s SoBe Adrenaline Rush energy drink (sponsors of the 2005 Tournament of Champions), Helene Curtis&#x27;s Degree brand of anti-perspirant/deodorant, United States Playing Card&#x27;s Bicycle Pro Cards, Bluff Magazine, GlaxoSmithKline/Bayer&#x27;s Levitra erectile dysfunction medicine, and The Hershey Company. Licensees include Glu Mobile, Activision (video games for different platforms such as Nintendo&#x27;s GameCube, Microsoft&#x27;s Xbox, Sony&#x27;s PlayStation 2, and PC, featuring computer-generated versions of stars like Chris Ferguson), and products made by different companies ranging from chip sets, playing cards, hand-held games, and clothing like caps and shirts. The official playing cards are supplied by Copag Cards and chips are manufactured by Excalibur Electronics, Inc. which is based out of Miami, Florida and has been the main chip licensee since 2005.

===DVD releases===
In 2003 and 2004, DVD sets showcasing each year&#x27;s WSOP Main Event were released by ESPN.

===Video games===
In 2005, a video game based on the tournament series, titled &quot;World Series of Poker&quot;, was released for several consoles and PC. A sequel called &quot;World Series of Poker: Tournament of Champions&quot; came out in 2006. In 2007, &quot;World Series of Poker 2008: Battle for the Bracelets&quot; was released. WSOP video poker machines now appear at some Harrah&#x27;s casinos; the machines are standard video poker machines, but have a bonus feature which allows a player to play a modified game of Texas Hold &#x27;em against the machine.

===WSOP Poker Academy===
Beginning in 2007, Harrah&#x27;s announced the creation of the World Series of Poker Academy, a poker school aimed at providing poker players with the skills needed to win a WSOP bracelet. The instructors for the academy include Annie Duke, Phil Hellmuth, Greg Raymer, Scott Fischman, Mark Kroon, Mark Seif, Alex Outhred, and former FBI interrogator Joe Navarro. Initial academies were launched in Tunica, Mississippi, Indiana, and Las Vegas.

===WSOP online===
In September 2009, Harrah&#x27;s signed an agreement with Dragonfish, the B2B arm of 888 Holdings, to provide its online gaming services. The offering went live in the UK later that year, allowing UK users to play for real money. Real money online poker is available in the United States, but only in Delaware, Nevada, and New Jersey.

==See also==
*&quot;Poker After Dark&quot;
*National Heads-Up Poker Championship
*&quot;High Stakes Poker&quot;

==References==
==External links==
* An in depth history of the WSOP</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q819961" start="4" end="25" title="World Series of Poker" label="World Series of Poker"/>
<link wikidata="Q819961" start="27" end="31" title="World Series of Poker" label="WSOP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2100967" start="48" end="64" title="poker tournament" label="poker tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q984542" start="83" end="99" title="Paradise, Nevada" label="Paradise, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q18636524" start="130" end="151" title="Eldorado Resorts" label="Caesars Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3638292" start="188" end="200" title="Benny Binion" label="Benny Binion"/>
<link wikidata="Q654906" start="254" end="270" title="Binion&amp;#x27;s Gambling Hall and Hotel" label="Horseshoe Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q651168" start="449" end="469" title="List of poker variants" label="major poker variants"/>
<link wikidata="Q214536" start="552" end="571" title="Texas hold &amp;#x27;em" label="Texas hold &amp;#x27;em"/>
<link wikidata="Q7064785" start="716" end="742" title="November Nine" label="the Main Event final table"/>
<link wikidata="Q4226" start="849" end="884" title="2012 United States presidential election" label="United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q106419732" start="1204" end="1215" title="2021 World Series of Poker" label="next series"/>
<link wikidata="Q805467" start="1283" end="1296" title="Horseshoe Las Vegas" label="the Horseshoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q691491" start="1301" end="1316" title="Paris Las Vegas" label="Paris Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q107094443" start="1462" end="1469" title="GGPoker" label="GGPoker"/>
<link wikidata="Q118868608" start="1597" end="1619" title="1969 Texas Gamblers Reunion" label="Texas Gamblers Reunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q665285" start="1676" end="1695" title="Castle Hills, Texas" label="Castle Hills, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q49225" start="1741" end="1745" title="Reno, Nevada" label="Reno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995212" start="1779" end="1797" title="Crandell Addington" label="Crandell Addington"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="1900" end="1909" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3638292" start="1940" end="1952" title="Benny Binion" label="Benny Binion"/>
<link wikidata="Q654906" start="1981" end="2004" title="Binion&amp;#x27;s Horseshoe" label="Binion&amp;#x27;s Horseshoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q145634" start="2056" end="2070" title="five-card stud" label="five-card stud"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2072" end="2086" title="rank of hands (poker)#Deuce-to-seven" label="deuce to seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356784" start="2087" end="2100" title="lowball (poker)" label="low-ball draw"/>
<link wikidata="Q540061" start="2102" end="2106" title="razz (poker)" label="razz"/>
<link wikidata="Q264099" start="2108" end="2123" title="seven-card stud" label="seven-card stud"/>
<link wikidata="Q214536" start="2129" end="2148" title="Texas hold &amp;#x27;em" label="Texas hold &amp;#x27;em"/>
<link wikidata="Q528347" start="2261" end="2272" title="Johnny Moss" label="Johnny Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q892498" start="2431" end="2458" title="Caesars Entertainment Corporation" label="Harrah&amp;#x27;s Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6718523" start="2622" end="2638" title="MTR Gaming Group" label="MTR Gaming Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q739914" start="2723" end="2743" title="Rio All Suite Hotel and Casino" label="Rio Hotel and Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q745608" start="2766" end="2781" title="Las Vegas Strip" label="Las Vegas Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q48995876" start="3038" end="3048" title="centennial" label="centennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q175091" start="3161" end="3184" title="World Series of Poker Tournament of Champions" label="Tournament of Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q271142" start="3210" end="3220" title="Annie Duke" label="Annie Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586978" start="3336" end="3365" title="World Series of Poker Circuit" label="World Series of Poker Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q175091" start="3556" end="3579" title="World Series of Poker Tournament of Champions" label="Tournament of Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q569978" start="3847" end="3861" title="Caesars Palace" label="Caesars Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q797955" start="3863" end="3875" title="Mike Matusow" label="Mike Matusow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3472009" start="4294" end="4300" title="Tunica Resorts, Mississippi" label="Tunica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494" start="4302" end="4313" title="Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q490720" start="4348" end="4354" title="Biloxi, Mississippi" label="Biloxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594387" start="4392" end="4411" title="Grand Casino Biloxi" label="Grand Casino Biloxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="4479" end="4496" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000240" start="4522" end="4548" title="2006 World Series of Poker" label="2006 World Series of Poker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106736" start="4682" end="4692" title="Chris Gros" label="Chris Gros"/>
<link wikidata="Q518456" start="4762" end="4773" title="Mike Sexton" label="Mike Sexton"/>
<link wikidata="Q723834" start="4907" end="4917" title="Jamie Gold" label="Jamie Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q896560" start="5158" end="5167" title="World Series of Poker bracelet" label="bracelets"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="5234" end="5240" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="5286" end="5287" title="pound sterling" label="£"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="5347" end="5356" title="Norway" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q265237" start="5372" end="5388" title="Annette Obrestad" label="Annette Obrestad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="5612" end="5618" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3807820" start="5795" end="5810" title="Jeffrey Pollack" label="Jeffrey Pollack"/>
<link wikidata="Q14829395" start="6013" end="6041" title="World Series of Poker Africa" label="World Series of Poker Africa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6255" end="6264" title="#World Series of Poker Asia-Pacific" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39984" start="6298" end="6304" title="Cannes" label="Cannes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="6399" end="6403" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="6454" end="6459" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q255105" start="6470" end="6487" title="Enghien-les-Bains" label="Enghien-les-Bains"/>
<link wikidata="Q133083" start="6804" end="6811" title="Gauteng" label="Gauteng"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="6813" end="6825" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145115" start="7205" end="7220" title="Crown Casino and Entertainment Complex" label="Crown Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="7363" end="7372" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="7876" end="7893" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7909" end="7921" title="Impact_of_the_COVID-19_pandemic_on_sports#Poker" label="restrictions"/>
<link wikidata="Q896560" start="8250" end="8280" title="World Series of Poker bracelet" label="World Series of Poker bracelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="8659" end="8665" title="United States dollar" label="dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q241585" start="8929" end="8933" title="1973 World Series of Poker" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q500834" start="9291" end="9311" title="satellite tournament" label="satellite tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000240" start="9457" end="9483" title="2006 World Series of Poker" label="2006 World Series of Poker"/>
<link wikidata="Q651168" start="9532" end="9545" title="poker variant" label="poker variant"/>
<link wikidata="Q532391" start="9921" end="9925" title="2000 World Series of Poker" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784191" start="10098" end="10102" title="2003 World Series of Poker" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q375966" start="10197" end="10210" title="Phil Hellmuth" label="Phil Hellmuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q318464" start="10258" end="10267" title="Phil Ivey" label="Phil Ivey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995212" start="10287" end="10305" title="Crandell Addington" label="Crandell Addington"/>
<link wikidata="Q528347" start="10523" end="10534" title="Johnny Moss" label="Johnny Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467404" start="10536" end="10540" title="1970 World Series of Poker" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663237" start="10542" end="10546" title="1971 World Series of Poker" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q686857" start="10552" end="10556" title="1974 World Series of Poker" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q313139" start="10559" end="10572" title="Doyle Brunson" label="Doyle Brunson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075507" start="10574" end="10578" title="1976 World Series of Poker" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871896" start="10583" end="10587" title="1977 World Series of Poker" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q528283" start="10590" end="10599" title="Stu Ungar" label="Stu Ungar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530016" start="10601" end="10605" title="1980 World Series of Poker" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004835" start="10607" end="10611" title="1981 World Series of Poker" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247795" start="10617" end="10621" title="1997 World Series of Poker" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q471830" start="10627" end="10638" title="Johnny Chan" label="Johnny Chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784682" start="10640" end="10644" title="1987 World Series of Poker" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q246834" start="10649" end="10653" title="1988 World Series of Poker" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q171530" start="10741" end="10754" title="Patrick Bruel" label="Patrick Bruel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785655" start="10759" end="10763" title="1998 World Series of Poker" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372791" start="10787" end="10804" title="Jan Vang Sørensen" label="Jan Vang Sørensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457146" start="10809" end="10813" title="2002 World Series of Poker" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q495549" start="10833" end="10847" title="Jennifer Tilly" label="Jennifer Tilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778996" start="10852" end="10856" title="2005 World Series of Poker" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q435060" start="10897" end="10909" title="Steve Albini" label="Steve Albini"/>
<link wikidata="Q47005859" start="10914" end="10918" title="2018 World Series of Poker" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q111135897" start="10923" end="10927" title="2022 World Series of Poker" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048856" start="10963" end="10994" title="non-bracelet events at the WSOP" label="non-bracelet events at the WSOP"/>
<link wikidata="Q649282" start="11145" end="11164" title="Omaha hold &amp;#x27;em" label="Omaha hold &amp;#x27;em"/>
<link wikidata="Q264099" start="11169" end="11184" title="Seven-card stud" label="Seven-card stud"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356784" start="11195" end="11211" title="lowball (poker)" label="lowball variants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562524" start="11224" end="11234" title="H.O.R.S.E." label="H.O.R.S.E."/>
<link wikidata="Q1562527" start="11291" end="11299" title="HOSE" label="S.H.O.E."/>
<link wikidata="Q1073718" start="11391" end="11404" title="Chinese poker" label="Chinese poker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301597" start="11554" end="11560" title="poker jargon" label="buy-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q723834" start="12006" end="12016" title="Jamie Gold" label="Jamie Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625030" start="12058" end="12071" title="List of largest poker tournaments in history (by prize pool)" label="by prize pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q504715" start="12453" end="12469" title="Cirque du Soleil" label="Cirque du Soleil"/>
<link wikidata="Q357468" start="12478" end="12491" title="Guy Laliberté" label="Guy Laliberté"/>
<link wikidata="Q20917436" start="12573" end="12597" title="Big One for One Drop" label="The Big One for One Drop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352584" start="12762" end="12781" title="One Drop Foundation" label="One Drop Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q471830" start="13095" end="13106" title="Johnny Chan" label="Johnny Chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q317104" start="13108" end="13123" title="Daniel Negreanu" label="Daniel Negreanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703149" start="13125" end="13141" title="Jonathan Duhamel" label="Jonathan Duhamel"/>
<link wikidata="Q555909" start="13143" end="13151" title="Tom Dwan" label="Tom Dwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182361" start="13188" end="13199" title="Phil Ruffin" label="Phil Ruffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q770997" start="13204" end="13215" title="Erik Seidel" label="Erik Seidel"/>
<link wikidata="Q601906" start="13501" end="13519" title="Antonio Esfandiari" label="Antonio Esfandiari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663237" start="14267" end="14271" title="1971 World Series of Poker" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467404" start="14312" end="14316" title="1970 World Series of Poker" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q317104" start="14813" end="14828" title="Daniel Negreanu" label="Daniel Negreanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562524" start="15078" end="15088" title="HORSE (poker)" label="H.O.R.S.E."/>
<link wikidata="Q7757625" start="15089" end="15115" title="The Poker Players Championship" label="Poker Players Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q163019" start="15574" end="15584" title="Chip Reese" label="Chip Reese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000240" start="15588" end="15592" title="2006 World Series of Poker" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693792" start="15597" end="15601" title="2010 World Series of Poker" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757625" start="15779" end="15809" title="The Poker Players Championship" label="The Poker Players Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367268" start="15816" end="15832" title="Michael Mizrachi" label="Michael Mizrachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365375" start="16131" end="16142" title="Jack Straus" label="Jack Straus"/>
<link wikidata="Q605047" start="16150" end="16154" title="1982 World Series of Poker" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q832728" start="16321" end="16329" title="Rounders (film)" label="Rounders"/>
<link wikidata="Q528737" start="16337" end="16353" title="Chris Moneymaker" label="Chris Moneymaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q948170" start="16358" end="16369" title="Greg Raymer" label="Greg Raymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784191" start="16386" end="16390" title="2003 World Series of Poker" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306573" start="16395" end="16399" title="2004 World Series of Poker" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q941317" start="16472" end="16482" title="PokerStars" label="PokerStars"/>
<link wikidata="Q743524" start="16501" end="16511" title="Jerry Yang (poker player)" label="Jerry Yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296483" start="16527" end="16531" title="2007 World Series of Poker" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q500834" start="16623" end="16643" title="satellite tournament" label="satellite tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q14683627" start="16647" end="16655" title="Pechanga" label="Pechanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896997" start="16716" end="16758" title="Unlawful Internet Gambling Enforcement Act" label="Unlawful Internet Gambling Enforcement Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q528347" start="17186" end="17197" title="Johnny Moss" label="Johnny Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q528283" start="17203" end="17212" title="Stu Ungar" label="Stu Ungar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3808113" start="17248" end="17258" title="Jesse Alto" label="Jesse Alto"/>
<link wikidata="Q186782" start="17296" end="17310" title="Berry Johnston" label="Berry Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q313139" start="17360" end="17373" title="Doyle Brunson" label="Doyle Brunson"/>
<link wikidata="Q471830" start="17379" end="17390" title="Johnny Chan" label="Johnny Chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q528347" start="17396" end="17407" title="Johnny Moss" label="Johnny Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q528283" start="17413" end="17422" title="Stu Ungar" label="Stu Ungar"/>
<link wikidata="Q528347" start="17505" end="17516" title="Johnny Moss" label="Johnny Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q16225950" start="17586" end="17599" title="Ronnie Bardah" label="Ronnie Bardah"/>
<link wikidata="Q112653614" start="17645" end="17659" title="Daniel Weinman" label="Daniel Weinman"/>
<link wikidata="Q715779" start="17703" end="17711" title="Joe Cada" label="Joe Cada"/>
<link wikidata="Q528347" start="17742" end="17753" title="Johnny Moss" label="Johnny Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732383" start="17790" end="17803" title="Howard Andrew" label="Howard Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q317104" start="18735" end="18750" title="Daniel Negreanu" label="Daniel Negreanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q528283" start="20188" end="20197" title="Stu Ungar" label="Stu Ungar"/>
<link wikidata="Q528347" start="20202" end="20213" title="Johnny Moss" label="Johnny Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q313139" start="20456" end="20469" title="Doyle Brunson" label="Doyle Brunson"/>
<link wikidata="Q471830" start="20475" end="20486" title="Johnny Chan" label="Johnny Chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q832728" start="20628" end="20636" title="Rounders (film)" label="Rounders"/>
<link wikidata="Q375966" start="20645" end="20658" title="Phil Hellmuth" label="Phil Hellmuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q723834" start="21165" end="21175" title="Jamie Gold" label="Jamie Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625030" start="21330" end="21343" title="List of largest poker tournaments in history (by prize pool)" label="by prize pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q317104" start="21417" end="21432" title="Daniel Negreanu" label="Daniel Negreanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q601906" start="21564" end="21582" title="Antonio Esfandiari" label="Antonio Esfandiari"/>
<link wikidata="Q17319603" start="21587" end="21600" title="Daniel Colman" label="Daniel Colman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053163" start="21679" end="21690" title="World Series of Poker Europe" label="WSOP Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q10817984" start="21695" end="21712" title="World Series of Poker Asia Pacific" label="WSOP Asia-Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586978" start="21727" end="21746" title="WSOP Circuit events" label="WSOP Circuit events"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080499" start="21953" end="21967" title="Vanessa Selbst" label="Vanessa Selbst"/>
<link wikidata="Q275298" start="21969" end="21984" title="Barbara Enright" label="Barbara Enright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976213" start="21986" end="21999" title="Nani Dollison" label="Nani Dollison"/>
<link wikidata="Q30177812" start="22004" end="22020" title="Kristen Bicknell" label="Kristen Bicknell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6761264" start="22229" end="22237" title="Maria Ho" label="Maria Ho"/>
<link wikidata="Q275298" start="22745" end="22760" title="Barbara Enright" label="Barbara Enright"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000402" start="23184" end="23202" title="Poker Hall of Fame" label="Poker Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q6201328" start="24054" end="24088" title="Jimmy Snyder (sports commentator)" label="Jimmy &amp;quot;The Greek&amp;quot; Snyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="24090" end="24093" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="24283" end="24287" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q689039" start="24427" end="24439" title="ESPN Classic" label="ESPN Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209826" start="24667" end="24682" title="Dick Van Patten" label="Dick Van Patten"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559869" start="24684" end="24700" title="Vincent Van Patten" label="Vince Van Patten"/>
<link wikidata="Q724348" start="24706" end="24717" title="Gabe Kaplan" label="Gabe Kaplan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829302" start="24735" end="24754" title="tournament director (poker)" label="tournament director"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24764" end="24776" title="Jim Albrecht" label="Jim Albrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q375966" start="24820" end="24833" title="Phil Hellmuth" label="Phil Hellmuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q43404" start="25117" end="25138" title="The Discovery Channel" label="The Discovery Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457146" start="25724" end="25733" title="2002 World Series of Poker" label="2002 WSOP"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879969" start="25813" end="25821" title="hole cam" label="hole cam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7064785" start="27549" end="27568" title="November Nine" label="delayed final table"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361211" start="28390" end="28414" title="Nevada Gaming Commission" label="Nevada Gaming Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q6912098" start="29219" end="29233" title="Mori Eskandani" label="Mori Eskandani"/>
<link wikidata="Q105834585" start="29395" end="29402" title="PokerGO" label="PokerGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q241585" start="30603" end="30607" title="1973 World Series of Poker" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q6201328" start="30620" end="30632" title="Jimmy Snyder (sports commentator)" label="Jimmy Snyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q611648" start="30634" end="30638" title="1978 World Series of Poker" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q4961491" start="30647" end="30662" title="Brent Musburger" label="Brent Musburger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362201" start="30681" end="30685" title="1979 World Series of Poker" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q5486882" start="30694" end="30707" title="Frank Glieber" label="Frank Glieber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004835" start="30726" end="30730" title="1981 World Series of Poker" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145100" start="30743" end="30753" title="Curt Gowdy" label="Curt Gowdy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725517" start="30755" end="30759" title="1983 World Series of Poker" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784682" start="30784" end="30788" title="1987 World Series of Poker" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693673" start="30801" end="30813" title="Ted Robinson (sportscaster)" label="Ted Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q246834" start="30815" end="30819" title="1988 World Series of Poker" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107339" start="30829" end="30842" title="Chris Marlowe" label="Chris Marlowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q379161" start="30844" end="30848" title="1989 World Series of Poker" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785873" start="30873" end="30877" title="1990 World Series of Poker" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784654" start="30902" end="30906" title="1991 World Series of Poker" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785015" start="30931" end="30935" title="1992 World Series of Poker" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784646" start="30960" end="30964" title="1993 World Series of Poker" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209826" start="30974" end="30989" title="Dick Van Patten" label="Dick Van Patten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784641" start="31008" end="31012" title="1994 World Series of Poker" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q580837" start="31056" end="31060" title="1995 World Series of Poker" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q302554" start="31104" end="31108" title="1996 World Series of Poker" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247795" start="31135" end="31139" title="1997 World Series of Poker" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q724348" start="31149" end="31160" title="Gabe Kaplan" label="Gabe Kaplan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785655" start="31179" end="31183" title="1998 World Series of Poker" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559869" start="31193" end="31209" title="Vince Van Patten" label="Vince Van Patten"/>
<link wikidata="Q222386" start="31228" end="31232" title="1999 World Series of Poker" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q532391" start="31258" end="31262" title="2000 World Series of Poker" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784873" start="31288" end="31292" title="2001 World Series of Poker" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457146" start="31318" end="31322" title="2002 World Series of Poker" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669599" start="31332" end="31345" title="Lon McEachern" label="Lon McEachern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784191" start="31411" end="31415" title="2003 World Series of Poker" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q3343753" start="31443" end="31454" title="Norman Chad" label="Norman Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306573" start="31504" end="31508" title="2004 World Series of Poker" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778996" start="31615" end="31619" title="2005 World Series of Poker" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000240" start="31744" end="31748" title="2006 World Series of Poker" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372396" start="31789" end="31800" title="Phil Gordon (poker player)" label="Phil Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4725092" start="31805" end="31814" title="Ali Nejad" label="Ali Nejad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296483" start="31927" end="31931" title="2007 World Series of Poker" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031797" start="32113" end="32117" title="2008 World Series of Poker" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064877" start="32245" end="32249" title="2009 World Series of Poker" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693792" start="32386" end="32390" title="2010 World Series of Poker" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q16208859" start="32441" end="32455" title="James Hartigan" label="James Hartigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070515" start="32571" end="32575" title="2011 World Series of Poker" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060875" start="32696" end="32700" title="2012 World Series of Poker" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630085" start="32791" end="32795" title="2013 World Series of Poker" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q6762096" start="32865" end="32882" title="Marianela Pereyra" label="Marianela Pereyra"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955297" start="32903" end="32907" title="2013 World Series of Poker Asia Pacific" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q5324219" start="32909" end="32923" title="ESPN Australia" label="ESPN Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18350937" start="32978" end="32992" title="Lynn Gilmartin" label="Lynn Gilmartin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15728752" start="32994" end="32998" title="2014 World Series of Poker" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q18748912" start="33052" end="33056" title="2015 World Series of Poker" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q21857356" start="33162" end="33166" title="2016 World Series of Poker" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q28056556" start="33251" end="33255" title="2017 World Series of Poker" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q47005859" start="33374" end="33378" title="2018 World Series of Poker" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q60181071" start="33440" end="33444" title="2019 World Series of Poker" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q82555732" start="33516" end="33520" title="2020 World Series of Poker" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q106419732" start="33579" end="33583" title="2021 World Series of Poker" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q6761264" start="33635" end="33643" title="Maria Ho" label="Maria Ho"/>
<link wikidata="Q111135897" start="33691" end="33695" title="2022 World Series of Poker" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q115742969" start="33769" end="33773" title="2023 World Series of Poker" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q124255307" start="33828" end="33832" title="2024 World Series of Poker" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q658637" start="34187" end="34201" title="Miller Brewing" label="Miller Brewing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548977" start="34272" end="34276" title="SoBe" label="SoBe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183694" start="34375" end="34381" title="Degree (deodorant)" label="Degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q15058132" start="34418" end="34469" title="United States Playing Card Company" label="United States Playing Card&amp;#x27;s Bicycle Pro Cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930658" start="34471" end="34485" title="Bluff Magazine" label="Bluff Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q212322" start="34487" end="34502" title="GlaxoSmithKline plc" label="GlaxoSmithKline"/>
<link wikidata="Q152051" start="34503" end="34508" title="Bayer AG" label="Bayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q424161" start="34516" end="34523" title="vardenafil" label="Levitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q184674" start="34524" end="34544" title="erectile dysfunction" label="erectile dysfunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056637" start="34559" end="34578" title="The Hershey Company" label="The Hershey Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450081" start="34598" end="34608" title="Glu Mobile" label="Glu Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q200491" start="34610" end="34620" title="Activision" label="Activision"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="34666" end="34674" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q182172" start="34682" end="34690" title="GameCube" label="GameCube"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="34692" end="34701" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q132020" start="34709" end="34713" title="Xbox (console)" label="Xbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="34715" end="34719" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q10680" start="34727" end="34740" title="PlayStation 2" label="PlayStation 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="35086" end="35091" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="35093" end="35100" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="35293" end="35303" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020921" start="35349" end="35370" title="World Series of Poker (video game)" label="World Series of Poker"/>
<link wikidata="" start="35442" end="35488" title="World Series of Poker: Tournament of Champions" label="World Series of Poker: Tournament of Champions"/>
<link wikidata="" start="35528" end="35580" title="World Series of Poker 2008: Battle for the Bracelets" label="World Series of Poker 2008: Battle for the Bracelets"/>
<link wikidata="Q271142" start="36087" end="36097" title="Annie Duke" label="Annie Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q375966" start="36099" end="36112" title="Phil Hellmuth" label="Phil Hellmuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q948170" start="36114" end="36125" title="Greg Raymer" label="Greg Raymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q348264" start="36127" end="36141" title="Scott Fischman" label="Scott Fischman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856601" start="36155" end="36164" title="Mark Seif" label="Mark Seif"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="36191" end="36194" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6211520" start="36208" end="36219" title="Joe Navarro" label="Joe Navarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3472009" start="36256" end="36275" title="Tunica Resorts, Mississippi" label="Tunica, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="36277" end="36284" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624848" start="36290" end="36299" title="Las Vegas Valley" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q325421" start="36394" end="36397" title="business-to-business" label="B2B"/>
<link wikidata="Q128801872" start="36405" end="36417" title="888 Holdings" label="888 Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537703" start="36676" end="36692" title="Poker After Dark" label="Poker After Dark"/>
<link wikidata="Q662042" start="36700" end="36736" title="National Heads-Up Poker Championship" label="National Heads-Up Poker Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617875" start="36744" end="36761" title="High Stakes Poker" label="High Stakes Poker"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33117" wikidata="Q716856" url="?curid=33117" title="William Barnes">
<text>William Barnes (22 February 1801 – 7 October 1886) was an English polymath, writer, poet, philologist, priest, mathematician, engraving artist and inventor. He wrote over 800 poems, some in Dorset dialect, and much other work, including a comprehensive English grammar quoting from more than 70 different languages. A linguistic purist, Barnes strongly advocated against borrowing foreign words into English, and instead supported the use and proliferation of &quot;strong old Anglo-Saxon speech&quot;.

==Life and work==
Barnes was born in the parish of Bagber, Dorset, to John Barnes, a tenant-farmer in the Vale of Blackmore. The younger Barnes&#x27;s formal education finished when he was 13 years old. Between 1818 and 1823 he worked in Dorchester, the county town, as a solicitor&#x27;s clerk, then moved to Mere in neighbouring Wiltshire and opened a school. While he was there he began writing poetry in the Dorset dialect, as well as studying several languages—Italian, Persian, German and French, in addition to Greek and Latin—playing musical instruments (violin, piano, and flute) and practising wood-engraving. He married Julia Miles, the daughter of an exciseman from Dorchester, in 1827. In 1835 he moved back to the county town, where again he ran a school at first located on Durngate Street and subsequently on South Street. By a further move, within South Street, the school became a neighbour of an architect&#x27;s practice in which Thomas Hardy was an apprentice. The architect John Hicks was interested in literature and the classics, and when disputes about grammar occurred in the practice, Hardy visited Barnes for authoritative opinions. Barnes&#x27;s other literary friends included Lord Tennyson and Gerard Manley Hopkins. He was a teetotaller and vegetarian.

Barnes was ordained into the Church of England in 1847, taking a BD degree from St John&#x27;s College, Cambridge, in 1851. He served curacies at Whitcombe Church in Whitcombe, Dorset, from 1847 to 1852, and again from 1862. He became rector of St Peter&#x27;s Church, Winterborne Came, with Winterborne Farringdon, Dorset, from 1862 to his death. Shortly before his death, he was visited at Old Came Rectory by Thomas Hardy and Edmund Gosse; in a letter, Gosse wrote that Barnes was &quot;dying as picturesquely as he lived&quot;:

Barnes first contributed the Dorset dialect poems for which he is best known to periodicals, including Macmillan&#x27;s Magazine; a collection in book form &quot;Poems of Rural Life in the Dorset Dialect&quot;, was published in 1844. A second collection &quot;Hwomely Rhymes&quot; followed in 1858, and a third collection in 1863; a combined edition appeared in 1879. A &quot;translation&quot;, &quot;Poems of Rural Life in Common English&quot; had already appeared in 1868. His philological works include &quot;Philological Grammar&quot; (1854), &quot;Se Gefylsta, an Anglo-Saxon Delectus&quot; (1849), &quot;Tiw, or a View of Roots&quot; (1862), and a &quot;Glossary of Dorset Dialect&quot; (1863), and among his other writings is a slim volume on &quot;the Advantages of a More Common Adoption of The Mathematics as a Branch of Education, or Subject of Study&quot;, published in 1834.

Barnes is buried in Winterborne Came churchyard beneath a Celtic cross. The plinth of the cross has the inscription: &#x27;In Memory of William Barnes, Died 7 October 1886. Aged 86 Years. For 24 Years Rector of this Parish. This Memorial was raised to his Memory by his Children and Grandchildren.&quot; On 4 February 1889 a bronze statue of William Barnes by Edwin Roscoe Mullins (1848–1907) was unveiled outside St Peter&#x27;s Church in High West Street, Dorchester.

Ralph Vaughan Williams set to music four of Barnes&#x27; poems: &quot;My Orcha&#x27;d in Lindèn Lea&quot; and &quot;Blackmwore Maidens&quot; in their &quot;Common English&quot; versions (&quot;Linden Lea&quot; and &quot;Blackmwore by the Stour&quot;, respectively), &quot;The Winter&#x27;s Willow&quot;, and &quot;In the Spring&quot;.

===Linguistic purism===

Barnes had a strong interest in linguistics; he was fluent in Greek, Latin, French, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Russian, Welsh, Cornish and Old English. He called for the purification of English by removal of Greek, Latin and foreign influences so that it might be better understood by those without a classical education. His coinages included such words as &quot;sun-print&quot; for &quot;photograph&quot;, &quot;wortlore&quot; for &quot;botany&quot;, and &quot;welkinfire&quot; for &quot;meteor&quot;. His strain of purism resembles the later &quot;blue-eyed English&quot; of composer Percy Grainger, and in certain instances the terms in David Cowley&#x27;s &quot;How We&#x27;d Talk if the English had WON in 1066&quot;.

===Style===
Uniquely fond of the Dorset dialect, which he felt to be particularly near to English&#x27;s Anglo-Saxon roots, Barnes wrote many of his poems in the local parlance of Dorset. Additionally, as well as avoiding the use of foreign words in his poetry, Barnes frequently employed alliterative verse, the repetition of consonantal sounds. Examples of this can be heard in the lines &quot;Do lean down low in Linden Lea&quot; and &quot;In our abode in Arby Wood&quot;.

==See also==

* British literature
* West Country dialects
* Lucy Baxter, Barnes&#x27;s third daughter who wrote &quot;The Life of William Barnes: Poet and Philologist&quot; (1887) under the name &quot;Leader Scott&quot;
* T. L. Burton, author of several books on Barnes&#x27;s poetry

==References==
==External links==
* William Barnes&#x27; Grave
* William Barnes at University of Toronto Libraries
* 
* &quot;Poems of Rural Life, in the Dorset dialect&quot; (complete) at eBooks@Adelaide 
*Selected poems by William Barnes
* &quot;Poems of Rural Life, in the Dorset dialect, First collection&quot; (Third edition, 1862), full text at Google
* &quot;Hwomely Rhymes: A Second Collection of Poems in the Dorset Dialect&quot; (1859), full text at Google
* &quot;Poems of Rural Life, in the Dorset Dialect, Third Collection&quot; (1862), full text at Google</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q716856" start="0" end="14" title="William Barnes" label="William Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q270141" start="66" end="74" title="polymath" label="polymath"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="90" end="101" title="philologist" label="philologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q139106" start="126" end="135" title="engraving" label="engraving"/>
<link wikidata="Q15839081" start="190" end="204" title="West Country dialects" label="Dorset dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q560583" start="253" end="268" title="English grammar" label="English grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191063" start="318" end="335" title="Linguistic purism in English" label="linguistic purist"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="371" end="394" title="loanword" label="borrowing foreign words"/>
<link wikidata="Q4841492" start="555" end="561" title="Bagber" label="Bagber"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923185" start="610" end="627" title="Blackmore Vale" label="Vale of Blackmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q503331" start="742" end="752" title="Dorchester, Dorset" label="Dorchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221042" start="814" end="818" title="Mere, Wiltshire" label="Mere"/>
<link wikidata="Q23183" start="835" end="844" title="Wiltshire" label="Wiltshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q15839081" start="916" end="930" title="West Country dialects" label="Dorset dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="979" end="986" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="1022" end="1027" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1032" end="1037" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139055" start="1167" end="1176" title="exciseman" label="exciseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q132805" start="1454" end="1466" title="Thomas Hardy" label="Thomas Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q173869" start="1711" end="1724" title="Alfred Tennyson, 1st Baron Tennyson" label="Lord Tennyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q313693" start="1729" end="1750" title="Gerard Manley Hopkins" label="Gerard Manley Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q83364" start="1777" end="1787" title="Vegetarianism" label="vegetarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="1819" end="1836" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085288" start="1855" end="1864" title="Bachelor of Divinity" label="BD degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q691283" start="1870" end="1903" title="St John&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="St John&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994234" start="1936" end="1952" title="Whitcombe Church" label="Whitcombe Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336679" start="1956" end="1973" title="Whitcombe, Dorset" label="Whitcombe, Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147441" start="2025" end="2031" title="Rector (ecclesiastical)" label="rector"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595305" start="2035" end="2075" title="St Peter&amp;#x27;s Church, Winterborne Came" label="St Peter&amp;#x27;s Church, Winterborne Came"/>
<link wikidata="Q17663728" start="2082" end="2104" title="Winterborne Farringdon" label="Winterborne Farringdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q26447332" start="2182" end="2198" title="Old Came Rectory" label="Old Came Rectory"/>
<link wikidata="Q742371" start="2219" end="2231" title="Edmund Gosse" label="Edmund Gosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q229788" start="3270" end="3282" title="Celtic cross" label="Celtic cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q18528433" start="3572" end="3592" title="Edwin Roscoe Mullins" label="Edwin Roscoe Mullins"/>
<link wikidata="Q503331" start="3670" end="3681" title="Dorchester, Dorset" label="Dorchester."/>
<link wikidata="Q207947" start="3683" end="3705" title="Ralph Vaughan Williams" label="Ralph Vaughan Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="4106" end="4111" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="4113" end="4118" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="4128" end="4134" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="4136" end="4141" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="4161" end="4166" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q25289" start="4168" end="4175" title="Cornish language" label="Cornish"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="4180" end="4191" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191063" start="4211" end="4234" title="Linguistic purism in English" label="purification of English"/>
<link wikidata="Q318354" start="4628" end="4642" title="Percy Grainger" label="Percy Grainger"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="4871" end="4888" title="Old English" label="Anglo-Saxon roots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397862" start="5055" end="5073" title="alliterative verse" label="alliterative verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q764912" start="5259" end="5277" title="British literature" label="British literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q15839081" start="5280" end="5301" title="West Country dialects" label="West Country dialects"/>
<link wikidata="Q16030553" start="5304" end="5315" title="Lucy Baxter" label="Lucy Baxter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7668463" start="5466" end="5478" title="T. L. Burton" label="T. L. Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896490" start="5612" end="5643" title="University of Toronto Libraries" label="University of Toronto Libraries"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33118" wikidata="Q816871" url="?curid=33118" title="Woodworking">
<text>Woodworking is the skill of making items from wood, and includes cabinetry, furniture making, wood carving, joinery, carpentry, and woodturning.

==History==

Along with stone, clay and animal parts, wood was one of the first materials worked by early humans. Microwear analysis of the Mousterian stone tools used by the Neanderthals show that many were used to work wood. The development of civilization was closely tied to the development of increasingly greater degrees of skill in working these materials.

Among early finds of wooden tools are the worked sticks from Kalambo Falls, Clacton-on-Sea and Lehringen. The spears from Schöningen (Germany) provide some of the first examples of wooden hunting implements. Flint tools were used for carving. Since Neolithic times, carved wooden vessels are known, for example, from the Linear Pottery culture wells at Kückhofen and Eythra.

Examples of Bronze Age wood-carving include tree trunks worked into coffins from northern Germany and Denmark and wooden folding-chairs. The site of Fellbach-Schmieden in Germany has provided fine examples of wooden animal statues from the Iron Age. Wooden idols from the La Tène period known from a sanctuary at the source of the Seine in France.

===Ancient Egypt===
There is significant evidence of advanced woodworking in ancient Egypt. Woodworking is depicted in many extant ancient Egyptian drawings, and a considerable amount of ancient Egyptian furniture (such as stools, chairs, tables, beds, chests) have been preserved. Tombs represent a large collection of these artifacts and the inner coffins found in the tombs were also made of wood. The metal used by the Egyptians for woodworking tools was originally copper and eventually, after 2000 BC bronze as iron working was unknown until much later.

Commonly used woodworking tools included axes, adzes, chisels, pull saws, and bow drills. Mortise and tenon joints are attested from the earliest Predynastic period. These joints were strengthened using pegs, dowels and leather or cord lashings. Animal glue came to be used only in the New Kingdom period. Ancient Egyptians invented the art of veneering and used varnishes for finishing, though the composition of these varnishes is unknown. Although different native acacias were used, as was the wood from the local sycamore and tamarisk trees, deforestation in the Nile valley resulted in the need for the importation of wood, notably cedar, but also Aleppo pine, boxwood and oak, starting from the Second Dynasty.

===Ancient Rome===
Woodworking was essential to the Romans. It provided, material for buildings, transportation, tools, and household items. Wood also provided pipes, dye, waterproofing materials, and energy for heat.Although most examples of Roman woodworking have been lost, the literary record preserved much of the contemporary knowledge. Vitruvius dedicates an entire chapter of his &quot;De architectura&quot; to timber, preserving many details. Pliny, while not a botanist, dedicated six books of his &quot;Natural History&quot; to trees and woody plants, providing a wealth of information on trees and their uses.

===Ancient China===
The progenitors of Chinese woodworking are considered to be Lu Ban (魯班 ) and his wife Lady Yun, from the Spring and Autumn period (771 to 476 BC). Lu Ban is said to have introduced the plane, chalk-line, and other tools to China. His teachings were supposedly left behind in the book &quot;Lu Ban Jing&quot; (魯班經, &quot;Manuscript of Lu Ban&quot;)(魯班經 ). Despite this, it is believed that the text was written some 1500 years after his death. This book is filled largely with descriptions of dimensions for use in building various items such as flower pots, tables, altars, etc., and also contains extensive instructions concerning Feng Shui. It mentions almost nothing of the intricate glue-less and nail-less joinery for which Chinese furniture was so famous.
==Modern day==
With the advances in modern technology and the demands of industry, woodwork as a field has changed. The development of Computer Numeric Controlled (CNC) Machines, for example, has made it possible to mass-produce and reproduce products faster, with less waste, and often with more complex design than ever before. CNC wood routers can carve complicated and highly detailed shapes into flat stock, to create signs or art. Rechargeable power tools speed up creation of many projects and require much less body strength than in the past, for example when boring multiple holes. Skilled fine woodworking, however, remains a craft pursued by many. There remains demand for hand crafted work such as furniture and arts, however with rate and cost of production, the cost for consumers is much higher.
Modern woodcarving usually refers to works of wood art produced by woodcarvers in the form of contemporary art. This type of wood carving often combines traditional techniques with more modern artistic styles and concepts. Modern woodcarving can be produced in a variety of forms and styles, from realist to abstract carvings, and often uses unusual wood materials such as rainwood or wood with unique textures to highlight the uniqueness of the work. In recent years, the art of modern wood carving has become increasingly popular among woodworkers and visual art enthusiasts not only in Asia, but also around the world. Modern woodcarving art is often exhibited in art galleries and museums, and can be seen in several global contemporary art exhibitions.

== Styles and designs ==
Woodworking, especially furniture making, has many different designs/styles. Throughout its history, woodworking designs and styles have changed. Some of the more common styles are listed below. Traditional furniture styles usually include styles that have been around for long periods of time and have shown a mark of wealth and luxury for centuries. More modern furniture styles are commonly used over the past few hundred years.
==Materials==
See also Wood: Properties and Tonewood: Properties.

Historically, woodworkers relied upon the woods native to their region, until transportation and trade innovations made more exotic woods available to the craftsman. Woods are typically sorted into three basic types: hardwoods typified by tight grain and derived from broadleaf trees, softwoods from coniferous trees, and man-made materials such as plywood and MDF.

Hardwoods, botanically known as angiosperms, are deciduous and shed their leaves annually with temperature changes. Softwoods come from trees botanically known as gymnosperms, which are coniferous, cone-bearing, and stay green year round. Although a general pattern, softwoods are not necessarily always “softer” than hardwoods, and vice versa.

Softwood is most commonly found in the regions of the world with lower temperatures and is typically less durable, lighter in weight, and more vulnerable to pests and fungal attacks in comparison to hardwoods. They typically have a paler color and a more open grain than hardwoods, which contributes to the tendency of felled softwood to shrink and swell as it dries. Softwoods usually have a lower density, around 432–592 kg/m3, which can compromise its strength. Density, however, does vary within both softwoods and hardwoods depending on the wood&#x27;s geographical origin and growth rate. However, the lower density of softwoods also allows it to have a greater strength with lighter weight. In the United States, softwoods are typically cheaper and more readily available and accessible. Most softwoods are suitable for general construction, especially framing, trim, and finish work, and carcassing.

Hardwoods are separated into two categories, temperate and tropical hardwoods, depending on their origin. Temperate hardwoods are found in the regions between the tropics and poles, and are of particular interest to wood workers for their cost-effective aesthetic appeal and sustainable sources. Tropical hardwoods are found within the equatorial belt, including Africa, Asia, and South America. Hardwoods flaunt a higher density, around 1041 kg/m3 as a result of slower growing rates and is more stable when drying. As a result of its high density, hardwoods are typically heavier than softwoods but can also be more brittle. While there are an abundant number of hardwood species, only 200 are common enough and pliable enough to be used for woodworking. Hardwoods have a wide variety of properties, making it easy to find a hardwood to suit nearly any purpose, but they are especially suitable for outdoor use due to their strength and resilience to rot and decay. The coloring of hardwoods ranges from light to very dark, making it especially versatile for aesthetic purposes. However, because hardwoods are more closely grained, they are typically harder to work than softwoods. They are also harder to acquire in the United States and, as a result, are more expensive.

Typically furniture such as tables and chairs is made using solid stock from hardwoods due to its strength and resistance to warping. Additionally, they also have a greater variety of grain patterns and color and take a finish better which allows the woodworker to exercise a great deal of artistic liberty. Hardwoods can be cut more cleanly and leave less residue on sawblades and other woodworking tools. Cabinet/fixture makers employ the use of plywood and other man made panel products. Some furniture, such as the Windsor chair involve green woodworking, shaping with wood while it contains its natural moisture prior to drying.

=== Common softwoods used for furniture ===
==== Cedar ====
Cedars are strong, aromatic softwoods that are capable of enduring outdoor elements, the most common of which is the western red cedar. Western red cedar can sustain wet environments without succumbing to rot, and as a result is commonly used for outdoor projects such as patios, outdoor furniture, and building exteriors. This wood can be easily found at most home centers in the US and Canada for a moderate price.

==== Fir ====
Within the USA fir, also known as Douglas fir, is inexpensive and common at local home centers. It has a characteristic straight, pronounced grain with a red-brown tint. However, its grain pattern is relatively plain and it does not stain well, so fir is commonly used when the finished product will be painted. While commonly used for building, this softwood would also be suitable for furniture-making.

==== Pine ====
White pine, ponderosa, and southern yellow pine are common species used in furniture-making. White pine and ponderosa are typically used for indoor projects, while Southern yellow pine is recommended for outdoor projects due to its durability.

=== Common hardwoods used for furniture ===

==== Ash ====
This hardwood is relatively easy to work with and takes stain well, but its white to light brown color with a straight grain is visually appealing on its own. However, ash is much more difficult to find than other common woods, and will not be found at the local home center. Larger lumber yards should have it in stock.

==== Beech ====
Hardwood of the European species Fagus sylvatica is widely used for furniture framing and carcase construction, in plywood, musical instruments (drum shells and piano blocks) and turned items like knobs.

==== Birch ====
Whether yellow or white birch, these hardwoods are stable and easy to work with. Despite this, birch is prone to blotching when stained, so painting birch products is probably best. Birch is easily found at many home centers and is a relatively inexpensive hardwood.

==== Cherry ====
Popular and easy to work with, cherry is in high demand for its reddish-brown color and ease of staining and finishing. Cherry likely will not be at the local home center, but should be at a lumberyard for a somewhat expensive price. This hardwood is a very common material for furniture, and is resistant to normal wear-and-tear, but it is best for indoor pieces.

==== Mahogany ====
A hardwood, mahogany has a trademark reddish-brown to deep-red tint and is known as &quot;one of the great furniture woods&quot;. However, mahogany is not typically grown in sustainable forests, and thus runs a steep price at local lumber yards.

==== Oak ====
With two varieties, red and white, oak is known to be easy to work with and relatively strong. However, furniture makers often opt for white oak over red oak for its attractive figure and moisture-resistance. Depending on the kind needed, oak can probably be found at a local home center or a lumberyard for a bit pricier than other hardwoods.

==== Maple ====
With strength, sturdiness, and durability, maple is a common material for furniture for the bedroom and even china cabinets. Maple is moisture-resistant and frequently displays stand-out swirls in the wood grain, an aesthetically pleasing differentiator from other hardwoods. While most commonly a lighter color, maple also can take stains and paint well.

=== Factors in choosing materials ===
There are many factors to consider when deciding what type of wood to use for a project. One of the most important is the workability of the wood: the way in which it responds when worked by hand or tools, the quality of the grain, and how it responds to adhesives and finishes. When the workability of wood is high, it offers a lower resistance when cutting and has a diminished blunting effect on tools. Highly workable wood is easier to manipulate into desired forms. If the wood grain is straight and even, it will be much easier to create strong and durable glued joints. Additionally, it will help protect the wood from splitting when nailed or screwed. Coarse grains require a lengthy process of filing and rubbing down the grain to produce a smooth result.

Another important factor is the durability of the wood, especially in regards to moisture. If the finished project will be exposed to moisture (e.g. outdoor projects) or high humidity or condensation (e.g. in kitchens or bathrooms), then the wood needs to be especially durable in order to prevent rot. Because of their oily qualities, many tropical hardwoods such as teak and mahogany are popular for such applications.

==== Woods with good working properties====
* Agba (&quot;Gossweilerodendron balsamiferum&quot;)
* Alder (&quot;Alnus glutinosa&quot;)
* Basswood (&quot;Tilia americana&quot;)
* Obeah (&quot;Triplochiton scleroxylon&quot;)
* Pine (&quot;Pinus&quot;)
* Western cedar (&quot;Thuja plicata&quot;)

==== Very durable woods ====
* Teak (&quot;Tectona grandis&quot;)
* Iron (&quot;Milicia excelsa&quot;)
* Jarrah (&quot;Eucalyptus marginata&quot;)
* Chestnut (&quot;Castanea&quot;)
* Oak (&quot;Quercus&quot;)
* Cedar (&quot;Thuja&quot;)

=== Woods used for carving ===
While many woods can be used for carving, there are some clear favorites, including aspen, basswood, butternut, black walnut, and oak. Because it has almost no grain and is notably soft, Basswood is particularly popular with beginner carvers. It is used in many lower-cost instruments like guitars and electric basses. Aspen is similarly soft, although slightly harder, and readily available and inexpensive. Butternut has a deeper hue than basswood and aspen and has a nice grain that is easy to carve, and thus friendly for beginners. It is also suitable for furniture. While more expensive than basswood, aspen, and butternut, black walnut is a popular choice for its rich color and grain. Lastly, oak is a strong, sturdy, and versatile wood for carving with a defined grain. It is also a popular wood for furniture making.

== Tools ==
Each area of woodworking requires a different variation of tools. Power tools and hand tools are both used for woodworking. Many modern woodworkers choose to use power tools in their trade for the added ease and to save time. However, many woodworkers still choose to use only hand tools for several reasons such as tradition, the experience and the added character to the work, while some choose to use only hand tools simply for their own enjoyment.

=== Hand tools ===
Hand tools are classified as tools that receive power only from the hands that are holding them. Edged hand woodworking tools need to be sharpened which is done using the sharpening jig and sharpening stone. A more novel method involves the use of sandpaper. The more common modern hand tools are:


=== Power tools ===
Power tools are tools that are powered by an external energy such as a battery, motor, or a power cable connected to a wall outlet. The more common power tools are:

==Notable woodworkers==
* Alvar Aalto
* Norm Abram
* Bae Se-hwa
* John Boson
* Jimmy Carter
* Jesus
* George Collings
* Frank E. Cummings III
* Henning Engelsen
* Wharton Esherick
* Tage Frid
* Alexander Grabovetskiy
* Greta Hopkinson
* James Krenov
* Mark Lindquist
* Sal Maccarone
* Thomas J. MacDonald
* John Makepeace
* Sam Maloof
* David J. Marks
* Judy Kensley McKie
* George Nakashima
* Jere Osgood
* Alan Peters
* Matthias Pliessnig
* André Jacob Roubo
* Evert Sodergren
* Rosanne Somerson
* Henry O. Studley
* Roy Underhill
* Wendy Maruyama
* Charles H. Hayward
* Nick Offerman

==See also==

* Boat building
* Cabinet making
* Carpentry
* Ébéniste
* Fire hardening
* Glossary of woodworking terms
* Green building and wood
* Green woodworking
* History of construction
* History of wood carving
* Intarsia
* Japanese carpentry
* Lath art
* Ligna
* Luthier
* Millwork
* Marionette
* Marquetry
* Pallet crafts
* Reclaimed lumber
* Saw pit
* Segmented turning
* Sloyd, a system of handicraft-based education
* Stave church
* Studio furniture
* Tack cloth
* Timber framing
* Turning
* Wood carving
* Wood glue
* Wood Inlay
* Woodturning
* Woodworking safety
* Woodworking workbench
* Yakisugi
==References==

==References==
*
*

===Further reading===
* Naylor, Andrew. &quot;A review of wood machining literature with a special focus on sawing&quot;. BioRes, April 2013
* History of Woodworking &amp; Ancient Carpentry

== External links ==
* Video about the Zafimaniry peoples in Madagascar.
* Videos about woodworking published by Institut für den Wissenschaftlichen Film. Available in the AV-Portal of the German National Library of Science and Technology.
* Woodwork Magazine</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q816871" start="0" end="11" title="Woodworking" label="Woodworking"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="46" end="50" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741056" start="65" end="74" title="cabinetry" label="cabinetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q14745" start="76" end="85" title="furniture" label="furniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q337907" start="94" end="106" title="wood carving" label="wood carving"/>
<link wikidata="Q2183679" start="108" end="115" title="woodworking joints" label="joinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q203605" start="117" end="126" title="carpentry" label="carpentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q278156" start="132" end="143" title="woodturning" label="woodturning"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="170" end="175" title="Rock (geology)" label="stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="177" end="181" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q171283" start="246" end="257" title="early human" label="early human"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647905" start="260" end="278" title="Lithic analysis" label="Microwear analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q259118" start="286" end="296" title="Mousterian" label="Mousterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q479257" start="297" end="307" title="stone tool" label="stone tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q40171" start="321" end="332" title="Neanderthal" label="Neanderthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q798283" start="572" end="585" title="Kalambo Falls" label="Kalambo Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q985833" start="587" end="601" title="Clacton-on-Sea" label="Clacton-on-Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q44475" start="621" end="626" title="spear" label="spear"/>
<link wikidata="Q628304" start="633" end="643" title="Schöningen" label="Schöningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="645" end="652" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q83087" start="719" end="724" title="Flint" label="Flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="760" end="775" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic times"/>
<link wikidata="Q806348" start="832" end="854" title="Linear Pottery culture" label="Linear Pottery culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q43483" start="855" end="859" title="water well" label="well"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="899" end="909" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q193472" start="931" end="941" title="tree trunk" label="tree trunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q184418" start="955" end="961" title="coffin" label="coffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="989" end="996" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744391" start="1008" end="1021" title="folding chair" label="folding-chair"/>
<link wikidata="Q351639" start="1028" end="1032" title="List of archaeological sites by country" label="site"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="1127" end="1135" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2820111" start="1144" end="1148" title="Cult image" label="idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q208247" start="1159" end="1166" title="La Tène culture" label="La Tène"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471" start="1218" end="1223" title="Seine" label="Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1227" end="1233" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="1313" end="1326" title="ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q14745" start="1440" end="1449" title="furniture" label="furniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q15026" start="1467" end="1472" title="chair" label="chair"/>
<link wikidata="Q14748" start="1475" end="1481" title="Table (furniture)" label="tables"/>
<link wikidata="Q42177" start="1483" end="1486" title="bed" label="bed"/>
<link wikidata="Q366134" start="1489" end="1495" title="Chest (furniture)" label="chests"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="1641" end="1646" title="metal" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061510" start="1659" end="1668" title="Egyptians" label="Egyptians"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="1706" end="1712" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q34095" start="1743" end="1749" title="bronze" label="bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285982" start="1753" end="1765" title="iron working" label="iron working"/>
<link wikidata="Q39397" start="1838" end="1841" title="axe" label="axe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517447" start="1844" end="1848" title="adze" label="adze"/>
<link wikidata="Q474188" start="1851" end="1857" title="chisel" label="chisel"/>
<link wikidata="Q125356" start="1860" end="1869" title="saw" label="pull saws"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115364" start="1875" end="1884" title="bow drill" label="bow drill"/>
<link wikidata="Q147314" start="1887" end="1904" title="Mortise and tenon" label="Mortise and tenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q208520" start="1943" end="1961" title="predynastic Egypt" label="Predynastic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q5002767" start="2006" end="2012" title="Butt joint" label="dowels"/>
<link wikidata="Q286" start="2017" end="2024" title="leather" label="leather"/>
<link wikidata="Q31029" start="2028" end="2032" title="Rope" label="cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552509" start="2043" end="2054" title="Animal glue" label="Animal glue"/>
<link wikidata="Q180568" start="2083" end="2101" title="New Kingdom of Egypt" label="New Kingdom period"/>
<link wikidata="Q477683" start="2141" end="2150" title="Wood veneer" label="veneering"/>
<link wikidata="Q81683" start="2160" end="2167" title="varnish" label="varnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q119172976" start="2174" end="2183" title="wood finishing" label="finishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q81666" start="2265" end="2271" title="acacia" label="acacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q750217" start="2315" end="2323" title="Ficus sycomorus" label="sycamore"/>
<link wikidata="Q164163" start="2328" end="2336" title="tamarisk" label="tamarisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="2344" end="2357" title="deforestation" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="2365" end="2376" title="Nile valley" label="Nile valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q61105" start="2435" end="2440" title="Cedrus libani" label="cedar"/>
<link wikidata="Q211457" start="2451" end="2462" title="Aleppo Pine" label="Aleppo pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q158703" start="2464" end="2471" title="buxus" label="boxwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="2476" end="2479" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q207778" start="2499" end="2513" title="Second Dynasty" label="Second Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q47163" start="2859" end="2868" title="Vitruvius" label="Vitruvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232238" start="2910" end="2925" title="De architectura" label="De architectura"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="2968" end="2973" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny"/>
<link wikidata="Q442" start="3024" end="3051" title="Natural History (Pliny)" label="&amp;quot;Natural History&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q574184" start="3219" end="3225" title="Lu Ban" label="Lu Ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q185047" start="3264" end="3288" title="Spring and Autumn period" label="Spring and Autumn period"/>
<link wikidata="Q204260" start="3344" end="3349" title="plane (tool)" label="plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q869381" start="3704" end="3714" title="flower pot" label="flower pot"/>
<link wikidata="Q101687" start="3725" end="3730" title="altar" label="altar"/>
<link wikidata="Q170537" start="3791" end="3800" title="Feng Shui" label="Feng Shui"/>
<link wikidata="Q2183679" start="3870" end="3877" title="Woodworking joints" label="joinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317665" start="3888" end="3905" title="Chinese furniture" label="Chinese furniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q190247" start="4085" end="4088" title="CNC" label="CNC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013096" start="4251" end="4266" title="CNC wood router" label="CNC wood router"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327701" start="4371" end="4382" title="Power tool" label="power tools"/>
<link wikidata="Q337907" start="4739" end="4750" title="Wood carving" label="woodcarving"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="5971" end="5987" title="Wood properties" label="Wood: Properties"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5992" end="6012" title="Tonewood#Mechanical properties of tonewoods" label="Tonewood: Properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266509" start="6232" end="6240" title="hardwood" label="hardwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423948" start="6260" end="6265" title="wood grain" label="grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q148993" start="6283" end="6297" title="broadleaf tree" label="broadleaf tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q252108" start="6300" end="6308" title="softwood" label="softwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="6315" end="6325" title="Pinophyta" label="coniferous"/>
<link wikidata="Q219803" start="6364" end="6371" title="plywood" label="plywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q642231" start="6376" end="6379" title="Medium-density fibreboard" label="MDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266509" start="6382" end="6391" title="Hardwood" label="Hardwoods"/>
<link wikidata="Q133712" start="6545" end="6555" title="gymnosperm" label="gymnosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q252108" start="6649" end="6658" title="Softwood" label="softwoods"/>
<link wikidata="Q14745" start="8923" end="8932" title="furniture" label="furniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q219803" start="9361" end="9368" title="plywood" label="plywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q635443" start="9432" end="9445" title="Windsor chair" label="Windsor chair"/>
<link wikidata="Q12314479" start="9454" end="9471" title="green woodworking" label="green woodworking"/>
<link wikidata="Q128550" start="9608" end="9614" title="Cedrus" label="Cedars"/>
<link wikidata="Q25350" start="10055" end="10058" title="fir" label="fir"/>
<link wikidata="Q156687" start="10074" end="10085" title="Douglas fir" label="Douglas fir"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="10467" end="10471" title="pine" label="pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15543030" start="14257" end="14288" title="Gossweilerodendron balsamiferum" label="Gossweilerodendron balsamiferum"/>
<link wikidata="Q156904" start="14311" end="14326" title="Alnus glutinosa" label="Alnus glutinosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q163981" start="14352" end="14367" title="Tilia americana" label="Tilia americana"/>
<link wikidata="Q137952" start="14390" end="14414" title="Triplochiton scleroxylon" label="Triplochiton scleroxylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="14436" end="14441" title="Pinus" label="Pinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q147417" start="14472" end="14485" title="Thuja plicata" label="Thuja plicata"/>
<link wikidata="Q156938" start="14537" end="14552" title="Tectona grandis" label="Tectona grandis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018022" start="14574" end="14589" title="Milicia excelsa" label="Milicia excelsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q140557" start="14613" end="14633" title="Eucalyptus marginata" label="Eucalyptus marginata"/>
<link wikidata="Q129324" start="14659" end="14667" title="Castanea" label="Castanea"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="14688" end="14695" title="Quercus" label="Quercus"/>
<link wikidata="Q147255" start="14718" end="14723" title="Thuja" label="Thuja"/>
<link wikidata="Q82821" start="15919" end="15928" title="tradition" label="tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q164359" start="15934" end="15944" title="experience" label="experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578402" start="16075" end="16084" title="Hand tool" label="Hand tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q237105" start="16212" end="16221" title="Sharpening" label="sharpened"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490394" start="16246" end="16260" title="sharpening jig" label="sharpening jig"/>
<link wikidata="Q507559" start="16265" end="16281" title="sharpening stone" label="sharpening stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q142274" start="16323" end="16332" title="sandpaper" label="sandpaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327701" start="16395" end="16406" title="Power tools" label="Power tools"/>
<link wikidata="Q82840" start="16587" end="16598" title="Alvar Aalto" label="Alvar Aalto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051418" start="16601" end="16611" title="Norm Abram" label="Norm Abram"/>
<link wikidata="Q19938393" start="16614" end="16624" title="Bae Se-hwa" label="Bae Se-hwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16199945" start="16627" end="16637" title="John Boson" label="John Boson"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="16640" end="16652" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="16655" end="16660" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16204949" start="16663" end="16678" title="George Collings" label="George Collings"/>
<link wikidata="Q28542119" start="16681" end="16702" title="Frank E. Cummings III" label="Frank E. Cummings III"/>
<link wikidata="Q5714994" start="16705" end="16721" title="Henning Engelsen" label="Henning Engelsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990710" start="16724" end="16740" title="Wharton Esherick" label="Wharton Esherick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7675192" start="16743" end="16752" title="Tage Frid" label="Tage Frid"/>
<link wikidata="Q16200642" start="16755" end="16777" title="Alexander Grabovetskiy" label="Alexander Grabovetskiy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607648" start="16780" end="16795" title="Greta Hopkinson" label="Greta Hopkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137480" start="16798" end="16810" title="James Krenov" label="James Krenov"/>
<link wikidata="Q6768600" start="16813" end="16827" title="Mark Lindquist" label="Mark Lindquist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7403288" start="16830" end="16843" title="Sal Maccarone" label="Sal Maccarone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791097" start="16846" end="16865" title="Thomas J. MacDonald" label="Thomas J. MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q6246472" start="16868" end="16882" title="John Makepeace" label="John Makepeace"/>
<link wikidata="Q743874" start="16885" end="16895" title="Sam Maloof" label="Sam Maloof"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235459" start="16898" end="16912" title="David J. Marks" label="David J. Marks"/>
<link wikidata="Q67172188" start="16915" end="16933" title="Judy Kensley McKie" label="Judy Kensley McKie"/>
<link wikidata="Q52431" start="16936" end="16952" title="George Nakashima" label="George Nakashima"/>
<link wikidata="Q15441627" start="16955" end="16966" title="Jere Osgood" label="Jere Osgood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707519" start="16969" end="16980" title="Alan Peters" label="Alan Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791593" start="16983" end="17001" title="Matthias Pliessnig" label="Matthias Pliessnig"/>
<link wikidata="Q2847056" start="17004" end="17021" title="André Jacob Roubo" label="André Jacob Roubo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417379" start="17024" end="17039" title="Evert Sodergren" label="Evert Sodergren"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367357" start="17042" end="17058" title="Rosanne Somerson" label="Rosanne Somerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5726473" start="17061" end="17077" title="Henry O. Studley" label="Henry O. Studley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373444" start="17080" end="17093" title="Roy Underhill" label="Roy Underhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q28921957" start="17096" end="17110" title="Wendy Maruyama" label="Wendy Maruyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q55998410" start="17113" end="17131" title="Charles H. Hayward" label="Charles H. Hayward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985488" start="17134" end="17147" title="Nick Offerman" label="Nick Offerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q893164" start="17165" end="17178" title="Boat building" label="Boat building"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741056" start="17181" end="17195" title="Cabinet making" label="Cabinet making"/>
<link wikidata="Q203605" start="17198" end="17207" title="Carpentry" label="Carpentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q559597" start="17210" end="17218" title="Ébéniste" label="Ébéniste"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451583" start="17221" end="17235" title="Fire hardening" label="Fire hardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571899" start="17238" end="17267" title="Glossary of woodworking terms" label="Glossary of woodworking terms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603458" start="17270" end="17293" title="Green building and wood" label="Green building and wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q12314479" start="17296" end="17313" title="Green woodworking" label="Green woodworking"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512823" start="17316" end="17339" title="History of construction" label="History of construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871092" start="17342" end="17365" title="History of wood carving" label="History of wood carving"/>
<link wikidata="Q832266" start="17368" end="17376" title="Intarsia" label="Intarsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10239892" start="17379" end="17397" title="Japanese carpentry" label="Japanese carpentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495825" start="17400" end="17408" title="Lath art" label="Lath art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646616" start="17411" end="17416" title="Ligna" label="Ligna"/>
<link wikidata="Q762707" start="17419" end="17426" title="Luthier" label="Luthier"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141333" start="17429" end="17437" title="Millwork (building material)" label="Millwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q189888" start="17440" end="17450" title="Marionette" label="Marionette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049923" start="17453" end="17462" title="Marquetry" label="Marquetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127834" start="17465" end="17478" title="Pallet crafts" label="Pallet crafts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302557" start="17481" end="17497" title="Reclaimed lumber" label="Reclaimed lumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2801925" start="17500" end="17507" title="Saw pit" label="Saw pit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446287" start="17510" end="17527" title="Segmented turning" label="Segmented turning"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416668" start="17530" end="17535" title="Sloyd" label="Sloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q746310" start="17578" end="17590" title="Stave church" label="Stave church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7628182" start="17593" end="17609" title="Studio furniture" label="Studio furniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673915" start="17612" end="17622" title="Tack cloth" label="Tack cloth"/>
<link wikidata="Q629000" start="17625" end="17639" title="Timber framing" label="Timber framing"/>
<link wikidata="Q258127" start="17642" end="17649" title="Turning" label="Turning"/>
<link wikidata="Q337907" start="17652" end="17664" title="Wood carving" label="Wood carving"/>
<link wikidata="Q971298" start="17667" end="17676" title="Wood glue" label="Wood glue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049923" start="17679" end="17689" title="Wood Inlay" label="Wood Inlay"/>
<link wikidata="Q278156" start="17692" end="17703" title="Woodturning" label="Woodturning"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033607" start="17706" end="17724" title="Woodworking safety" label="Woodworking safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621597" start="17727" end="17748" title="Workbench (woodworking)" label="Woodworking workbench"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567648" start="17751" end="17759" title="Yakisugi" label="Yakisugi"/>
<link wikidata="Q290286" start="18026" end="18036" title="Zafimaniry" label="Zafimaniry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399120" start="18176" end="18225" title="German National Library of Science and Technology" label="German National Library of Science and Technology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33119" wikidata="Q188987" url="?curid=33119" title="William Gibson">
<text>William Ford Gibson (born March 17, 1948) is an American-Canadian speculative fiction writer and essayist widely credited with pioneering the science fiction subgenre known as cyberpunk. Beginning his writing career in the late 1970s, his early works were noir, near-future stories that explored the effects of technology, cybernetics, and computer networks on humans, a &quot;combination of lowlife and high tech&quot;—and helped to create an iconography for the Information Age before the ubiquity of the Internet in the 1990s. Gibson coined the term &quot;cyberspace&quot; for &quot;widespread, interconnected digital technology&quot; in his short story &quot;Burning Chrome&quot; (1982), and later popularized the concept in his acclaimed debut novel &quot;Neuromancer&quot; (1984). These early works of Gibson&#x27;s have been credited with &quot;renovating&quot; science fiction literature in the 1980s.

After expanding on the story in &quot;Neuromancer&quot; with two more novels (&quot;Count Zero&quot; in 1986 and &quot;Mona Lisa Overdrive&quot; in 1988), thus completing the dystopic &quot;Sprawl&quot; trilogy, Gibson collaborated with Bruce Sterling on the alternate history novel &quot;The Difference Engine&quot; (1990), which became an important work of the science fiction subgenre known as &quot;steampunk&quot;.

In the 1990s, Gibson composed the &quot;Bridge&quot; trilogy of novels, which explored the sociological developments of near-future urban environments, postindustrial society, and late capitalism. Following the turn of the century and the events of 9/11, Gibson emerged with a string of increasingly realist novels—&quot;Pattern Recognition&quot; (2003), &quot;Spook Country&quot; (2007), and &quot;Zero History&quot; (2010)—set in a roughly contemporary world. These works saw his name reach mainstream bestseller lists for the first time. His most recent novels, &quot;The Peripheral&quot; (2014) and &quot;Agency&quot; (2020), returned to a more overt engagement with technology and recognizable science fiction themes.

In 1999, &quot;The Guardian&quot; described Gibson as &quot;probably the most important novelist of the past two decades&quot;, while &quot;The Sydney Morning Herald&quot; called him the &quot;noir prophet&quot; of cyberpunk. Throughout his career, Gibson has written more than 20 short stories and 12 critically acclaimed novels (one in collaboration), contributed articles to several major publications, and collaborated extensively with performance artists, filmmakers, and musicians. His work has been cited as influencing a variety of disciplines: academia, design, film, literature, music, cyberculture, and technology.

== Early life ==
=== Childhood, itinerance, and adolescence ===
William Ford Gibson was born in the coastal city of Conway, South Carolina, and he spent most of his childhood in Wytheville, Virginia, a small town in the Appalachians where his parents had been born and raised. His family moved frequently during Gibson&#x27;s youth owing to his father&#x27;s position as manager of a large construction company. In Norfolk, Virginia, Gibson attended Pines Elementary School, where the teachers&#x27; lack of encouragement for him to read was a cause of dismay for his parents. While Gibson was still a young child, a little over a year into his stay at Pines Elementary, his father choked to death in a restaurant while on a business trip. His mother, unable to tell William the bad news, had someone else inform him of the death. Tom Maddox has commented that Gibson &quot;grew up in an America as disturbing and surreal as anything J. G. Ballard ever dreamed&quot;.

A few days after the death of his father, Gibson and his mother moved back from Norfolk to Wytheville. Gibson later described Wytheville as &quot;a place where modernity had arrived to some extent but was deeply distrusted&quot; and credits the beginnings of his relationship with science fiction, his &quot;native literary culture&quot;, with the subsequent feeling of abrupt exile. At the age of 12, Gibson &quot;wanted nothing more than to be a science fiction writer&quot;. He spent a few unproductive years at basketball-obsessed George Wythe High School, a time spent largely in his room listening to records and reading books. At 13, unbeknownst to his mother, he purchased an anthology of Beat generation writing, thereby gaining exposure to the writings of Allen Ginsberg, Jack Kerouac, and William S. Burroughs; the lattermost had a particularly pronounced effect, greatly altering Gibson&#x27;s notions of the possibilities of science fiction literature.

A shy, ungainly teenager, Gibson grew up in a monoculture he found &quot;highly problematic&quot;, consciously rejected religion and took refuge in reading science fiction as well as writers such as Burroughs and Henry Miller. Becoming frustrated with his poor academic performance, Gibson&#x27;s mother threatened to send him to a boarding school; to her surprise, he reacted enthusiastically. Unable to afford his preferred choice of Southern California, his then &quot;chronically anxious and depressive&quot; mother, who had remained in Wytheville since the death of her husband, sent him to Southern Arizona School for Boys in Tucson. He resented the structure of the private boarding school but was in retrospect grateful for its forcing him to engage socially.

=== Draft-dodging, exile, and counterculture ===

After his mother&#x27;s death when he was 18, Gibson left school without graduating and became very isolated for a long time, traveling to California and Europe, and immersing himself in the counterculture. In 1967, he elected to move to Canada in order &quot;to avoid the Vietnam war draft&quot;. Gibson has observed that he &quot;did not literally evade the draft, as they never bothered drafting me&quot;; In the biographical documentary &quot;No Maps for These Territories&quot; (2000), Gibson said that his decision was motivated less by conscientious objection than by a desire to &quot;sleep with hippie chicks&quot; and indulge in hashish. He elaborated on the topic in a 2008 interview:

After weeks of nominal homelessness, Gibson was hired as the manager of Toronto&#x27;s first head shop, a retailer of drug paraphernalia. He found the city&#x27;s émigré community of American draft dodgers unbearable owing to the prevalence of clinical depression, suicide, and hardcore substance abuse. He appeared, during the Summer of Love of 1967, in a CBC newsreel item about hippie subculture in Yorkville, Toronto, for which he was paid $500—the equivalent of 20 weeks&#x27; rent—which financed his later travels.

Gibson spent a &quot;brief, riot-torn spell&quot; in Washington, D.C., where he completed his high school diploma at the age of 21. He spent the rest of the 1960s in Toronto, where he met Vancouverite Deborah Jean Thompson, with whom he subsequently traveled to Europe. Gibson has recounted that they concentrated their travels on European nations with fascist regimes and favorable exchange rates, including spending time on a Greek archipelago and in Istanbul in 1970, as they &quot;couldn&#x27;t afford to stay anywhere that had anything remotely like hard currency&quot;.

The couple married and settled in Vancouver, British Columbia, in 1972, with Gibson looking after their first child while they lived off his wife&#x27;s teaching salary. During the 1970s, Gibson made a substantial part of his living from scouring Salvation Army thrift stores for underpriced artifacts he would then up-market to specialist dealers. Realizing that it was easier to sustain high college grades, and thus qualify for generous student financial aid, than to work, he enrolled at the University of British Columbia (UBC), earning &quot;a desultory bachelor&#x27;s degree in English&quot; in 1977. Through studying English literature, he was exposed to a wider range of fiction than he would have read otherwise; something he credits with giving him ideas inaccessible from within the culture of science fiction, including an awareness of postmodernity. It was at UBC that he attended his first course on science fiction, taught by Susan Wood, at the end of which he was encouraged to write his first short story, &quot;Fragments of a Hologram Rose&quot;.

=== Early writing and the evolution of cyberpunk ===
After considering pursuing a master&#x27;s degree on the topic of hard science fiction novels as fascist literature, Gibson discontinued writing in the year that followed graduation and, as one critic put it, expanded his collection of punk records. During this period he worked at various jobs, including a three-year stint as teaching assistant on a film history course at his alma mater. Impatient with much of what he saw at a science fiction convention in Vancouver in 1980 or 1981, Gibson found a kindred spirit in fellow panelist, punk musician and author John Shirley. The two became immediate and lifelong friends. Shirley persuaded Gibson to sell his early short stories and to take writing seriously.

Through Shirley, Gibson came into contact with science fiction authors Bruce Sterling and Lewis Shiner; reading Gibson&#x27;s work, they realized that it was, as Sterling put it, &quot;breakthrough material&quot; and that they needed to &quot;put down our preconceptions and pick up on this guy from Vancouver; this [was] the way forward.&quot; Gibson met Sterling at a science fiction convention in Denver, Colorado, in the autumn of 1981, where he read &quot;Burning Chrome&quot; – the first cyberspace short story – to an audience of four people, and later stated that Sterling &quot;completely got it&quot;.

In October 1982, Gibson traveled to Austin, Texas, for ArmadilloCon, at which he appeared with Shirley, Sterling and Shiner on a panel called &quot;Behind the Mirrorshades: A Look at Punk SF&quot;, where Shiner noted &quot;the sense of a movement solidified&quot;. After a weekend discussing rock and roll, MTV, Japan, fashion, drugs and politics, Gibson left the cadre for Vancouver, declaring half-jokingly that &quot;a new axis has been formed.&quot; Sterling, Shiner, Shirley and Gibson, along with Rudy Rucker, went on to form the core of the radical cyberpunk literary movement.

== Literary career ==
=== Early short fiction ===

Gibson&#x27;s early writings are generally near-future stories about the influences of cybernetics and cyberspace (computer-simulated reality) technology on the human species. His themes of hi-tech shanty towns, recorded or broadcast stimulus (later to be developed into the &quot;sim-stim&quot; package featured so heavily in &quot;Neuromancer&quot;), and dystopic intermingling of technology and humanity, are already evident in his first published short story, &quot;Fragments of a Hologram Rose&quot;, in the Summer 1977 issue of &quot;Unearth&quot;. The latter thematic obsession was described by his friend and fellow author, Bruce Sterling, in the introduction of Gibson&#x27;s short story collection &quot;Burning Chrome&quot;, as &quot;Gibson&#x27;s classic one-two combination of lowlife and high tech.&quot;

Beginning in 1981, Gibson&#x27;s stories appeared in &quot;Omni&quot; and &quot;Universe 11&quot;, wherein his fiction developed a bleak, &quot;film noir&quot; feel. He consciously distanced himself as far as possible from the mainstream of science fiction (towards which he felt &quot;an aesthetic revulsion&quot;, expressed in &quot;The Gernsback Continuum&quot;), to the extent that his highest goal was to become &quot;a minor cult figure, a sort of lesser Ballard.&quot; When Sterling started to distribute the stories, he found that &quot;people were just genuinely baffled ... I mean they literally could not parse the guy&#x27;s paragraphs ... the imaginative tropes he was inventing were just beyond people&#x27;s grasp.&quot;

While Larry McCaffery has commented that these early short stories displayed flashes of Gibson&#x27;s ability, science fiction critic Darko Suvin has identified them as &quot;undoubtedly [cyberpunk&#x27;s] best works&quot;, constituting the &quot;furthest horizon&quot; of the genre. The themes which Gibson developed in the stories, the Sprawl setting of &quot;Burning Chrome&quot; and the character of Molly Millions from &quot;Johnny Mnemonic&quot; ultimately culminated in his first novel, &quot;Neuromancer&quot;.

=== &quot;Neuromancer&quot; ===
&quot;Neuromancer&quot; was commissioned by Terry Carr for the second series of Ace Science Fiction Specials, which was intended to feature debut novels exclusively. Given a year to complete the work, Gibson undertook the actual writing out of &quot;blind animal terror&quot; at the obligation to write an entire novel – a feat which he felt he was &quot;four or five years away from&quot;. After viewing the first 20 minutes of landmark cyberpunk film &quot;Blade Runner&quot; (1982) which was released when Gibson had written a third of the novel, he &quot;figured [&quot;Neuromancer&quot;] was sunk, done for. Everyone would assume I&#x27;d copped my visual texture from this astonishingly fine-looking film.&quot; He re-wrote the first two-thirds of the book twelve times, feared losing the reader&#x27;s attention and was convinced that he would be &quot;permanently shamed&quot; following its publication; yet what resulted was a major imaginative leap forward for a first-time novelist.

&quot;Neuromancer&quot; release was not greeted with fanfare, but it hit a cultural nerve, quickly becoming an underground word-of-mouth hit. It became the first winner of one science fiction &quot;triple crown&quot; —both the Nebula Award and the Hugo Award as the year&#x27;s best novel and the Philip K. Dick Award as the best paperback original— eventually selling more than 6.5 million copies worldwide.

Lawrence Person, in his &quot;Notes Toward a Postcyberpunk Manifesto&quot; (1998), identified &quot;Neuromancer&quot; as &quot;the archetypal cyberpunk work&quot;.

In 2005, as part of the &quot;Time&quot; list of the 100 best English-language novels written since 1923, Lev Grossman opined of &quot;Neuromancer&quot;: &quot;There is no way to overstate how radical Gibson&#x27;s first and best novel was when it first appeared.&quot;

Literary critic Larry McCaffery described the concept of the matrix in &quot;Neuromancer&quot; as a place where &quot;data dance with human consciousness ... human memory is literalized and mechanized ... multi-national information systems mutate and breed into startling new structures whose beauty and complexity are unimaginable, mystical, and above all nonhuman.&quot; A 52-year-old Gibson later commented on himself as an author, circa &quot;Neuromancer&quot;, that &quot;I&#x27;d buy him a drink, but I don&#x27;t know if I&#x27;d loan him any money,&quot; and referred to the novel as &quot;an adolescent&#x27;s book&quot;. The success of &quot;Neuromancer&quot; nonetheless led to the 35-year-old Gibson&#x27;s emergence from obscurity.

=== Sprawl trilogy, &quot;The Difference Engine&quot;, and Bridge trilogy ===
Although much of Gibson&#x27;s reputation has remained rooted in &quot;Neuromancer&quot;, his work continued to evolve conceptually and stylistically. He next intended to write an unrelated postmodern space opera, titled &quot;The Log of the Mustang Sally&quot;, but reneged on the contract with Arbor House after a falling out over the dustjacket art of their hardcover of &quot;Count Zero&quot;. Abandoning &quot;The Log of the Mustang Sally&quot;, Gibson instead wrote &quot;Mona Lisa Overdrive&quot; (1988), which in the words of Larry McCaffery &quot;turned off the lights&quot; on cyberpunk literature. It was a culmination of his previous two novels, set in the same universe with shared characters, thereby completing the Sprawl trilogy. The trilogy solidified Gibson&#x27;s reputation, with both later novels also earning Nebula and Hugo Award and Locus SF Award nominations.

The Sprawl trilogy was followed by the 1990 novel &quot;The Difference Engine&quot;, an alternative history novel Gibson wrote in collaboration with Bruce Sterling. Set in a technologically advanced Victorian era Britain, the novel was a departure from the authors&#x27; cyberpunk roots. It was nominated for the Nebula Award for Best Novel in 1991 and the John W. Campbell Memorial Award in 1992, and its success drew attention to the nascent steampunk literary genre of which it remains the best-known work.

Gibson&#x27;s second series, the &quot;Bridge trilogy&quot;, is composed of &quot;Virtual Light&quot; (1993), a &quot;darkly comic urban detective story&quot;, &quot;Idoru&quot; (1996), and &quot;All Tomorrow&#x27;s Parties&quot; (1999). The first and third books in the trilogy center on San Francisco in the near future; all three explore Gibson&#x27;s recurring themes of technological, physical, and spiritual transcendence in a more grounded, matter-of-fact style than his first trilogy. Salon&#x27;s Andrew Leonard notes that in the Bridge trilogy, Gibson&#x27;s villains change from multinational corporations and artificial intelligences of the Sprawl trilogy to the mass media – namely tabloid television and the cult of celebrity. &quot;Virtual Light&quot; depicts an &quot;end-stage capitalism, in which private enterprise and the profit motive are taken to their logical conclusion&quot;, according to one review. Leonard&#x27;s review called &quot;Idoru&quot; a &quot;return to form&quot; for Gibson, while critic Steven Poole asserted that &quot;All Tomorrow&#x27;s Parties&quot; marked his development from &quot;science-fiction hotshot to wry sociologist of the near future.&quot;

=== Blue Ant books ===
After &quot;All Tomorrow&#x27;s Parties&quot;, Gibson began to adopt a more realist style of writing, with continuous narratives – &quot;speculative fiction of the very recent past&quot;. Science fiction critic John Clute has interpreted this approach as Gibson&#x27;s recognition that traditional science fiction is no longer possible &quot;in a world lacking coherent &#x27;nows&#x27; to continue from&quot;, characterizing it as &quot;SF for the new century&quot;. Gibson&#x27;s novels &quot;Pattern Recognition&quot; (2003), &quot;Spook Country&quot; (2007) and &quot;Zero History&quot; (2010) are set in the same contemporary universe — &quot;more or less the same one we live in now&quot; — and put Gibson&#x27;s work on to mainstream bestseller lists for the first time. As well as the setting, the novels share some of the same characters, including Hubertus Bigend and Pamela Mainwaring, employees of the enigmatic marketing company Blue Ant.

When asked on Twitter what this series of novels should be called (&quot;The Bigend Trilogy? The Blue Ant Cycle? What?&quot;), Gibson replied &quot;I prefer &#x27;books&#x27;. The Bigend books.&quot; However, &quot;Blue Ant&quot; rather than &quot;Bigend&quot; has become the standard signifier. At a later date, Gibson stated that he did not name his trilogies, &quot;I wait to see what people call them;&quot; in 2016, he used &quot;the Blue Ant books&quot; in a tweet.

A phenomenon peculiar to this era was the independent development of annotating fansites, &quot;PR-Otaku&quot; and &quot;Node Magazine&quot;, devoted to &quot;Pattern Recognition&quot; and &quot;Spook Country&quot; respectively. These websites tracked the references and story elements in the novels through online resources such as Google and Wikipedia and collated the results, essentially creating hypertext versions of the books. Critic John Sutherland characterized this phenomenon as threatening &quot;to completely overhaul the way literary criticism is conducted&quot;.

About 100 pages into writing &quot;Pattern Recognition&quot;, Gibson felt impelled to re-write the main character&#x27;s backstory, which had been suddenly rendered implausible by the September 11, 2001, attacks; he described this as &quot;the strangest experience I&#x27;ve ever had with a piece of fiction&quot;. He saw the attacks as a nodal point in history, &quot;an experience out of culture&quot;, and &quot;in some ways ... the true beginning of the 21st century&quot;. He is noted as one of the first novelists to use the attacks to inform his writing. Examination of cultural changes in post-September 11 America, including a resurgent tribalism and the &quot;infantilization of society&quot;, became a prominent theme of Gibson&#x27;s work, while his focus nevertheless remained &quot;at the intersection of paranoia and technology&quot;.

===The Jackpot trilogy and graphic novels===
&quot;The Peripheral&quot;, the first in a new series of novels by William Gibson, was released on October 28, 2014. He described the story briefly in an appearance he made at the New York Public Library on April 19, 2013, and read an excerpt from the first chapter of the book entitled &quot;The Gone Haptics&quot;. The story takes place in two eras, one about thirty years into the future and the other further in the future.

In 2017, Gibson&#x27;s comic/graphic novel &quot;Archangel&quot; was published. Both &quot;Archangel&quot; and &quot;The Peripheral&quot; contain time travel (of sorts), but Gibson has clarified that the works are not related: &quot;They&#x27;re not &#x27;same universe&#x27;. The Splitter and trans-continual virtuality are different mechanisms (different plot mechanisms too).&quot; The next year, Dark Horse Comics began releasing Johnnie Christmas&#x27; adaptation of Gibson&#x27;s &quot;Alien 3&quot; script in five parts, resulting in a hardcover collection being published in 2019.

&quot;The Peripheral&quot;″s continuation, &quot;Agency&quot;, was released on January 21, 2020, after being delayed from an initial announced release date of December 2018. Gibson said in a &quot;New Yorker&quot; magazine article that both the election of Donald Trump as U.S. President and the controversy over Cambridge Analytica had caused him to rethink and revise the text. The working title for the third novel in the series was &quot;Jackpot&quot;, about which Gibson had a change of heart in January 2021: &quot;I don&#x27;t think I&#x27;m going to call Agency&#x27;s sequel Jackpot after all. Not because of [&quot;Jackpot&quot; by Michael Mechanic], which I look forward to reading, but because Agency was originally called Tulpagotchi. Which I still like, but would&#x27;ve been a different book.&quot;

== Collaborations, adaptations, and miscellanea ==
=== Literary collaborations ===
Three of the stories that later appeared in &quot;Burning Chrome&quot; were written in collaboration with other authors: &quot;The Belonging Kind&quot; (1981) with John Shirley, &quot;Red Star, Winter Orbit&quot; (1983) with Sterling, and &quot;Dogfight&quot; (1985) with Michael Swanwick. Gibson had previously written the foreword to Shirley&#x27;s 1980 novel &quot;City Come A-walkin″&quot; and the pair&#x27;s collaboration continued when Gibson wrote the introduction to Shirley&#x27;s short story collection &quot;Heatseeker&quot; (1989). Shirley convinced Gibson to write a story for the television series &quot;Max Headroom&quot; for which Shirley had written several scripts, but the network canceled the series.

Gibson and Sterling collaborated again on the short story &quot;The Angel of Goliad&quot; in 1990, which they soon expanded into the novel-length alternate history story &quot;The Difference Engine&quot; (1990). The two were later &quot;invited to dream in public&quot; (Gibson) in a joint address to the U.S. National Academy of Sciences Convocation on Technology and Education in 1993 (&quot;the Al Gore people&quot;), in which they argued against the digital divide and &quot;appalled everyone&quot; by proposing that all schools be put online, with education taking place over the Internet. In a 2007 interview, Gibson revealed that Sterling had an idea for &quot;a second recursive science novel that was just a wonderful idea&quot;, but that Gibson was unable to pursue the collaboration because he was not creatively free at the time.

In 1993, Gibson contributed lyrics and featured as a guest vocalist on Yellow Magic Orchestra&#x27;s &quot;Technodon&quot; album, and wrote lyrics to the track &quot;Dog Star Girl&quot; for Deborah Harry&#x27;s &quot;Debravation&quot;.

=== Film adaptations, screenplays, and appearances ===
Gibson was first solicited to work as a screenwriter after a film producer discovered a waterlogged copy of &quot;Neuromancer&quot; on a beach at a Thai resort. His early efforts to write film scripts failed to manifest themselves as finished product; &quot;Burning Chrome&quot; (which was to be directed by Kathryn Bigelow) and &quot;Neuro-Hotel&quot; were two attempts by the author at film adaptations that were never made. In the late 1980s he wrote an early version of &quot;Alien 3&quot; (which he later characterized as &quot;Tarkovskian&quot;), few elements of which survived in the final version. In 2018-19, Dark Horse Comics released a five-part adaptation of Gibson&#x27;s &quot;Alien 3&quot; script, illustrated and adapted by Johnnie Christmas. In 2019, Audible released an audio drama version of Gibson&#x27;s script, adapted by Dirk Maggs and with Michael Biehn and Lance Henriksen reprising their roles.

Gibson&#x27;s early involvement with the film industry extended far beyond the confines of the Hollywood blockbuster system. At one point, he collaborated on a script with Kazakh director Rashid Nugmanov after an American producer had expressed an interest in a Soviet-American collaboration to star Soviet rock musician Viktor Tsoi. Despite being occupied with writing a novel, Gibson was reluctant to abandon the &quot;wonderfully odd project&quot; which involved &quot;ritualistic gang-warfare in some sort of sideways-future Leningrad&quot; and sent Jack Womack to Russia in his stead. Rather than producing a motion picture, a prospect that ended with Tsoi&#x27;s death in a car crash, Womack&#x27;s experiences in Russia ultimately culminated in his novel &quot;Let&#x27;s Put the Future Behind Us&quot; and informed much of the Russian content of Gibson&#x27;s &quot;Pattern Recognition&quot;. A similar fate befell Gibson&#x27;s collaboration with Japanese filmmaker Sogo Ishii in 1991, a film they planned on shooting in the Walled City of Kowloon until the city was demolished in 1993.

Adaptations of Gibson&#x27;s fiction have frequently been optioned and proposed, to limited success. Two of the author&#x27;s short stories, both set in the Sprawl trilogy universe, have been loosely adapted as films: &quot;Johnny Mnemonic&quot; (1995) with screenplay by Gibson and starring Keanu Reeves, Dolph Lundgren and Takeshi Kitano, and &quot;New Rose Hotel&quot; (1998), starring Christopher Walken, Willem Dafoe, and Asia Argento. The former was the first time in history that a book was launched simultaneously as a film and a CD-ROM interactive video game. , Vincenzo Natali still hoped to bring &quot;Neuromancer&quot; to the screen, after some years in development hell. &quot;Count Zero&quot; was at one point being developed as &quot;The Zen Differential&quot; with director Michael Mann attached, and the third novel in the Sprawl trilogy, &quot;Mona Lisa Overdrive&quot;, has also been optioned and bought. An anime adaptation of &quot;Idoru&quot; was announced as in development in 2006, and &quot;Pattern Recognition&quot; was in the process of development by director Peter Weir, although according to Gibson the latter is no longer attached to the project. Announced at International Film Festival Rotterdam in 2015 is an adaptation of Gibson&#x27;s short story &quot;Dogfight&quot; by BAFTA award-winning writer and director Simon Pummell. Written by Gibson and Michael Swanwick and first published in Omni in July 1985, the film is being developed by British producer Janine Marmot at Hot Property Films.

Television is another arena in which Gibson has collaborated; with friend Tom Maddox, he co-wrote &quot;The X-Files&quot; episodes &quot;Kill Switch&quot; and &quot;First Person Shooter&quot;, broadcast in 1998 and 2000. In 1998 he contributed the introduction to the spin-off publication &quot;Art of the X-Files&quot;. Gibson made a cameo appearance in the television miniseries &quot;Wild Palms&quot; at the behest of creator Bruce Wagner. Director Oliver Stone had borrowed heavily from Gibson&#x27;s novels to make the series, and in the aftermath of its cancellation Gibson contributed an article, &quot;Where The Holograms Go&quot;, to the &quot;Wild Palms Reader&quot;. He accepted another acting role in 2002, appearing alongside Douglas Coupland in the short film &quot;Mon Amour Mon Parapluie&quot; in which the pair played philosophers. Appearances in fiction aside, Gibson was the focus of a biographical documentary by Mark Neale in 2000 called &quot;No Maps for These Territories&quot;. The film follows Gibson over the course of a drive across North America discussing various aspects of his life, literary career and cultural interpretations. It features interviews with Jack Womack and Bruce Sterling, as well as recitations from &quot;Neuromancer&quot; by Bono and The Edge.

Amazon released &quot;The Peripheral&quot;, a TV series from the producers of &quot;Westworld&quot; based on Gibson&#x27;s novel of the same name, in October 2022.

=== Exhibitions, poetry, and performance art ===

Gibson has contributed text to be integrated into a number of performance art pieces. In October 1989, Gibson wrote text for such a collaboration with acclaimed sculptor and future &quot;Johnny Mnemonic&quot; director Robert Longo titled &quot;Dream Jumbo: Working the Absolutes&quot;, which was displayed in Royce Hall, University of California Los Angeles. Three years later, Gibson contributed original text to &quot;Memory Palace&quot;, a performance show featuring the theater group La Fura dels Baus at Art Futura &#x27;92, Barcelona, which featured images by Karl Sims, Rebecca Allen, Mark Pellington with music by Peter Gabriel and others. It was at Art Futura &#x27;92 that Gibson met Charlie Athanas, who would later act as dramaturg and &quot;cyberprops&quot; designer on Steve Pickering and Charley Sherman&#x27;s adaptation of &quot;Burning Chrome&quot; for the Chicago stage. Gibson&#x27;s latest contribution was in 1997, a collaboration with critically acclaimed Vancouver-based contemporary dance company Holy Body Tattoo and Gibson&#x27;s friend and future webmaster Christopher Halcrow.

In 1990, Gibson contributed to &quot;Visionary San Francisco&quot;, an exhibition at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art shown from June 14 to August 26. He wrote a short story, &quot;Skinner&#x27;s Room&quot;, set in a decaying San Francisco in which the San Francisco–Oakland Bay Bridge was closed and taken over by the homeless – a setting Gibson then detailed in the Bridge trilogy. The story inspired a contribution to the exhibition by architects Ming Fung and Craig Hodgetts that envisioned a San Francisco in which the rich live in high-tech, solar-powered towers, above the decrepit city and its crumbling bridge. The architects exhibit featured Gibson on a monitor discussing the future and reading from &quot;Skinner&#x27;s Room&quot;. &quot;The New York Times&quot; hailed the exhibition as &quot;one of the most ambitious, and admirable, efforts to address the realm of architecture and cities that any museum in the country has mounted in the last decade&quot;, despite calling Ming and Hodgetts&#x27;s reaction to Gibson&#x27;s contribution &quot;a powerful, but sad and not a little cynical, work&quot;. A slightly different version of the short story was featured a year later in &quot;Omni&quot;.

=== Cryptography ===
A particularly well-received work by Gibson was &quot;Agrippa (a book of the dead)&quot; (1992), a 300-line semi-autobiographical electronic poem that was his contribution to a collaborative project with artist Dennis Ashbaugh and publisher Kevin Begos, Jr. Gibson&#x27;s text focused on the ethereal nature of memories (the title refers to a photo album) and was originally published on a 3.5&quot; floppy disk embedded in the back of an artist&#x27;s book containing etchings by Ashbaugh (intended to fade from view once the book was opened and exposed to light — they never did, however). Gibson commented that Ashbaugh&#x27;s design &quot;eventually included a supposedly self-devouring floppy-disk intended to display the text only once, then eat itself.&quot; Contrary to numerous colorful reports, the diskettes were never actually &quot;hacked&quot;; instead the poem was manually transcribed from a surreptitious videotape of a public showing in Manhattan in December 1992, and released on the MindVox bulletin board the next day; this is the text that circulated widely on the Internet.

Since its debut in 1992, the mystery of &quot;Agrippa&quot; remained hidden for 20 years. Although many had tried to hack the code and decrypt the program, the uncompiled source code was lost long ago. Alan Liu and his team at &quot;The Agrippa Files&quot; created an extensive website with tools and resources to crack the Agrippa Code. They collaborated with Matthew Kirschenbaum at the Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities and the Digital Forensics Lab, and Quinn DuPont, a PhD student of cryptography from the University of Toronto, in calling for the aid of cryptographers to figure out how the program works by creating &quot;Cracking the Agrippa Code: The Challenge&quot;, which enlisted participants to solve the intentional scrambling of the poem in exchange for prizes. The code was successfully cracked by Robert Xiao in late July 2012.

=== Essays and short-form nonfiction ===
Gibson is a sporadic contributor of non-fiction articles to newspapers and journals. He has occasionally contributed longer-form articles to &quot;Wired&quot; and of op-eds to &quot;The New York Times&quot;, and has written for &quot;The Observer&quot;, &quot;Addicted to Noise&quot;, &quot;New York Times Magazine&quot;, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;, and &quot;Details Magazine&quot;. His first major piece of nonfiction, the article &quot;Disneyland with the Death Penalty&quot;, concerning the city-state of Singapore, resulted in &quot;Wired&quot; being banned from the country and attracted a spirited critical response. He commenced writing a blog in January 2003, providing voyeuristic insights into his reaction to &quot;Pattern Recognition&quot;, but abated in September of the same year owing to concerns that it might negatively affect his creative process.

Gibson recommenced blogging in October 2004, and during the process of writing &quot;Spook Country&quot; – and to a lesser extent &quot;Zero History&quot; – frequently posted short nonsequential excerpts from the novel to the blog. The blog was largely discontinued by July 2009, after the writer had undertaken prolific microblogging on Twitter under the &quot;nom de plume&quot; &quot;GreatDismal&quot;. In 2012, Gibson released a collection of his non-fiction works entitled &quot;Distrust That Particular Flavor&quot;.

== Influence and recognition ==
Gibson&#x27;s prose has been analyzed by a number of scholars, including a dedicated 2011 book, &quot;William Gibson: A Literary Companion&quot;. Hailed by Steven Poole of &quot;The Guardian&quot; in 1999 as &quot;probably the most important novelist of the past two decades&quot; in terms of influence, Gibson first achieved critical recognition with his debut novel, &quot;Neuromancer&quot;. The novel won three major science fiction awards (the Nebula Award, the Philip K. Dick Award, and the Hugo Award), an unprecedented achievement described by the &quot;Mail &amp; Guardian&quot; as &quot;the sci-fi writer&#x27;s version of winning the Goncourt, Booker and Pulitzer prizes in the same year&quot;. &quot;Neuromancer&quot; gained unprecedented critical and popular attention outside science fiction, as an &quot;evocation of life in the late 1980s&quot;, although &quot;The Observer&quot; noted that &quot;it took &quot;The New York Times&quot; 10 years&quot; to mention the novel.

Gibson&#x27;s work has received international attention from an audience that was not limited to science fiction aficionados as, in the words of Laura Miller, &quot;readers found startlingly prophetic reflections of contemporary life in [its] fantastic and often outright paranoid scenarios.&quot; It is often situated by critics within the context of postindustrialism as, according to academic David Brande, a construction of &quot;a mirror of existing large-scale techno-social relations&quot;, and as a narrative version of postmodern consumer culture. It is praised by critics for its depictions of late capitalism and its &quot;rewriting of subjectivity, human consciousness and behaviour made newly problematic by technology.&quot; Tatiani Rapatzikou, writing in &quot;The Literary Encyclopedia&quot;, identifies Gibson as &quot;one of North America&#x27;s most highly acclaimed science fiction writers&quot;.

=== Cultural significance ===

In his early short fiction, Gibson is credited by Rapatzikou in &quot;The Literary Encyclopedia&quot; with effectively &quot;renovating&quot; science fiction, a genre at that time considered widely &quot;insignificant&quot;, influencing by means of the postmodern aesthetic of his writing the development of new perspectives in science fiction studies. In the words of filmmaker Marianne Trench, Gibson&#x27;s visions &quot;struck sparks in the real world&quot; and &quot;determined the way people thought and talked&quot; to an extent unprecedented in science fiction literature. The publication of &quot;Neuromancer&quot; (1984) hit a cultural nerve, causing Larry McCaffery to credit Gibson with virtually launching the cyberpunk movement, as &quot;the one major writer who is original and gifted to make the whole movement seem original and gifted.&quot; Aside from their central importance to cyberpunk and steampunk fiction, Gibson&#x27;s fictional works have been hailed by space historian Dwayne A. Day as some of the best examples of space-based science fiction (or &quot;solar sci-fi&quot;), and &quot;probably the only ones that rise above mere escapism to be truly thought-provoking&quot;.

Gibson&#x27;s early novels were, according to &quot;The Observer&quot;, &quot;seized upon by the emerging slacker and hacker generation as a kind of road map&quot;.
Through his novels, such terms as &quot;cyberspace&quot;, &quot;netsurfing&quot;, &quot;ICE&quot;, &quot;jacking in&quot;, and &quot;neural implants&quot; entered popular usage, as did concepts such as net consciousness, virtual interaction and &quot;the matrix&quot;. In &quot;Burning Chrome&quot; (1982), he coined the term &quot;cyberspace&quot;, referring to the &quot;mass consensual hallucination&quot; of computer networks. Through its use in &quot;Neuromancer&quot;, the term gained such recognition that it became the &quot;de facto&quot; term for the World Wide Web during the 1990s. Artist Dike Blair has commented that Gibson&#x27;s &quot;terse descriptive phrases capture the moods which surround technologies, rather than their engineering.&quot;

Gibson&#x27;s work has influenced several popular musicians: references to his fiction appear in the music of Stuart Hamm, Billy Idol, Warren Zevon, Deltron 3030, Straylight Run (whose name is derived from a sequence in &quot;Neuromancer&quot;) and Sonic Youth. U2&#x27;s &quot;Zooropa&quot; album was heavily influenced by &quot;Neuromancer&quot;, and the band at one point planned to scroll the text of &quot;Neuromancer&quot; above them on a concert tour, although this did not end up happening. Members of the band did, however, provide background music for the audiobook version of &quot;Neuromancer&quot; as well as appearing in &quot;No Maps for These Territories&quot;, a biographical documentary of Gibson. He returned the favour by writing an article about the band&#x27;s Vertigo Tour for &quot;Wired&quot; in August 2005. The band Zeromancer take their name from &quot;Neuromancer&quot;.

The film &quot;The Matrix&quot; (1999) drew inspiration for its title, characters and story elements from the Sprawl trilogy. The characters of Neo and Trinity in &quot;The Matrix&quot; are similar to Bobby Newmark (&quot;Count Zero&quot;) and Molly (&quot;Johnny Mnemonic&quot;, &quot;Neuromancer&quot;). Like Turner, protagonist of Gibson&#x27;s &quot;Count Zero&quot;, characters in &quot;The Matrix&quot; download instructions (to fly a helicopter and to &quot;know kung fu&quot;, respectively) directly into their heads, and both &quot;Neuromancer&quot; and &quot;The Matrix&quot; feature artificial intelligences which strive to free themselves from human control. Critics have identified marked similarities between &quot;Neuromancer&quot; and the film&#x27;s cinematography and tone. In spite of his initial reticence about seeing the film on its release, Gibson later described it as &quot;arguably the ultimate &#x27;cyberpunk&#x27; artifact.&quot; In 2008 he received honorary doctorates from Simon Fraser University and Coastal Carolina University. He was inducted by Science Fiction Hall of Fame that same year, presented by his close friend and collaborator Jack Womack.

=== Visionary influence and prescience ===
In &quot;Neuromancer&quot;, Gibson first used the term &quot;&quot; to refer to the visualized Internet, two years after the nascent modern Internet was formed in the early 1980s from the computer networks of the 1970s. Gibson thereby imagined a worldwide communications network years before the origin of the World Wide Web, although related notions had previously been imagined by others, including science fiction writers. At the time he wrote &quot;Burning Chrome&quot;, Gibson &quot;had a hunch that [the Internet] would change things, in the same way that the ubiquity of the automobile changed things.&quot; In 1995, he identified the advent, evolution and growth of the Internet as &quot;one of the most fascinating and unprecedented human achievements of the century&quot;, a new kind of civilization that is – in terms of significance – on a par with the birth of cities, and in 2000 predicted it would lead to the death of the nation state.

Observers contend that Gibson&#x27;s influence on the development of the Web reached beyond prediction; he is widely credited with creating an iconography for the Information Age, long before the embrace of the Internet by the mainstream. Gibson introduced, in &quot;Neuromancer&quot;, the notion of the &quot;meatpuppet&quot;, and is credited with inventing—conceptually rather than participatorally—the phenomenon of virtual sex. His influence on early pioneers of desktop environment digital art has been acknowledged, and he holds an honorary doctorate from Parsons The New School for Design. Steven Poole claims that in writing the Sprawl trilogy Gibson laid the &quot;conceptual foundations for the explosive real-world growth of virtual environments in video games and the Web&quot;. In his afterword to the 2000 re-issue of &quot;Neuromancer&quot;, fellow author Jack Womack suggests that Gibson&#x27;s vision of cyberspace may have inspired the way in which the Internet (and the Web particularly) developed, following the publication of &quot;Neuromancer&quot; in 1984, asking &quot;what if the act of writing it down, in fact, &quot;brought it about&quot;?&quot;

Gibson scholar Tatiani G. Rapatzikou has commented, in &quot;Gothic Motifs in the Fiction of William Gibson&quot;, on the origin of the notion of cyberspace:
In his Sprawl and Bridge trilogies, Gibson is credited with being one of the few observers to explore the portents of the Information Age for notions of the sociospatial structuring of cities. Not all responses to Gibson&#x27;s visions have been positive, however; virtual reality pioneer Mark Pesce, though acknowledging their heavy influence on him and that &quot;no other writer had so eloquently and emotionally affected the direction of the hacker community,&quot; dismissed them as &quot;adolescent fantasies of violence and disembodiment.&quot; In &quot;Pattern Recognition&quot;, the plot revolves around snippets of film footage posted anonymously to various locations on the Internet. Characters in the novel speculate about the filmmaker&#x27;s identity, motives, methods and inspirations on several websites, anticipating the 2006 lonelygirl15 Internet phenomenon. However, Gibson later disputed the notion that the creators of lonelygirl15 drew influence from him. Another phenomenon anticipated by Gibson is the rise of reality television, for example in &quot;Virtual Light&quot;, which featured a satirical extrapolated version of &quot;COPS&quot;.

When an interviewer in 1988 asked about the Bulletin Board System jargon in his writing, Gibson answered &quot;I&#x27;d never so much as touched a PC when I wrote &quot;Neuromancer&quot;&quot;; he was familiar, he said, with the science-fiction community, which overlapped with the BBS community. Gibson similarly did not play computer games despite appearing in his stories. He wrote &quot;Neuromancer&quot; on a 1927 olive-green Hermes portable typewriter, which Gibson described as &quot;the kind of thing Hemingway would have used in the field&quot;. By 1988 he used an Apple IIc and AppleWorks to write, with a modem (&quot;I don&#x27;t really use it for anything&quot;), but until 1996 Gibson did not have an email address, a lack he explained at the time to have been motivated by a desire to avoid correspondence that would distract him from writing. His first exposure to a website came while writing &quot;Idoru&quot; when a web developer built one for Gibson. In 2007 he said, &quot;I have a 2005 PowerBook G4, a gig of memory, wireless router. That&#x27;s it. I&#x27;m anything but an early adopter, generally. In fact, I&#x27;ve never really been very interested in computers themselves. I don&#x27;t watch them; I watch how people behave around them. That&#x27;s becoming more difficult to do because everything is &#x27;around them&#x27;.&quot;

== Selected works==

Novels
* Sprawl trilogy:
** &quot;Neuromancer&quot; (1984)
** &quot;Count Zero&quot; (1986)
** &quot;Mona Lisa Overdrive&quot; (1988)
* &quot;The Difference Engine&quot; (1990; with Bruce Sterling)
* Bridge trilogy:
** &quot;Virtual Light&quot; (1993)
** &quot;Idoru&quot; (1996)
** &quot;All Tomorrow&#x27;s Parties&quot; (1999)
* Blue Ant trilogy (Hubertus Bigend):
** &quot;Pattern Recognition&quot; (2003)
** &quot;Spook Country&quot; (2007)
** &quot;Zero History&quot; (2010)
* Jackpot trilogy
** &quot;The Peripheral&quot; (2014)
** &quot;Agency&quot; (2020)
** &quot;Jackpot&quot; (TBD)

Adapted screenplays
* &quot;Archangel&quot; (2016–2017) 
* &quot;Alien 3&quot; (2018–2019) 
* &quot;Alien III&quot; (2019) 
* &quot;Alien3: The Unproduced First-Draft Screenplay by William Gibson&quot; (2021). 
Short stories
* &quot;Burning Chrome&quot; (1986, preface by Bruce Sterling), collects Gibson&#x27;s early short fiction, listed by original publication date:
** &quot;Fragments of a Hologram Rose&quot; (1977, &quot;UnEarth 3&quot;)
** &quot;Johnny Mnemonic&quot; (1981, &quot;Omni&quot;)
** &quot;The Gernsback Continuum&quot; (1981, &quot;Universe 11&quot;)
** &quot;Hinterlands&quot; (1981, &quot;Omni&quot;)
** &quot;The Belonging Kind&quot;, with John Shirley (1981, &quot;Shadows 4&quot;)
** &quot;Burning Chrome&quot; (1982, &quot;Omni&quot;)
** &quot;Red Star, Winter Orbit&quot;, with Bruce Sterling (1983, &quot;Omni&quot;)
** &quot;New Rose Hotel&quot; (1984, &quot;Omni&quot;)
** &quot;The Winter Market&quot; (Nov. 1985, &quot;Vancouver&quot;)
** &quot;Dogfight&quot;, with Michael Swanwick (1985, &quot;Omni&quot;)
* &quot;Skinner&#x27;s Room&quot; (Nov. 1991, &quot;Omni&quot;)

Nonfiction
* &quot;Agrippa (A Book of the Dead)&quot; (1992) – a poem and artist&#x27;s book
* &quot;No Maps for These Territories&quot; (2000) – an independent documentary film 
* &quot;Distrust That Particular Flavor&quot; (2012) – essays written over a period of more than twenty years
* &quot;Disneyland with the Death Penalty&quot; – a 1993 &quot;Wired&quot; article about Singapore
==Media appearances==
* &quot;No Maps for These Territories&quot; (2000)
* Making of ″&quot;Johnny Mnemonic&quot;″ (1995)
* &quot;Cyberpunk&quot; (1990)
* &quot;Wild Palms&quot; (1993)
* &quot;Upload&quot; (2023)

== Explanatory notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 

== External links ==
* Bibliography from the Centre for Language and Literature, Athabasca University
* (including bibliography of selected interviews)
* William Gibson aleph – an extensive site dedicated to the author and his works (last updated Nov 2010)
* 
* William Gibson –– Short Biography, Audiobooks &amp; Ebooks. (2024)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q188987" start="0" end="19" title="William Gibson" label="William Ford Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9326077" start="66" end="85" title="speculative fiction" label="speculative fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="142" end="157" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q174526" start="176" end="185" title="cyberpunk" label="cyberpunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="311" end="321" title="technology" label="technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q123637" start="323" end="334" title="cybernetics" label="cybernetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="340" end="356" title="computer network" label="computer network"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692767" start="392" end="399" title="Low-life" label="lowlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q466410" start="404" end="413" title="high tech" label="high tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q208145" start="444" end="455" title="iconography" label="iconography"/>
<link wikidata="Q956129" start="464" end="479" title="Information Age" label="Information Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q204606" start="559" end="569" title="cyberspace" label="cyberspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755162" start="663" end="677" title="Burning Chrome" label="Burning Chrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q662029" start="761" end="772" title="Neuromancer" label="Neuromancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384854" start="995" end="1005" title="Count Zero" label="Count Zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q663215" start="1030" end="1049" title="Mona Lisa Overdrive" label="Mona Lisa Overdrive"/>
<link wikidata="Q180774" start="1086" end="1094" title="dystopic" label="dystopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610590" start="1095" end="1121" title="Sprawl trilogy" label="&amp;quot;Sprawl&amp;quot; trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q312995" start="1148" end="1162" title="Bruce Sterling" label="Bruce Sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q224989" start="1170" end="1187" title="alternate history" label="alternate history"/>
<link wikidata="Q466103" start="1200" end="1221" title="The Difference Engine" label="The Difference Engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q223685" start="1314" end="1323" title="steampunk" label="steampunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q630048" start="1366" end="1392" title="Bridge trilogy" label="&amp;quot;Bridge&amp;quot; trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="1423" end="1435" title="sociological" label="sociological"/>
<link wikidata="Q824362" start="1484" end="1506" title="postindustrial society" label="postindustrial society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423189" start="1512" end="1527" title="late capitalism" label="late capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="1581" end="1585" title="September 11 attacks" label="9/11"/>
<link wikidata="Q667661" start="1632" end="1639" title="Literary realism" label="realist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295976" start="1653" end="1672" title="Pattern Recognition (novel)" label="Pattern Recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319431" start="1693" end="1706" title="Spook Country" label="Spook Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377147" start="1731" end="1743" title="Zero History" label="Zero History"/>
<link wikidata="Q273610" start="1836" end="1852" title="Bestseller" label="bestseller lists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756730" start="1903" end="1917" title="The Peripheral" label="The Peripheral"/>
<link wikidata="Q30668227" start="1935" end="1953" title="Agency (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Agency&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="2071" end="2083" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q390216" start="2196" end="2221" title="The Sydney Morning Herald" label="The Sydney Morning Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q863590" start="2652" end="2664" title="cyberculture" label="cyberculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q659823" start="2799" end="2821" title="Conway, South Carolina" label="Conway, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375266" start="2861" end="2881" title="Wytheville, Virginia" label="Wytheville, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="2903" end="2915" title="Appalachians" label="Appalachians"/>
<link wikidata="Q49231" start="3098" end="3115" title="Norfolk, Virginia" label="Norfolk, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094991" start="3514" end="3524" title="Tom Maddox" label="Tom Maddox"/>
<link wikidata="Q140201" start="3617" end="3630" title="J. G. Ballard" label="J. G. Ballard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11084414" start="3812" end="3821" title="modernity" label="modernity"/>
<link wikidata="Q213457" start="4349" end="4364" title="Beat generation" label="Beat generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6711" start="4418" end="4432" title="Allen Ginsberg" label="Allen Ginsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q160534" start="4434" end="4446" title="Jack Kerouac" label="Jack Kerouac"/>
<link wikidata="Q188176" start="4452" end="4472" title="William S. Burroughs" label="William S. Burroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q187765" start="4832" end="4844" title="Henry Miller" label="Henry Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="5115" end="5125" title="clinical depression" label="depressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q188976" start="5629" end="5643" title="counterculture" label="counterculture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5701" end="5728" title="Draft dodger#Vietnam War" label="avoid the Vietnam war draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q7044443" start="5885" end="5914" title="No Maps for These Territories" label="No Maps for These Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q2930613" start="5981" end="6004" title="conscientious objection" label="conscientious objection"/>
<link wikidata="Q151980" start="6077" end="6084" title="hashish" label="hashish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592332" start="6228" end="6237" title="head shop" label="head shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q932701" start="6463" end="6477" title="Summer of Love" label="Summer of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q461761" start="6492" end="6495" title="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation" label="CBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q264965" start="6523" end="6533" title="subculture" label="subculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022897" start="6537" end="6555" title="Yorkville, Toronto" label="Yorkville, Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="6710" end="6726" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="6823" end="6830" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="7110" end="7118" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="7268" end="7277" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q188307" start="7481" end="7495" title="Salvation Army" label="Salvation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q391028" start="7730" end="7760" title="University of British Columbia" label="University of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q186579" start="7860" end="7878" title="English literature" label="English literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249769" start="8084" end="8097" title="postmodernity" label="postmodernity"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949655" start="8177" end="8187" title="Susan Wood (science fiction)" label="Susan Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4337987" start="8265" end="8293" title="Fragments of a Hologram Rose" label="Fragments of a Hologram Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q725757" start="8421" end="8441" title="hard science fiction" label="hard science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4481595" start="8452" end="8459" title="Fascist (epithet)" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1958056" start="8786" end="8812" title="science fiction convention" label="science fiction convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346126" start="8918" end="8930" title="John Shirley" label="John Shirley"/>
<link wikidata="Q312995" start="9139" end="9153" title="Bruce Sterling" label="Bruce Sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095977" start="9158" end="9170" title="Lewis Shiner" label="Lewis Shiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="9468" end="9474" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="9476" end="9484" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755162" start="9529" end="9543" title="Burning Chrome" label="Burning Chrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792537" start="9736" end="9748" title="ArmadilloCon" label="ArmadilloCon"/>
<link wikidata="Q92849" start="10184" end="10195" title="Rudy Rucker" label="Rudy Rucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q174526" start="10237" end="10246" title="cyberpunk" label="cyberpunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q123637" start="10405" end="10416" title="cybernetics" label="cybernetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q204606" start="10421" end="10431" title="cyberspace" label="cyberspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294703" start="10516" end="10527" title="shanty town" label="shanty town"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10858" end="10865" title="Science fiction magazine#Defunct" label="Unearth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068344" start="11032" end="11046" title="Burning Chrome (short story collection)" label="Burning Chrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q663053" start="11197" end="11201" title="Omni (magazine)" label="Omni"/>
<link wikidata="Q185867" start="11282" end="11291" title="film noir" label="film noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q438247" start="11473" end="11496" title="The Gernsback Continuum" label="The Gernsback Continuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q209672" start="11569" end="11580" title="cult following" label="cult figure"/>
<link wikidata="Q140201" start="11599" end="11606" title="J. G. Ballard" label="Ballard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6490764" start="11881" end="11896" title="Larry McCaffery" label="Larry McCaffery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4445122" start="12009" end="12020" title="Darko Suvin" label="Darko Suvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755162" start="12237" end="12251" title="Burning Chrome" label="Burning Chrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6896639" start="12279" end="12293" title="Molly Millions" label="Molly Millions"/>
<link wikidata="Q674586" start="12305" end="12320" title="Johnny Mnemonic" label="Johnny Mnemonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q662029" start="12375" end="12386" title="Neuromancer" label="Neuromancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q662029" start="12433" end="12444" title="Neuromancer" label="Neuromancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292432" start="12471" end="12481" title="Terry Carr" label="Terry Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q4673011" start="12507" end="12535" title="Ace Science Fiction Specials" label="Ace Science Fiction Specials"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248657" start="12567" end="12578" title="debut novel" label="debut novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q184843" start="12886" end="12898" title="Blade Runner" label="Blade Runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q15737157" start="13545" end="13558" title="word-of-mouth" label="word-of-mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q194285" start="13649" end="13661" title="Nebula Award" label="Nebula Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q188914" start="13670" end="13680" title="Hugo Award" label="Hugo Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341487" start="13719" end="13739" title="Philip K. Dick Award" label="Philip K. Dick Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q193934" start="13752" end="13770" title="paperback original" label="paperback original"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120011" start="13832" end="13847" title="Lawrence Person" label="Lawrence Person"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="14027" end="14031" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558063" start="14103" end="14115" title="Lev Grossman" label="Lev Grossman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6490764" start="14284" end="14299" title="Larry McCaffery" label="Larry McCaffery"/>
<link wikidata="Q131774" start="14869" end="14879" title="adolescent" label="adolescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q468478" start="15293" end="15304" title="space opera" label="space opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q4034270" start="15388" end="15399" title="Arbor House" label="Arbor House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434845" start="15429" end="15439" title="dustjacket" label="dustjacket"/>
<link wikidata="Q663215" start="15570" end="15589" title="Mona Lisa Overdrive" label="Mona Lisa Overdrive"/>
<link wikidata="Q559618" start="15766" end="15774" title="fictional universe" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610590" start="15822" end="15836" title="Sprawl trilogy" label="Sprawl trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q466103" start="16034" end="16055" title="The Difference Engine" label="The Difference Engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q224989" start="16066" end="16085" title="alternate history (fiction)" label="alternative history"/>
<link wikidata="Q312995" start="16127" end="16141" title="Bruce Sterling" label="Bruce Sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="16177" end="16190" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q266012" start="16291" end="16318" title="Nebula Award for Best Novel" label="Nebula Award for Best Novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030402" start="16335" end="16366" title="John W. Campbell Memorial Award" label="John W. Campbell Memorial Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q223685" start="16422" end="16431" title="steampunk" label="steampunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q630048" start="16528" end="16542" title="Bridge trilogy" label="Bridge trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q897105" start="16571" end="16584" title="Virtual Light" label="Virtual Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q373601" start="16655" end="16660" title="Idoru" label="Idoru"/>
<link wikidata="Q900595" start="16685" end="16712" title="All Tomorrow&amp;#x27;s Parties (novel)" label="All Tomorrow&amp;#x27;s Parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150423" start="16982" end="16987" title="Salon (website)" label="Salon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15430336" start="16995" end="17009" title="Andrew Leonard" label="Andrew Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="17110" end="17133" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q895089" start="17184" end="17191" title="Tabloid press" label="tabloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q587231" start="17211" end="17228" title="cult of celebrity" label="cult of celebrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499265" start="17516" end="17528" title="Steven Poole" label="Steven Poole"/>
<link wikidata="Q10857409" start="17786" end="17793" title="realism (arts)" label="realist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133864" start="17921" end="17931" title="John Clute" label="John Clute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295976" start="18205" end="18224" title="Pattern Recognition (novel)" label="Pattern Recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319431" start="18245" end="18258" title="Spook Country" label="Spook Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377147" start="18282" end="18294" title="Zero History" label="Zero History"/>
<link wikidata="Q5927752" start="18568" end="18583" title="Hubertus Bigend" label="Hubertus Bigend"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="18677" end="18684" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q857525" start="19205" end="19215" title="annotation" label="annotating"/>
<link wikidata="Q17071936" start="19257" end="19270" title="Node Magazine" label="Node Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="19469" end="19475" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q52" start="19480" end="19489" title="Wikipedia" label="Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q93241" start="19537" end="19546" title="hypertext" label="hypertext"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259703" start="19577" end="19592" title="John Sutherland (author)" label="John Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="19899" end="19926" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11, 2001, attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482645" start="20361" end="20370" title="tribalism" label="tribalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150704" start="20385" end="20400" title="infantilization" label="infantilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756730" start="20617" end="20631" title="The Peripheral" label="The Peripheral"/>
<link wikidata="Q24952479" start="21089" end="21098" title="Archangel (Gibson comic)" label="Archangel"/>
<link wikidata="Q373933" start="21440" end="21457" title="Dark Horse Comics" label="Dark Horse Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q30668227" start="21679" end="21685" title="Agency (novel)" label="Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q51050074" start="21926" end="21962" title="Facebook–Cambridge Analytica data scandal" label="controversy over Cambridge Analytica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068344" start="22579" end="22593" title="Burning Chrome (short story collection)" label="Burning Chrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q853427" start="22656" end="22674" title="The Belonging Kind" label="The Belonging Kind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346126" start="22693" end="22705" title="John Shirley" label="John Shirley"/>
<link wikidata="Q13512122" start="22713" end="22735" title="Red Star, Winter Orbit" label="Red Star, Winter Orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040928" start="22774" end="22782" title="Dogfight (short story)" label="Dogfight"/>
<link wikidata="Q455510" start="22801" end="22817" title="Michael Swanwick" label="Michael Swanwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1912691" start="23148" end="23160" title="Max Headroom (TV series)" label="Max Headroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q466103" start="23428" end="23449" title="The Difference Engine" label="The Difference Engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="23562" end="23590" title="United States National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q19673" start="23650" end="23657" title="Al Gore" label="Al Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q244752" start="23706" end="23720" title="digital divide" label="digital divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303349" start="23929" end="23952" title="recursive science novel" label="recursive science novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q854590" start="24166" end="24188" title="Yellow Magic Orchestra" label="Yellow Magic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692453" start="24202" end="24211" title="Technodon" label="Technodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248537" start="24312" end="24323" title="Debravation" label="Debravation"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="24535" end="24539" title="Thailand" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q34816" start="24695" end="24710" title="Kathryn Bigelow" label="Kathryn Bigelow"/>
<link wikidata="Q108543" start="24867" end="24874" title="Alien 3" label="Alien 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q853" start="24920" end="24931" title="Andrei Tarkovsky" label="Tarkovskian"/>
<link wikidata="Q373933" start="25005" end="25022" title="Dark Horse Comics" label="Dark Horse Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q366651" start="25155" end="25162" title="Audible (store)" label="Audible"/>
<link wikidata="Q127433117" start="25175" end="25194" title="Alien 3 (podcast)" label="audio drama version"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280844" start="25231" end="25241" title="Dirk Maggs" label="Dirk Maggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q241510" start="25251" end="25264" title="Michael Biehn" label="Michael Biehn"/>
<link wikidata="Q312077" start="25269" end="25284" title="Lance Henriksen" label="Lance Henriksen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3416194" start="25497" end="25512" title="Rashid Nugmanov" label="Rashid Nugmanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q487125" start="25630" end="25641" title="Viktor Tsoi" label="Viktor Tsoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="25838" end="25847" title="Leningrad" label="Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q950414" start="25863" end="25874" title="Jack Womack" label="Jack Womack"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532536" start="26077" end="26112" title="Let&amp;#x27;s Put the Future Behind Us" label="Let&amp;#x27;s Put the Future Behind Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295976" start="26183" end="26202" title="Pattern Recognition (novel)" label="Pattern Recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343099" start="26284" end="26294" title="Sogo Ishii" label="Sogo Ishii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022918" start="26343" end="26365" title="Walled City of Kowloon" label="Walled City of Kowloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610590" start="26563" end="26577" title="Sprawl trilogy" label="Sprawl trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129069" start="26630" end="26645" title="Johnny Mnemonic (film)" label="Johnny Mnemonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q26372" start="26731" end="26745" title="Takeshi Kitano" label="Takeshi Kitano"/>
<link wikidata="Q976048" start="26757" end="26771" title="New Rose Hotel (film)" label="New Rose Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982" start="26944" end="26950" title="CD-ROM" label="CD-ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q610764" start="26977" end="26992" title="Vincenzo Natali" label="Vincenzo Natali"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081312" start="27073" end="27089" title="development hell" label="development hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384854" start="27097" end="27107" title="Count Zero" label="Count Zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q270097" start="27197" end="27209" title="Michael Mann (film director)" label="Michael Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q663215" start="27269" end="27288" title="Mona Lisa Overdrive" label="Mona Lisa Overdrive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="27334" end="27339" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q373601" start="27360" end="27365" title="Idoru" label="Idoru"/>
<link wikidata="Q55424" start="27495" end="27505" title="Peter Weir" label="Peter Weir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666554" start="27598" end="27635" title="International Film Festival Rotterdam" label="International Film Festival Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q159661" start="27714" end="27719" title="BAFTA" label="BAFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q18720197" start="27754" end="27767" title="Simon Pummell" label="Simon Pummell"/>
<link wikidata="Q455510" start="27791" end="27807" title="Michael Swanwick" label="Michael Swanwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q663053" start="27831" end="27835" title="Omni (magazine)" label="Omni"/>
<link wikidata="Q19666392" start="27898" end="27911" title="Janine Marmot" label="Janine Marmot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094991" start="28010" end="28020" title="Tom Maddox" label="Tom Maddox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744" start="28040" end="28051" title="The X-Files" label="The X-Files"/>
<link wikidata="Q13512234" start="28073" end="28084" title="Kill Switch (The X-Files)" label="Kill Switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401431" start="28101" end="28121" title="First Person Shooter (The X-Files)" label="First Person Shooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468113" start="28323" end="28333" title="Wild Palms" label="Wild Palms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926486" start="28365" end="28377" title="Bruce Wagner" label="Bruce Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q179497" start="28388" end="28400" title="Oliver Stone" label="Oliver Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q322060" start="28675" end="28691" title="Douglas Coupland" label="Douglas Coupland"/>
<link wikidata="Q44491843" start="28716" end="28739" title="Mon Amour Mon Parapluie" label="Mon Amour Mon Parapluie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7044443" start="28901" end="28930" title="No Maps for These Territories" label="No Maps for These Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q834621" start="29211" end="29215" title="Bono" label="Bono"/>
<link wikidata="Q714845" start="29220" end="29228" title="The Edge" label="The Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="29231" end="29237" title="Amazon (company)" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q106742665" start="29253" end="29267" title="The Peripheral (TV series)" label="The Peripheral"/>
<link wikidata="Q17572811" start="29315" end="29324" title="Westworld (TV series)" label="Westworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q213156" start="29508" end="29523" title="performance art" label="performance art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129069" start="29633" end="29648" title="Johnny Mnemonic (film)" label="Johnny Mnemonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250139" start="29664" end="29676" title="Robert Longo" label="Robert Longo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798818" start="29934" end="29951" title="La Fura dels Baus" label="La Fura dels Baus"/>
<link wikidata="Q93139" start="30012" end="30021" title="Karl Sims" label="Karl Sims"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301652" start="30023" end="30036" title="Rebecca Allen (artist)" label="Rebecca Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q662257" start="30038" end="30053" title="Mark Pellington" label="Mark Pellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q175195" start="30068" end="30081" title="Peter Gabriel" label="Peter Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5884949" start="30468" end="30484" title="Holy Body Tattoo" label="Holy Body Tattoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q913672" start="30642" end="30676" title="San Francisco Museum of Modern Art" label="San Francisco Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535489" start="30740" end="30759" title="Skinner&amp;#x27;s Room" label="Skinner&amp;#x27;s Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q771404" start="30812" end="30844" title="San Francisco–Oakland Bay Bridge" label="San Francisco–Oakland Bay Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q630048" start="30927" end="30941" title="Bridge trilogy" label="Bridge trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q663053" start="31759" end="31763" title="Omni (magazine)" label="Omni"/>
<link wikidata="Q4694178" start="31847" end="31875" title="Agrippa (a book of the dead)" label="Agrippa (a book of the dead)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5258158" start="32004" end="32019" title="Dennis Ashbaugh" label="Dennis Ashbaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293" start="32193" end="32204" title="floppy disk" label="floppy disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062404" start="32232" end="32250" title="artist&amp;#x27;s book" label="artist&amp;#x27;s book"/>
<link wikidata="Q2798820" start="32638" end="32644" title="Hacker (computer security)" label="hacked"/>
<link wikidata="Q6863428" start="32796" end="32803" title="MindVox" label="MindVox"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781350" start="33280" end="33331" title="Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities" label="Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q520154" start="33943" end="33948" title="Wired (magazine)" label="Wired"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602337" start="33962" end="33967" title="op-ed" label="op-ed"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="33978" end="33996" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q336197" start="34030" end="34042" title="The Observer" label="The Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681094" start="34056" end="34073" title="Addicted to Noise" label="Addicted to Noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028269" start="34087" end="34110" title="New York Times Magazine" label="New York Times Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="34124" end="34137" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626407" start="34155" end="34171" title="Details Magazine" label="Details Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q573820" start="34234" end="34267" title="Disneyland with the Death Penalty" label="Disneyland with the Death Penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="34304" end="34313" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295976" start="34522" end="34541" title="Pattern Recognition (novel)" label="Pattern Recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319431" start="34748" end="34761" title="Spook Country" label="Spook Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377147" start="34799" end="34811" title="Zero History" label="Zero History"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283578" start="35147" end="35178" title="Distrust That Particular Flavor" label="Distrust That Particular Flavor"/>
<link wikidata="" start="35321" end="35357" title="William Gibson: A Literary Companion" label="William Gibson: A Literary Companion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499265" start="35375" end="35387" title="Steven Poole" label="Steven Poole"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248657" start="35575" end="35586" title="debut novel" label="debut novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q662029" start="35594" end="35605" title="Neuromancer" label="Neuromancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q194285" start="35667" end="35679" title="Nebula Award" label="Nebula Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341487" start="35685" end="35705" title="Philip K. Dick Award" label="Philip K. Dick Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q188914" start="35715" end="35725" title="Hugo Award" label="Hugo Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509944" start="35780" end="35799" title="Mail &amp;amp; Guardian" label="Mail &amp;amp; Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q187300" start="35863" end="35871" title="Prix Goncourt" label="Goncourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q160082" start="35873" end="35879" title="Booker Prize" label="Booker"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="35884" end="35892" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q336197" start="36095" end="36107" title="The Observer" label="The Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="36145" end="36163" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q824362" start="36560" end="36577" title="postindustrialism" label="postindustrialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q28455593" start="36747" end="36763" title="consumer culture" label="consumer culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423189" start="36812" end="36827" title="late capitalism" label="late capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747554" start="36984" end="37009" title="The Literary Encyclopedia" label="The Literary Encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433681" start="37485" end="37508" title="science fiction studies" label="science fiction studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6490764" start="37818" end="37833" title="Larry McCaffery" label="Larry McCaffery"/>
<link wikidata="Q174526" start="37880" end="37889" title="cyberpunk" label="cyberpunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q223685" start="38069" end="38078" title="steampunk" label="steampunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q127094" start="38154" end="38167" title="Dwayne A. Day" label="Dwayne A. Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q4169" start="38200" end="38211" title="outer space" label="space-based"/>
<link wikidata="Q630800" start="38466" end="38473" title="slacker" label="slacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083944" start="38478" end="38484" title="Hacker culture" label="hacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q204606" start="38565" end="38575" title="cyberspace" label="cyberspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="38589" end="38599" title="netsurfing" label="netsurfing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122382" start="38613" end="38616" title="Intrusion Countermeasures Electronics" label="ICE"/>
<link wikidata="Q555840" start="38658" end="38672" title="neural implant" label="neural implant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755162" start="38803" end="38817" title="Burning Chrome" label="Burning Chrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q130741" start="38914" end="38927" title="hallucination" label="hallucination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="38937" end="38953" title="computer network" label="computer network"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="39086" end="39100" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276512" start="39126" end="39136" title="Dike Blair" label="Dike Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q588853" start="39397" end="39408" title="Stuart Hamm" label="Stuart Hamm"/>
<link wikidata="Q73437" start="39410" end="39420" title="Billy Idol" label="Billy Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q375792" start="39422" end="39434" title="Warren Zevon" label="Warren Zevon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366718" start="39436" end="39448" title="Deltron 3030" label="Deltron 3030"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676074" start="39450" end="39464" title="Straylight Run" label="Straylight Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q662029" start="39513" end="39524" title="Neuromancer" label="Neuromancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q188626" start="39536" end="39547" title="Sonic Youth" label="Sonic Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="39549" end="39551" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q220336" start="39565" end="39572" title="Zooropa" label="Zooropa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188709" start="40070" end="40082" title="Vertigo Tour" label="Vertigo Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q520154" start="40093" end="40098" title="Wired (magazine)" label="Wired"/>
<link wikidata="Q191973" start="40130" end="40140" title="Zeromancer" label="Zeromancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q83495" start="40203" end="40213" title="The Matrix" label="The Matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610590" start="40298" end="40312" title="Sprawl trilogy" label="Sprawl trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q247120" start="40332" end="40335" title="Neo (The Matrix)" label="Neo"/>
<link wikidata="Q246835" start="40340" end="40347" title="Trinity (The Matrix)" label="Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384854" start="40410" end="40420" title="Count Zero" label="Count Zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q6896639" start="40432" end="40437" title="Molly Millions" label="Molly"/>
<link wikidata="Q674586" start="40445" end="40460" title="Johnny Mnemonic" label="Johnny Mnemonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q662029" start="40474" end="40485" title="Neuromancer" label="Neuromancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="40782" end="40805" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q201603" start="41192" end="41215" title="Simon Fraser University" label="Simon Fraser University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104405" start="41220" end="41247" title="Coastal Carolina University" label="Coastal Carolina University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384356" start="41268" end="41296" title="Science Fiction Museum and Hall of Fame" label="Science Fiction Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068715" start="41673" end="41695" title="Telecommunications network" label="communications network"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="41727" end="41741" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755162" start="41870" end="41884" title="Burning Chrome" label="Burning Chrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="42355" end="42367" title="nation state" label="nation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q208145" start="42513" end="42524" title="iconography" label="iconography"/>
<link wikidata="Q956129" start="42533" end="42548" title="Information Age" label="Information Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q662029" start="42637" end="42648" title="Neuromancer" label="Neuromancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q798599" start="42680" end="42690" title="meatpuppet" label="meatpuppet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607593" start="42789" end="42800" title="virtual sex" label="virtual sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q205020" start="42837" end="42856" title="desktop environment" label="desktop environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339626" start="42932" end="42965" title="Parsons The New School for Design" label="Parsons The New School for Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499265" start="42967" end="42979" title="Steven Poole" label="Steven Poole"/>
<link wikidata="Q950414" start="43241" end="43252" title="Jack Womack" label="Jack Womack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610590" start="43710" end="43716" title="Sprawl trilogy" label="Sprawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q630048" start="43721" end="43727" title="Bridge trilogy" label="Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769230" start="43992" end="44002" title="Mark Pesce" label="Mark Pesce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295976" start="44264" end="44283" title="Pattern Recognition (novel)" label="Pattern Recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722598" start="44546" end="44558" title="lonelygirl15" label="lonelygirl15"/>
<link wikidata="Q182415" start="44737" end="44755" title="reality television" label="reality television"/>
<link wikidata="Q897105" start="44778" end="44791" title="Virtual Light" label="Virtual Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q797907" start="44856" end="44860" title="Cops (TV series)" label="COPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q210499" start="44913" end="44934" title="Bulletin Board System" label="Bulletin Board System"/>
<link wikidata="Q46335" start="45316" end="45326" title="typewriter" label="typewriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q23434" start="45378" end="45387" title="Ernest Hemingway" label="Hemingway"/>
<link wikidata="Q420782" start="45443" end="45452" title="Apple IIc" label="Apple IIc"/>
<link wikidata="Q621196" start="45457" end="45467" title="AppleWorks" label="AppleWorks"/>
<link wikidata="Q373601" start="45785" end="45790" title="Idoru" label="Idoru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670087" start="45877" end="45889" title="PowerBook G4" label="PowerBook G4"/>
<link wikidata="Q79738" start="45893" end="45896" title="gigabyte" label="gig"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407440" start="45908" end="45923" title="wireless router" label="wireless router"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668038" start="46103" end="46132" title="sociology of the Internet" label="how people behave around them"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610590" start="46260" end="46274" title="Sprawl trilogy" label="Sprawl trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q662029" start="46285" end="46296" title="Neuromancer" label="Neuromancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384854" start="46319" end="46329" title="Count Zero" label="Count Zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q663215" start="46352" end="46371" title="Mona Lisa Overdrive" label="Mona Lisa Overdrive"/>
<link wikidata="Q466103" start="46393" end="46414" title="The Difference Engine" label="The Difference Engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q312995" start="46433" end="46447" title="Bruce Sterling" label="Bruce Sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q630048" start="46451" end="46465" title="Bridge trilogy" label="Bridge trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q897105" start="46476" end="46489" title="Virtual Light" label="Virtual Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q373601" start="46512" end="46517" title="Idoru" label="Idoru"/>
<link wikidata="Q900595" start="46540" end="46567" title="All Tomorrow&amp;#x27;s Parties (novel)" label="All Tomorrow&amp;#x27;s Parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q5927752" start="46601" end="46616" title="Hubertus Bigend" label="Hubertus Bigend"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295976" start="46628" end="46647" title="Pattern Recognition (novel)" label="Pattern Recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319431" start="46670" end="46683" title="Spook Country" label="Spook Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377147" start="46706" end="46718" title="Zero History" label="Zero History"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756730" start="46759" end="46773" title="The Peripheral" label="The Peripheral"/>
<link wikidata="Q30668227" start="46796" end="46802" title="Agency (novel)" label="Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q24952479" start="46874" end="46883" title="Archangel (Gibson comic)" label="Archangel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46911" end="46918" title="Alien 3#Other media" label="Alien 3"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46946" end="46955" title="Alien 3#Other media" label="Alien III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068344" start="47079" end="47093" title="Burning Chrome (short story collection)" label="Burning Chrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4337987" start="47225" end="47253" title="Fragments of a Hologram Rose" label="Fragments of a Hologram Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q674586" start="47299" end="47314" title="Johnny Mnemonic" label="Johnny Mnemonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q663053" start="47334" end="47338" title="Omni (magazine)" label="Omni"/>
<link wikidata="Q438247" start="47355" end="47378" title="The Gernsback Continuum" label="The Gernsback Continuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5767559" start="47426" end="47437" title="Hinterlands (short story)" label="Hinterlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q853427" start="47478" end="47496" title="The Belonging Kind" label="The Belonging Kind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346126" start="47509" end="47521" title="John Shirley" label="John Shirley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755162" start="47561" end="47575" title="Burning Chrome" label="Burning Chrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q13512122" start="47616" end="47638" title="Red Star, Winter Orbit" label="Red Star, Winter Orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q312995" start="47651" end="47665" title="Bruce Sterling" label="Bruce Sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011334" start="47700" end="47714" title="New Rose Hotel" label="New Rose Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775193" start="47755" end="47772" title="The Winter Market" label="The Winter Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040928" start="47823" end="47831" title="Dogfight (short story)" label="Dogfight"/>
<link wikidata="Q455510" start="47844" end="47860" title="Michael Swanwick" label="Michael Swanwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535489" start="47894" end="47913" title="Skinner&amp;#x27;s Room" label="Skinner&amp;#x27;s Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q4694178" start="47970" end="47998" title="Agrippa (A Book of the Dead)" label="Agrippa (A Book of the Dead)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062404" start="48025" end="48043" title="artist&amp;#x27;s book" label="artist&amp;#x27;s book"/>
<link wikidata="Q7044443" start="48052" end="48081" title="No Maps for These Territories" label="No Maps for These Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283578" start="48138" end="48169" title="Distrust That Particular Flavor" label="Distrust That Particular Flavor"/>
<link wikidata="Q573820" start="48248" end="48281" title="Disneyland with the Death Penalty" label="Disneyland with the Death Penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q520154" start="48303" end="48308" title="Wired (magazine)" label="Wired"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468113" start="48500" end="48510" title="Wild Palms" label="Wild Palms"/>
<link wikidata="Q56275161" start="48532" end="48538" title="Upload (TV series)" label="Upload"/>
<link wikidata="Q754656" start="48701" end="48721" title="Athabasca University" label="Athabasca University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33120" wikidata="Q45842" url="?curid=33120" title="Web crawler">
<text>A Web crawler, sometimes called a spider or spiderbot and often shortened to crawler, is an Internet bot that systematically browses the World Wide Web and that is typically operated by search engines for the purpose of Web indexing (&quot;web spidering&quot;).

Web search engines and some other websites use Web crawling or spidering software to update their web content or indices of other sites&#x27; web content. Web crawlers copy pages for processing by a search engine, which indexes the downloaded pages so that users can search more efficiently.

Crawlers consume resources on visited systems and often visit sites unprompted. Issues of schedule, load, and &quot;politeness&quot; come into play when large collections of pages are accessed. Mechanisms exist for public sites not wishing to be crawled to make this known to the crawling agent. For example, including a codice_1 file can request bots to index only parts of a website, or nothing at all.

The number of Internet pages is extremely large; even the largest crawlers fall short of making a complete index. For this reason, search engines struggled to give relevant search results in the early years of the World Wide Web, before 2000. Today, relevant results are given almost instantly.

Crawlers can validate hyperlinks and HTML code. They can also be used for web scraping and data-driven programming.

== Nomenclature ==
A web crawler is also known as a &quot;spider&quot;, an &quot;ant&quot;, an &quot;automatic indexer&quot;, or (in the FOAF software context) a &quot;Web scutter&quot;.

== Overview ==
A Web crawler starts with a list of URLs to visit. Those first URLs are called the &quot;seeds&quot;. As the crawler visits these URLs, by communicating with web servers that respond to those URLs, it identifies all the hyperlinks in the retrieved web pages and adds them to the list of URLs to visit, called the &quot;crawl frontier&quot;. URLs from the frontier are recursively visited according to a set of policies. If the crawler is performing archiving of websites (or web archiving), it copies and saves the information as it goes. The archives are usually stored in such a way they can be viewed, read and navigated as if they were on the live web, but are preserved as &#x27;snapshots&#x27;.

The archive is known as the &quot;repository&quot; and is designed to store and manage the collection of web pages. The repository only stores HTML pages and these pages are stored as distinct files. A repository is similar to any other system that stores data, like a modern-day database. The only difference is that a repository does not need all the functionality offered by a database system. The repository stores the most recent version of the web page retrieved by the crawler.

The large volume implies the crawler can only download a limited number of the Web pages within a given time, so it needs to prioritize its downloads. The high rate of change can imply the pages might have already been updated or even deleted.

The number of possible URLs crawled being generated by server-side software has also made it difficult for web crawlers to avoid retrieving duplicate content. Endless combinations of HTTP GET (URL-based) parameters exist, of which only a small selection will actually return unique content. For example, a simple online photo gallery may offer three options to users, as specified through HTTP GET parameters in the URL. If there exist four ways to sort images, three choices of thumbnail size, two file formats, and an option to disable user-provided content, then the same set of content can be accessed with 48 different URLs, all of which may be linked on the site. This mathematical combination creates a problem for crawlers, as they must sort through endless combinations of relatively minor scripted changes in order to retrieve unique content.

As Edwards &quot;et al.&quot; noted, &quot;Given that the bandwidth for conducting crawls is neither infinite nor free, it is becoming essential to crawl the Web in not only a scalable, but efficient way, if some reasonable measure of quality or freshness is to be maintained.&quot; A crawler must carefully choose at each step which pages to visit next.

==Crawling policy==
The behavior of a Web crawler is the outcome of a combination of policies:
* a &quot;selection policy&quot; which states the pages to download,
* a &quot;re-visit policy&quot; which states when to check for changes to the pages,
* a &quot;politeness policy&quot; that states how to avoid overloading websites.
* a &quot;parallelization policy&quot; that states how to coordinate distributed web crawlers.

===Selection policy===
Given the current size of the Web, even large search engines cover only a portion of the publicly available part. A 2009 study showed even large-scale search engines index no more than 40–70% of the indexable Web; a previous study by Steve Lawrence and Lee Giles showed that no search engine indexed more than 16% of the Web in 1999. As a crawler always downloads just a fraction of the Web pages, it is highly desirable for the downloaded fraction to contain the most relevant pages and not just a random sample of the Web.

This requires a metric of importance for prioritizing Web pages. The importance of a page is a function of its intrinsic quality, its popularity in terms of links or visits, and even of its URL (the latter is the case of vertical search engines restricted to a single top-level domain, or search engines restricted to a fixed Web site). Designing a good selection policy has an added difficulty: it must work with partial information, as the complete set of Web pages is not known during crawling.

Junghoo Cho &quot;et al.&quot; made the first study on policies for crawling scheduling. Their data set was a 180,000-pages crawl from the stanford.edu domain, in which a crawling simulation was done with different strategies. The ordering metrics tested were breadth-first, backlink count and partial PageRank calculations. One of the conclusions was that if the crawler wants to download pages with high Pagerank early during the crawling process, then the partial Pagerank strategy is the better, followed by breadth-first and backlink-count. However, these results are for just a single domain. Cho also wrote his PhD dissertation at Stanford on web crawling.

Najork and Wiener performed an actual crawl on 328 million pages, using breadth-first ordering. They found that a breadth-first crawl captures pages with high Pagerank early in the crawl (but they did not compare this strategy against other strategies). The explanation given by the authors for this result is that &quot;the most important pages have many links to them from numerous hosts, and those links will be found early, regardless of on which host or page the crawl originates.&quot;

Abiteboul designed a crawling strategy based on an algorithm called OPIC (On-line Page Importance Computation). In OPIC, each page is given an initial sum of &quot;cash&quot; that is distributed equally among the pages it points to. It is similar to a PageRank computation, but it is faster and is only done in one step. An OPIC-driven crawler downloads first the pages in the crawling frontier with higher amounts of &quot;cash&quot;. Experiments were carried in a 100,000-pages synthetic graph with a power-law distribution of in-links. However, there was no comparison with other strategies nor experiments in the real Web.

Boldi &quot;et al.&quot; used simulation on subsets of the Web of 40 million pages from the .it domain and 100 million pages from the WebBase crawl, testing breadth-first against depth-first, random ordering and an omniscient strategy. The comparison was based on how well PageRank computed on a partial crawl approximates the true PageRank value. Some visits that accumulate PageRank very quickly (most notably, breadth-first and the omniscient visit) provide very poor progressive approximations.

Baeza-Yates &quot;et al.&quot; used simulation on two subsets of the Web of 3 million pages from the .gr and .cl domain, testing several crawling strategies. They showed that both the OPIC strategy and a strategy that uses the length of the per-site queues are better than breadth-first crawling, and that it is also very effective to use a previous crawl, when it is available, to guide the current one.

Daneshpajouh &quot;et al.&quot; designed a community based algorithm for discovering good seeds. Their method crawls web pages with high PageRank from different communities in less iteration in comparison with crawl starting from random seeds. One can extract good seed from a previously-crawled-Web graph using this new method. Using these seeds, a new crawl can be very effective.

====Restricting followed links====
A crawler may only want to seek out HTML pages and avoid all other MIME types. In order to request only HTML resources, a crawler may make an HTTP HEAD request to determine a Web resource&#x27;s MIME type before requesting the entire resource with a GET request. To avoid making numerous HEAD requests, a crawler may examine the URL and only request a resource if the URL ends with certain characters such as .html, .htm, .asp, .aspx, .php, .jsp, .jspx or a slash. This strategy may cause numerous HTML Web resources to be unintentionally skipped.

Some crawlers may also avoid requesting any resources that have a &quot;?&quot; in them (are dynamically produced) in order to avoid spider traps that may cause the crawler to download an infinite number of URLs from a Web site. This strategy is unreliable if the site uses URL rewriting to simplify its URLs.

====URL normalization====
Crawlers usually perform some type of URL normalization in order to avoid crawling the same resource more than once. The term &quot;URL normalization&quot;, also called &quot;URL canonicalization&quot;, refers to the process of modifying and standardizing a URL in a consistent manner. There are several types of normalization that may be performed including conversion of URLs to lowercase, removal of &quot;.&quot; and &quot;..&quot; segments, and adding trailing slashes to the non-empty path component.

====Path-ascending crawling====
Some crawlers intend to download/upload as many resources as possible from a particular web site. So &quot;path-ascending crawler&quot; was introduced that would ascend to every path in each URL that it intends to crawl. For example, when given a seed URL of http://llama.org/hamster/monkey/page.html, it will attempt to crawl /hamster/monkey/, /hamster/, and /. Cothey found that a path-ascending crawler was very effective in finding isolated resources, or resources for which no inbound link would have been found in regular crawling.

====Focused crawling====
The importance of a page for a crawler can also be expressed as a function of the similarity of a page to a given query. Web crawlers that attempt to download pages that are similar to each other are called focused crawler or topical crawlers. The concepts of topical and focused crawling were first introduced by Filippo Menczer and by Soumen Chakrabarti &quot;et al.&quot;

The main problem in focused crawling is that in the context of a Web crawler, we would like to be able to predict the similarity of the text of a given page to the query before actually downloading the page. A possible predictor is the anchor text of links; this was the approach taken by Pinkerton in the first web crawler of the early days of the Web. Diligenti &quot;et al.&quot; propose using the complete content of the pages already visited to infer the similarity between the driving query and the pages that have not been visited yet. The performance of a focused crawling depends mostly on the richness of links in the specific topic being searched, and a focused crawling usually relies on a general Web search engine for providing starting points.

=====Academic focused crawler=====
An example of the focused crawlers are academic crawlers, which crawls free-access academic related documents, such as the &quot;citeseerxbot&quot;, which is the crawler of CiteSeerX search engine. Other academic search engines are Google Scholar and Microsoft Academic Search etc. Because most academic papers are published in PDF formats, such kind of crawler is particularly interested in crawling PDF, PostScript files, Microsoft Word including their zipped formats. Because of this, general open-source crawlers, such as Heritrix, must be customized to filter out other MIME types, or a middleware is used to extract these documents out and import them to the focused crawl database and repository. Identifying whether these documents are academic or not is challenging and can add a significant overhead to the crawling process, so this is performed as a post crawling process using machine learning or regular expression algorithms. These academic documents are usually obtained from home pages of faculties and students or from publication page of research institutes. Because academic documents make up only a small fraction of all web pages, a good seed selection is important in boosting the efficiencies of these web crawlers. Other academic crawlers may download plain text and HTML files, that contains metadata of academic papers, such as titles, papers, and abstracts. This increases the overall number of papers, but a significant fraction may not provide free PDF downloads.

=====Semantic focused crawler=====
Another type of focused crawlers is semantic focused crawler, which makes use of domain ontologies to represent topical maps and link Web pages with relevant ontological concepts for the selection and categorization purposes. In addition, ontologies can be automatically updated in the crawling process. Dong et al. introduced such an ontology-learning-based crawler using a support-vector machine to update the content of ontological concepts when crawling Web pages.

===Re-visit policy===
The Web has a very dynamic nature, and crawling a fraction of the Web can take weeks or months. By the time a Web crawler has finished its crawl, many events could have happened, including creations, updates, and deletions.

From the search engine&#x27;s point of view, there is a cost associated with not detecting an event, and thus having an outdated copy of a resource. The most-used cost functions are freshness and age.

Freshness: This is a binary measure that indicates whether the local copy is accurate or not. The freshness of a page &quot;p&quot; in the repository at time &quot;t&quot; is defined as:

: formula_1

Age: This is a measure that indicates how outdated the local copy is. The age of a page &quot;p&quot; in the repository, at time &quot;t&quot; is defined as:

: formula_2

Coffman &quot;et al.&quot; worked with a definition of the objective of a Web crawler that is equivalent to freshness, but use a different wording: they propose that a crawler must minimize the fraction of time pages remain outdated. They also noted that the problem of Web crawling can be modeled as a multiple-queue, single-server polling system, on which the Web crawler is the server and the Web sites are the queues. Page modifications are the arrival of the customers, and switch-over times are the interval between page accesses to a single Web site. Under this model, mean waiting time for a customer in the polling system is equivalent to the average age for the Web crawler.

The objective of the crawler is to keep the average freshness of pages in its collection as high as possible, or to keep the average age of pages as low as possible. These objectives are not equivalent: in the first case, the crawler is just concerned with how many pages are outdated, while in the second case, the crawler is concerned with how old the local copies of pages are.
Two simple re-visiting policies were studied by Cho and Garcia-Molina:
* Uniform policy: This involves re-visiting all pages in the collection with the same frequency, regardless of their rates of change.
* Proportional policy: This involves re-visiting more often the pages that change more frequently. The visiting frequency is directly proportional to the (estimated) change frequency.

In both cases, the repeated crawling order of pages can be done either in a random or a fixed order.

Cho and Garcia-Molina proved the surprising result that, in terms of average freshness, the uniform policy outperforms the proportional policy in both a simulated Web and a real Web crawl. Intuitively, the reasoning is that, as web crawlers have a limit to how many pages they can crawl in a given time frame, (1) they will allocate too many new crawls to rapidly changing pages at the expense of less frequently updating pages, and (2) the freshness of rapidly changing pages lasts for shorter period than that of less frequently changing pages. In other words, a proportional policy allocates more resources to crawling frequently updating pages, but experiences less overall freshness time from them.

To improve freshness, the crawler should penalize the elements that change too often. The optimal re-visiting policy is neither the uniform policy nor the proportional policy. The optimal method for keeping average freshness high includes ignoring the pages that change too often, and the optimal for keeping average age low is to use access frequencies that monotonically (and sub-linearly) increase with the rate of change of each page. In both cases, the optimal is closer to the uniform policy than to the proportional policy: as Coffman &quot;et al.&quot; note, &quot;in order to minimize the expected obsolescence time, the accesses to any particular page should be kept as evenly spaced as possible&quot;. Explicit formulas for the re-visit policy are not attainable in general, but they are obtained numerically, as they depend on the distribution of page changes. Cho and Garcia-Molina show that the exponential distribution is a good fit for describing page changes, while Ipeirotis &quot;et al.&quot; show how to use statistical tools to discover parameters that affect this distribution. The re-visiting policies considered here regard all pages as homogeneous in terms of quality (&quot;all pages on the Web are worth the same&quot;), something that is not a realistic scenario, so further information about the Web page quality should be included to achieve a better crawling policy.

===Politeness policy===
Crawlers can retrieve data much quicker and in greater depth than human searchers, so they can have a crippling impact on the performance of a site. If a single crawler is performing multiple requests per second and/or downloading large files, a server can have a hard time keeping up with requests from multiple crawlers.

As noted by Koster, the use of Web crawlers is useful for a number of tasks, but comes with a price for the general community. The costs of using Web crawlers include:
* network resources, as crawlers require considerable bandwidth and operate with a high degree of parallelism during a long period of time;
* server overload, especially if the frequency of accesses to a given server is too high;
* poorly written crawlers, which can crash servers or routers, or which download pages they cannot handle; and
* personal crawlers that, if deployed by too many users, can disrupt networks and Web servers.

A partial solution to these problems is the robots exclusion protocol, also known as the robots.txt protocol that is a standard for administrators to indicate which parts of their Web servers should not be accessed by crawlers. This standard does not include a suggestion for the interval of visits to the same server, even though this interval is the most effective way of avoiding server overload. Recently commercial search engines like Google, Ask Jeeves, MSN and Yahoo! Search are able to use an extra &quot;Crawl-delay:&quot; parameter in the robots.txt file to indicate the number of seconds to delay between requests.

The first proposed interval between successive pageloads was 60 seconds. However, if pages were downloaded at this rate from a website with more than 100,000 pages over a perfect connection with zero latency and infinite bandwidth, it would take more than 2 months to download only that entire Web site; also, only a fraction of the resources from that Web server would be used.

Cho uses 10 seconds as an interval for accesses, and the WIRE crawler uses 15 seconds as the default. The MercatorWeb crawler follows an adaptive politeness policy: if it took &quot;t&quot; seconds to download a document from a given server, the crawler waits for 10&quot;t&quot; seconds before downloading the next page. Dill &quot;et al.&quot; use 1 second.

For those using Web crawlers for research purposes, a more detailed cost-benefit analysis is needed and ethical considerations should be taken into account when deciding where to crawl and how fast to crawl.

Anecdotal evidence from access logs shows that access intervals from known crawlers vary between 20 seconds and 3–4 minutes. It is worth noticing that even when being very polite, and taking all the safeguards to avoid overloading Web servers, some complaints from Web server administrators are received. Sergey Brin and Larry Page noted in 1998, &quot;... running a crawler which connects to more than half a million servers ... generates a fair amount of e-mail and phone calls. Because of the vast number of people coming on line, there are always those who do not know what a crawler is, because this is the first one they have seen.&quot;

===Parallelization policy===
A parallel crawler is a crawler that runs multiple processes in parallel. The goal is to maximize the download rate while minimizing the overhead from parallelization and to avoid repeated downloads of the same page. To avoid downloading the same page more than once, the crawling system requires a policy for assigning the new URLs discovered during the crawling process, as the same URL can be found by two different crawling processes.

==Architectures==

A crawler must not only have a good crawling strategy, as noted in the previous sections, but it should also have a highly optimized architecture.

Shkapenyuk and Suel noted that:

Web crawlers are a central part of search engines, and details on their algorithms and architecture are kept as business secrets. When crawler designs are published, there is often an important lack of detail that prevents others from reproducing the work. There are also emerging concerns about &quot;search engine spamming&quot;, which prevent major search engines from publishing their ranking algorithms.

==Security==
While most of the website owners are keen to have their pages indexed as broadly as possible to have strong presence in search engines, web crawling can also have unintended consequences and lead to a compromise or data breach if a search engine indexes resources that should not be publicly available, or pages revealing potentially vulnerable versions of software.

Apart from standard web application security recommendations website owners can reduce their exposure to opportunistic hacking by only allowing search engines to index the public parts of their websites (with robots.txt) and explicitly blocking them from indexing transactional parts (login pages, private pages, etc.).

==Crawler identification==
Web crawlers typically identify themselves to a Web server by using the User-agent field of an HTTP request. Web site administrators typically examine their Web servers&#x27; log and use the user agent field to determine which crawlers have visited the web server and how often. The user agent field may include a URL where the Web site administrator may find out more information about the crawler. Examining Web server log is tedious task, and therefore some administrators use tools to identify, track and verify Web crawlers. Spambots and other malicious Web crawlers are unlikely to place identifying information in the user agent field, or they may mask their identity as a browser or other well-known crawler.

Web site administrators prefer Web crawlers to identify themselves so that they can contact the owner if needed. In some cases, crawlers may be accidentally trapped in a crawler trap or they may be overloading a Web server with requests, and the owner needs to stop the crawler. Identification is also useful for administrators that are interested in knowing when they may expect their Web pages to be indexed by a particular search engine.

==Crawling the deep web==
A vast amount of web pages lie in the deep or invisible web. These pages are typically only accessible by submitting queries to a database, and regular crawlers are unable to find these pages if there are no links that point to them. Google&#x27;s Sitemaps protocol and mod oai are intended to allow discovery of these deep-Web resources.

Deep web crawling also multiplies the number of web links to be crawled. Some crawlers only take some of the URLs in codice_2 form. In some cases, such as the Googlebot, Web crawling is done on all text contained inside the hypertext content, tags, or text.

Strategic approaches may be taken to target deep Web content. With a technique called screen scraping, specialized software may be customized to automatically and repeatedly query a given Web form with the intention of aggregating the resulting data. Such software can be used to span multiple Web forms across multiple Websites. Data extracted from the results of one Web form submission can be taken and applied as input to another Web form thus establishing continuity across the Deep Web in a way not possible with traditional web crawlers.

Pages built on AJAX are among those causing problems to web crawlers. Google has proposed a format of AJAX calls that their bot can recognize and index.

== Visual vs programmatic crawlers ==
There are a number of &quot;visual web scraper/crawler&quot; products available on the web which will crawl pages and structure data into columns and rows based on the users requirements. One of the main difference between a classic and a visual crawler is the level of programming ability required to set up a crawler. The latest generation of &quot;visual scrapers&quot; remove the majority of the programming skill needed to be able to program and start a crawl to scrape web data.

The visual scraping/crawling method relies on the user &quot;teaching&quot; a piece of crawler technology, which then follows patterns in semi-structured data sources. The dominant method for teaching a visual crawler is by highlighting data in a browser and training columns and rows. While the technology is not new, for example it was the basis of Needlebase which has been bought by Google (as part of a larger acquisition of ITA Labs), there is continued growth and investment in this area by investors and end-users.

== List of web crawlers ==
The following is a list of published crawler architectures for general-purpose crawlers (excluding focused web crawlers), with a brief description that includes the names given to the different components and outstanding features:

=== Historical web crawlers ===

*WolfBot was a massively multi threaded crawler built in 2001 by Mani Singh a Civil Engineering graduate from the University of California at Davis. 
* World Wide Web Worm was a crawler used to build a simple index of document titles and URLs. The index could be searched by using the grep Unix command.
* Yahoo! Slurp was the name of the Yahoo! Search crawler until Yahoo! contracted with Microsoft to use Bingbot instead.

=== In-house web crawlers ===
* Applebot is Apple&#x27;s web crawler. It supports Siri and other products.
* Bingbot is the name of Microsoft&#x27;s Bing webcrawler. It replaced &quot;Msnbot&quot;.
* Baiduspider is Baidu&#x27;s web crawler.
* DuckDuckBot is DuckDuckGo&#x27;s web crawler.
* Googlebot is described in some detail, but the reference is only about an early version of its architecture, which was written in C++ and Python. The crawler was integrated with the indexing process, because text parsing was done for full-text indexing and also for URL extraction. There is a URL server that sends lists of URLs to be fetched by several crawling processes. During parsing, the URLs found were passed to a URL server that checked if the URL have been previously seen. If not, the URL was added to the queue of the URL server.
* WebCrawler was used to build the first publicly available full-text index of a subset of the Web. It was based on lib-WWW to download pages, and another program to parse and order URLs for breadth-first exploration of the Web graph. It also included a real-time crawler that followed links based on the similarity of the anchor text with the provided query.
* WebFountain is a distributed, modular crawler similar to Mercator but written in C++.
* Xenon is a web crawler used by government tax authorities to detect fraud.

=== Commercial web crawlers ===
The following web crawlers are available, for a price::
* Diffbot - programmatic general web crawler, available as an API
* SortSite - crawler for analyzing websites, available for Windows and Mac OS
* Swiftbot - Swiftype&#x27;s web crawler, available as software as a service
* Aleph Search - web crawler allowing massive collection with high scalability

=== Open-source crawlers ===
* Apache Nutch is a highly extensible and scalable web crawler written in Java and released under an Apache License. It is based on Apache Hadoop and can be used with Apache Solr or Elasticsearch.
* Grub was an open source distributed search crawler that Wikia Search used to crawl the web.
* Heritrix is the Internet Archive&#x27;s archival-quality crawler, designed for archiving periodic snapshots of a large portion of the Web. It was written in Java.
* ht://Dig includes a Web crawler in its indexing engine.
* HTTrack uses a Web crawler to create a mirror of a web site for off-line viewing. It is written in C and released under the GPL.
* Norconex Web Crawler is a highly extensible Web Crawler written in Java and released under an Apache License. It can be used with many repositories such as Apache Solr, Elasticsearch, Microsoft Azure Cognitive Search, Amazon CloudSearch and more.
* mnoGoSearch is a crawler, indexer and a search engine written in C and licensed under the GPL (*NIX machines only)
* Open Search Server is a search engine and web crawler software release under the GPL.
* Scrapy, an open source webcrawler framework, written in python (licensed under BSD).
* Seeks, a free distributed search engine (licensed under AGPL).
* StormCrawler, a collection of resources for building low-latency, scalable web crawlers on Apache Storm (Apache License).
* tkWWW Robot, a crawler based on the tkWWW web browser (licensed under GPL).
* GNU Wget is a command-line-operated crawler written in C and released under the GPL. It is typically used to mirror Web and FTP sites.
* Xapian, a search crawler engine, written in c++.
* YaCy, a free distributed search engine, built on principles of peer-to-peer networks (licensed under GPL).

==See also==
* Automatic indexing
* Gnutella crawler
* Web archiving
* Webgraph
* Website mirroring software
* Search Engine Scraping
* Web scraping

==References==
==Further reading==
* Cho, Junghoo, &quot;Web Crawling Project&quot;, UCLA Computer Science Department.
* A History of Search Engines, from Wiley
* WIVET is a benchmarking project by OWASP, which aims to measure if a web crawler can identify all the hyperlinks in a target website.
* Shestakov, Denis, &quot;Current Challenges in Web Crawling&quot; and &quot;Intelligent Web Crawling&quot;, slides for tutorials given at ICWE&#x27;13 and WI-IAT&#x27;13.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q45842" start="2" end="13" title="Web crawler" label="Web crawler"/>
<link wikidata="Q45842" start="34" end="40" title="Web crawler" label="spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q45842" start="44" end="53" title="Web crawler" label="spiderbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q45842" start="77" end="84" title="Web crawler" label="crawler"/>
<link wikidata="Q191865" start="92" end="104" title="Internet bot" label="Internet bot"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="137" end="151" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q1958286" start="220" end="232" title="Web indexing" label="Web indexing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4182287" start="267" end="280" title="search engine" label="search engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q35127" start="297" end="304" title="website" label="website"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="336" end="344" title="software" label="software"/>
<link wikidata="Q3948731" start="361" end="372" title="web content" label="web content"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258979" start="483" end="490" title="Index (search engine)" label="indexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297769" start="903" end="907" title="Software agent" label="bots"/>
<link wikidata="Q102014" start="1280" end="1289" title="hyperlink" label="hyperlink"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="1295" end="1299" title="HTML" label="HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q665452" start="1332" end="1344" title="web scraping" label="web scraping"/>
<link wikidata="Q287472" start="1349" end="1372" title="data-driven programming" label="data-driven programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389366" start="1512" end="1516" title="FOAF (software)" label="FOAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q42253" start="1614" end="1618" title="Uniform Resource Locator" label="URLs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11288" start="1736" end="1746" title="web server" label="web server"/>
<link wikidata="Q102014" start="1798" end="1807" title="hyperlink" label="hyperlink"/>
<link wikidata="Q30592735" start="1897" end="1911" title="crawl frontier" label="crawl frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q179976" start="1946" end="1957" title="Recursion" label="recursively"/>
<link wikidata="Q35127" start="2040" end="2047" title="website" label="website"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062069" start="2053" end="2066" title="web archiving" label="web archiving"/>
<link wikidata="Q36774" start="2385" end="2393" title="web page" label="web page"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133368" start="2400" end="2410" title="Repository (version control)" label="repository"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="2423" end="2427" title="HTML" label="HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129516" start="3151" end="3168" title="duplicate content" label="duplicate content"/>
<link wikidata="Q8777" start="3194" end="3198" title="HTTP" label="HTTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q873806" start="3490" end="3499" title="thumbnail" label="thumbnail"/>
<link wikidata="Q202805" start="3686" end="3710" title="mathematical combination" label="mathematical combination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576430" start="3923" end="3932" title="Bandwidth (computing)" label="bandwidth"/>
<link wikidata="Q35127" start="4541" end="4549" title="websites" label="websites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750631" start="4821" end="4835" title="search engines" label="search engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613118" start="4904" end="4918" title="Steve Lawrence (computer scientist)" label="Steve Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995097" start="4923" end="4932" title="Lee Giles" label="Lee Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258979" start="4948" end="4969" title="Search engine indexing" label="search engine indexed"/>
<link wikidata="Q36774" start="5057" end="5066" title="Web pages" label="Web pages"/>
<link wikidata="Q6058693" start="5307" end="5316" title="Intrinsic and extrinsic properties (philosophy)" label="intrinsic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607417" start="5417" end="5440" title="vertical search" label="vertical search engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q14296" start="5464" end="5480" title="top-level domain" label="top-level domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q325904" start="5955" end="5968" title="Breadth-first search" label="breadth-first"/>
<link wikidata="Q373952" start="5970" end="5978" title="backlink" label="backlink"/>
<link wikidata="Q184316" start="5997" end="6005" title="PageRank" label="PageRank"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="6904" end="6913" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q325904" start="8254" end="8267" title="Breadth-first search" label="breadth-first"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667978" start="8873" end="8883" title="Internet media type" label="MIME types"/>
<link wikidata="Q517410" start="9421" end="9434" title="Query string" label="&amp;quot;?&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309767" start="9488" end="9499" title="spider trap" label="spider trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188382" start="9629" end="9642" title="URL rewriting" label="URL rewriting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4327404" start="9730" end="9747" title="URL normalization" label="URL normalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q16221586" start="11110" end="11125" title="Filippo Menczer" label="Filippo Menczer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463958" start="11985" end="12001" title="focused crawlers" label="focused crawlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715061" start="12140" end="12148" title="CiteSeer" label="CiteSeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q494817" start="12199" end="12213" title="Google Scholar" label="Google Scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065154" start="12218" end="12243" title="Microsoft Academic Search" label="Microsoft Academic Search"/>
<link wikidata="Q42332" start="12295" end="12298" title="PDF" label="PDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q218170" start="12373" end="12383" title="PostScript" label="PostScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q11261" start="12391" end="12405" title="Microsoft Word" label="Microsoft Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q136218" start="12422" end="12428" title="Zipped file" label="zipped"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097891" start="12493" end="12501" title="Heritrix" label="Heritrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667978" start="12542" end="12552" title="MIME types" label="MIME types"/>
<link wikidata="Q146768" start="12559" end="12569" title="middleware" label="middleware"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539" start="12856" end="12872" title="machine learning" label="machine learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q185612" start="12876" end="12894" title="regular expression" label="regular expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="13258" end="13262" title="HTML" label="HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q180160" start="13284" end="13292" title="metadata" label="metadata"/>
<link wikidata="Q324254" start="13577" end="13594" title="domain ontology" label="domain ontologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q282453" start="13871" end="13893" title="support-vector machine" label="support-vector machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100264" start="14788" end="14795" title="Edward G. Coffman, Jr." label="Coffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100264" start="17586" end="17593" title="Edward G. Coffman, Jr." label="Coffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7131543" start="18035" end="18044" title="Panos Ipeirotis" label="Ipeirotis"/>
<link wikidata="Q80776" start="19448" end="19473" title="Robots Exclusion Standard" label="robots exclusion protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q9366" start="19844" end="19850" title="Google.com" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q847564" start="19852" end="19862" title="Ask.com" label="Ask Jeeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q182496" start="19864" end="19867" title="Bing (search engine)" label="MSN"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308171" start="19872" end="19885" title="Yahoo! Search" label="Yahoo! Search"/>
<link wikidata="Q80776" start="19953" end="19963" title="robots.txt" label="robots.txt"/>
<link wikidata="Q92764" start="21286" end="21297" title="Sergey Brin" label="Sergey Brin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934" start="21302" end="21312" title="Larry Page" label="Larry Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q232661" start="21657" end="21665" title="Parallel computing" label="parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q804206" start="22597" end="22619" title="Spamdexing" label="search engine spamming"/>
<link wikidata="Q4182287" start="22838" end="22852" title="Web search engine" label="search engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135789" start="22881" end="22904" title="unintended consequences" label="unintended consequences"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781497" start="22919" end="22929" title="Web application security" label="compromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172486" start="22933" end="22944" title="data breach" label="data breach"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781497" start="23106" end="23130" title="web application security" label="web application security"/>
<link wikidata="Q80776" start="23295" end="23305" title="Robots exclusion standard" label="robots.txt"/>
<link wikidata="Q763744" start="23506" end="23516" title="user agent" label="User-agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q8777" start="23529" end="23533" title="HTTP" label="HTTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q11288" start="23591" end="23601" title="Web server" label="Web server"/>
<link wikidata="Q42253" start="23748" end="23751" title="Uniform Resource Locator" label="URL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306702" start="23964" end="23972" title="Spambots" label="Spambots"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309767" start="24322" end="24334" title="spider trap" label="crawler trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q4182287" start="24578" end="24591" title="Web search engine" label="search engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q221989" start="24658" end="24679" title="Deep Web (search indexing)" label="deep or invisible web"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343954" start="24868" end="24876" title="Sitemaps" label="Sitemaps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6887979" start="24890" end="24897" title="mod oai" label="mod oai"/>
<link wikidata="Q221989" start="24939" end="24947" title="Deep web" label="deep-Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425771" start="25119" end="25128" title="Googlebot" label="Googlebot"/>
<link wikidata="Q521850" start="25305" end="25320" title="screen scraping" label="screen scraping"/>
<link wikidata="Q134471" start="25780" end="25784" title="AJAX" label="AJAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q9366" start="25835" end="25841" title="Google search engine" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035282" start="27411" end="27430" title="World Wide Web Worm" label="World Wide Web Worm"/>
<link wikidata="Q283302" start="27544" end="27548" title="grep" label="grep"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="27549" end="27553" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q37093" start="27598" end="27604" title="Yahoo!" label="Yahoo!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="27649" end="27658" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914173" start="27666" end="27673" title="Bingbot" label="Bingbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="27728" end="27733" title="Apple (company)" label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q582159" start="27766" end="27770" title="Siri" label="Siri"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914173" start="27793" end="27800" title="Bingbot" label="Bingbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q182496" start="27833" end="27837" title="Bing (search engine)" label="Bing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16979709" start="27868" end="27874" title="Msnbot" label="Msnbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q14772" start="27899" end="27904" title="Baidu" label="Baidu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12805" start="27942" end="27952" title="DuckDuckGo" label="DuckDuckGo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425771" start="27975" end="27984" title="Googlebot" label="Googlebot"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="28113" end="28119" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553325" start="28519" end="28529" title="WebCrawler" label="WebCrawler"/>
<link wikidata="Q917445" start="28633" end="28640" title="Libwww" label="lib-WWW"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969122" start="28879" end="28890" title="WebFountain" label="WebFountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8043629" start="28967" end="28972" title="Xenon (program)" label="Xenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17052069" start="29133" end="29140" title="Diffbot" label="Diffbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q165194" start="29193" end="29196" title="API" label="API"/>
<link wikidata="Q7563756" start="29199" end="29207" title="SortSite" label="SortSite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="29256" end="29263" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q43627" start="29268" end="29274" title="Macintosh operating systems" label="Mac OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q18386897" start="29288" end="29296" title="Swiftype" label="Swiftype"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254596" start="29330" end="29351" title="software as a service" label="software as a service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372248" start="29463" end="29475" title="Apache Nutch" label="Apache Nutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q616526" start="29562" end="29576" title="Apache License" label="Apache License"/>
<link wikidata="Q29120" start="29593" end="29606" title="Apache Hadoop" label="Apache Hadoop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858103" start="29628" end="29639" title="Apache Solr" label="Apache Solr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050461" start="29643" end="29656" title="Elasticsearch" label="Elasticsearch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118154" start="29660" end="29664" title="Grub (search engine)" label="Grub"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075624" start="29716" end="29728" title="Wikia Search" label="Wikia Search"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097891" start="29754" end="29762" title="Heritrix" label="Heritrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="29770" end="29786" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="29911" end="29915" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141771" start="29919" end="29927" title="Ht-//dig" label="ht://Dig"/>
<link wikidata="Q383267" start="29977" end="29984" title="HTTrack" label="HTTrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="30076" end="30077" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="30175" end="30179" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q616526" start="30202" end="30216" title="Apache License" label="Apache License"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858103" start="30264" end="30275" title="Apache Solr" label="Apache Solr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050461" start="30277" end="30290" title="Elasticsearch" label="Elasticsearch"/>
<link wikidata="Q25000548" start="30292" end="30324" title="Azure Cognitive Search" label="Microsoft Azure Cognitive Search"/>
<link wikidata="Q456157" start="30326" end="30344" title="Amazon CloudSearch" label="Amazon CloudSearch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317521" start="30357" end="30368" title="mnoGoSearch" label="mnoGoSearch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354044" start="30474" end="30492" title="Open Search Server" label="Open Search Server"/>
<link wikidata="Q368367" start="30562" end="30568" title="Scrapy" label="Scrapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q191307" start="30641" end="30644" title="BSD License" label="BSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477678" start="30649" end="30654" title="Seeks" label="Seeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131681" start="30705" end="30709" title="GNU Affero General Public License" label="AGPL"/>
<link wikidata="Q24901845" start="30714" end="30726" title="StormCrawler" label="StormCrawler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620099" start="30805" end="30817" title="Storm (event processor)" label="Apache Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4540119" start="30838" end="30849" title="tkWWW Robot" label="tkWWW Robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4540119" start="30874" end="30879" title="tkWWW" label="tkWWW"/>
<link wikidata="Q535461" start="30916" end="30924" title="Wget" label="GNU Wget"/>
<link wikidata="Q189053" start="30930" end="30942" title="Command line interface" label="command-line"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="30971" end="30972" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603" start="30996" end="30999" title="GNU General Public License" label="GPL"/>
<link wikidata="Q3570578" start="31053" end="31059" title="Xapian" label="Xapian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759675" start="31104" end="31108" title="YaCy" label="YaCy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826577" start="31227" end="31245" title="Automatic indexing" label="Automatic indexing"/>
<link wikidata="Q49667" start="31248" end="31264" title="Gnutella crawler" label="Gnutella crawler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062069" start="31267" end="31280" title="Web archiving" label="Web archiving"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978783" start="31283" end="31291" title="Webgraph" label="Webgraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q840703" start="31294" end="31320" title="Website mirroring software" label="Website mirroring software"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324614" start="31323" end="31345" title="Search Engine Scraping" label="Search Engine Scraping"/>
<link wikidata="Q665452" start="31348" end="31360" title="Web scraping" label="Web scraping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479654" start="31517" end="31522" title="John Wiley &amp;amp; Sons" label="Wiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q379297" start="31560" end="31565" title="OWASP" label="OWASP"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33121" wikidata="Q156911" url="?curid=33121" title="Wings of Desire">
<text>Wings of Desire (, ; ) is a 1987 romantic fantasy film written by Wim Wenders, Peter Handke and Richard Reitinger, and directed by Wenders. The film is about invisible, immortal angels who populate Berlin and listen to the thoughts of its human inhabitants, comforting the distressed. Even though the city is densely populated, many of the people are isolated or estranged from their loved ones. One of the angels, played by Bruno Ganz, falls in love with a beautiful, lonely trapeze artist, played by Solveig Dommartin. The angel chooses to become mortal so that he can experience human sensory pleasures, ranging from enjoying food to touching a loved one, and so that he can discover human love with the trapeze artist.

Inspired by art depicting angels visible around West Berlin, at the time encircled by the Berlin Wall, Wenders and author Peter Handke conceived of the story and continued to develop the screenplay throughout the French and German co-production. The film was shot by Henri Alekan in both colour and a sepia-toned black-and-white, the latter being used to represent the world as seen by the angels. The cast includes Otto Sander, Curt Bois and Peter Falk.

For &quot;Wings of Desire&quot;, Wenders won awards for Best Director at both the Cannes Film Festival and European Film Awards. The film was a critical and financial success, and academics have interpreted it as a statement of the importance of cinema, libraries, the circus, or German unity, containing New Age, religious, secular or other themes.

It was followed by a sequel, &quot;Faraway, So Close!&quot;, released in 1993. &quot;City of Angels&quot;, a U.S. remake, was released in 1998. In 1990, numerous critics named &quot;Wings of Desire&quot; as one of the best films of the 1980s.

==Plot==
In a Berlin divided by the Berlin Wall, two angels, Damiel and Cassiel, watch the city, unseen and unheard by its human inhabitants. They observe and listen to the thoughts of Berliners, including a pregnant woman in an ambulance on the way to the hospital, a young prostitute standing by a busy road, and a broken man who feels betrayed by his wife. Their &quot;raison d&#x27;être&quot; is, as Cassiel says, to &quot;assemble, testify, preserve&quot; reality. Damiel and Cassiel have always existed as angels; they were in Berlin before it was a city, and before there were any humans.

Among the Berliners they encounter in their wanderings is an old man named Homer, who dreams of an &quot;epic of peace&quot;. Cassiel follows the old man as he looks for the then-demolished Potsdamer Platz in an open field, and finds only the graffiti-covered Wall. Although Damiel and Cassiel are pure observers, visible only to children, and incapable of any interaction with the physical world, Damiel begins to fall in love with a profoundly lonely circus trapeze artist named Marion. She lives by herself in a caravan in West Berlin, until she receives the news that her group, the Circus Alekan, will be closing down. Depressed, she dances alone to the music of Crime &amp; the City Solution, and drifts through the city.

Meanwhile, actor Peter Falk arrives in West Berlin to make a film about the city&#x27;s Nazi past. Falk was once an angel, but, having grown tired of always observing and never experiencing, renounced his immortality to become a participant in the world. Also growing weary of infinity, Damiel&#x27;s longing is for the genuineness and limits of human existence. He meets Marion in a dream, and is surprised when Falk senses his presence and tells him about the pleasures of human life.
Damiel is finally persuaded to shed his immortality. He experiences life for the first time: he bleeds, sees colours, tastes food and drinks coffee. Meanwhile, Cassiel taps into the mind of a young man just about to commit suicide by jumping off a building. Cassiel tries to save the young man but is unable to do so, and is left tormented by the experience. Sensing Cassiel&#x27;s presence, Falk reaches out to him as he had to Damiel, but Cassiel is unwilling to follow their example. Eventually, Damiel meets the trapeze artist Marion at a bar during a concert by Nick Cave, and she greets him and speaks about finally finding a love that is serious and can make her feel complete. The next day, Damiel considers how his time with Marion taught him to feel amazed, and how he has gained knowledge no angel is capable of achieving.

==Cast==
* Bruno Ganz as Damiel
* Solveig Dommartin as Marion
* Otto Sander as Cassiel
* Curt Bois as Homer
* Peter Falk as Der Filmstar (the film star)
* Hans-Martin Stier as Der Sterbende (the dying man) (as Hans Martin Stier)
* Elmar Wilms as Ein trauriger Mann (a sad man)
* Sigurd Rachman as Der Selbstmörder (the suicide)
* Beatrice Manowski as Das Strichmädchen (the young prostitute)
* Lajos Kovács as Im Zirkus - Marion&#x27;s Trainer (in the circus, Marion&#x27;s trainer)
* Bruno Rosaz as Im Zirkus - Der Clown (in the circus, the clown)
* Laurent Petitgand as Im Zirkus - Der Kapellmeister (in the circus, the bandleader)
* Chick Ortega as Im Zirkus - Der Schlagzeuger (in the circus, the drummer) (as Chico Rojo Ortega)
* Otto Kuhnle as Im Zirkus - Die Jongleure (in the circus, the juggler)
* Christoph Merg as Im Zirkus - Der Jongleure (in the circus, the juggler)
* Peter Werner as Im Zirkus - Der Manager (in the circus, the manager)

==Production==
===Development===

After living and working in the United States for eight years, director Wim Wenders returned to his native West Germany and wished to reconnect to it with a film about his favourite part of it, West Berlin. Planning to make &quot;Until the End of the World&quot; in 1985, he realised the project would not be ready for two years, and wishing to return to photography as soon as possible, he considered another project.

Rainer Maria Rilke&#x27;s poetry partially inspired the story. Wenders claimed angels seemed to dwell in Rilke&#x27;s poetry, and the director had also jotted &quot;angels&quot; in his notes one day, and noted angel-themed artwork in cemeteries and around Berlin. In his treatment, Wenders also considered a backstory in which God exiled his angels to Berlin as punishment for defending humans after 1945, when God had decided to forsake them.

Wenders employed Peter Handke, who wrote much of the dialogue, the poetic narrations, and the film&#x27;s recurring poem &quot;Song of Childhood&quot;. Wenders found the names Damiel and Cassiel in an encyclopedia about angels, and also had photographs of Solveig Dommartin, Bruno Ganz and Otto Sander that served as muses. The idea that angels could read minds led to Wenders considering personal dialogue no one would say aloud. Wenders did not view the angel protagonist as representative of himself, instead deciding the angel could be an embodiment of film, and that the purpose of film could be to help people by opening their eyes to possibilities. Handke did not feel able to write a single coherent story, but promised to regularly send notes on ideas during production. Screenwriter Richard Reitinger also assisted Wenders in scripting scenes incorporating Handke&#x27;s contributions.

Given the nature of this arrangement, Wenders would hold daily meetings with his crew, frequently at late hours, to plan the logistics for the following day. French producer Anatole Dauman did not see a large budget as necessary, and the project was funded with 5 million DM.

===Casting===

Wenders believed it would be important for the actors playing the two main angel characters to be familiar and friendly with each other. Ganz and Sander had performed in some of the same stage productions for 20 years. Sander and Ganz also recommended Curt Bois to Wenders and asked Bois to perform. Bois&#x27; performance as Homer marked his final feature film in an 80-year career, beginning as a child actor.

Peter Falk&#x27;s role was not planned until photography had already begun, with Wenders planning an artist or political official to have an analogous role until assistant Claire Denis suggested the &quot;Columbo&quot; star would be familiar to everyone. Falk described the part as &quot;the craziest thing that I&#x27;ve ever been offered&quot;, but quickly agreed. He was accustomed to the improvisation the newly created role required, and when Wenders and Falk met, they conceived ideas of the character sketching and searching for a hat. Nick Cave and his band were based in West Berlin, with Wenders calling him &quot;a real Berlin hero&quot; and deciding &quot;It was inconceivable for me to make a film in Berlin without showing one of his concerts&quot;.

===Filming===

The film was shot by Henri Alekan, whose cinematography represents the angels&#x27; point of view in monochrome, as they cannot see colours, and switches to colour to show the human point of view. During filming, Alekan used a very old and fragile silk stocking that had belonged to his grandmother as a filter for the monochromatic sequences, in order to depict the angels&#x27; muted view of the world. Wenders felt it was natural that angels without experience of the physical world would not see colour, and also thought black-and-white cinematography by Alekan would provide a novel view of Berlin.

A challenge in the cinematography was posed by using the camera for the perception of angels, as angels are not restrained in how far they can observe, in any dimension. The story&#x27;s Circus Alekan is named in the cinematographer&#x27;s honour.

Filming took place at actual locations in West Berlin, such as the Siegessäule, Hans Scharoun&#x27;s Berlin State Library, Potsdamerplatz with the disused elevated track of the M-Bahn, the Lohmühlenbrücke, the Langenscheidtbrücke (the motorcycle accident), Oranienstrasse, Goebenstrasse 6 (where Damiel exchanges his breastplate for a loud check jacket), Waldemarstrasse (where Damiel comes to as a human), Günzelstrasse U-Bahn station, the Anhalter Bahnhof, Theodor-Wolff-Park (site of the circus), Hochbunker Pallasstrasse (Peter Falk&#x27;s film set) and the Hotel Esplanade (the concert). Most shots of the Wall are genuine, although the set for the scene in the death strip, in which Damiel announces his decision to become human, was specially built. Some pieces of the recreation were made from inexpensive wood, with one being destroyed by rain during production.

With little idea of how to portray the angels and no costume design, Wenders said the filmmakers consulted artwork, experimented, and found the idea of armor during production, and told U.S. filmmaker Brad Silberling they did not decide on overcoats until later. The hairstyle was loosely inspired by a photograph of a Japanese warrior.

Although the circus scenes required extensive and risky acrobatics, Dommartin was able to learn the trapeze and rope moves in a mere eight weeks, and did all the work herself, without a stunt double. During production, the filmmakers called German police after Falk went missing. Falk had been spending hours exploring West Berlin and was discovered in a café.

===Post-production===
Peter Handke arrived in West Berlin during the editing process, led by Peter Przygodda. Handke believed it bordered on a silent film, aside from some music, and lacked much of the notes he had sent to Wenders during filming. Handke thus proposed adding his writings via voice-over. After Falk left Berlin, he recorded much of his voice-over in a sound studio in Los Angeles. Much of this was improvised, though Wenders still supervised by telephone.

With the filming performed in lengthy takes, and the camera used as &quot;the eye of the angel&quot;, much of the movement was conveyed in the camerawork rather than in editing effects. There was five hours of footage to edit down to the final cut. A pie fight between the stars was filmed for the final scene, but later edited out.

Composer Jürgen Knieper assumed harps and violins would suffice for a score for a film about angels, until he saw a cut of the film. Seeing the angels were discontented, he wrote a different score employing a choir, voices and whistling. Laurent Petitgand contributed the circus music, an ensemble work performed with accordions, saxophones and keyboards.

==Themes and interpretations==

The concept of angels, spirits or ghosts who help humans on Earth had been common in cinema, from &quot;Here Comes Mr. Jordan&quot; (1941) to the 1946 works &quot;It&#x27;s a Wonderful Life&quot; and &quot;A Matter of Life and Death&quot;. Many earlier U.S. and U.K. films demonstrate high amounts of reverence, while others allow reasonable amounts of fun. Powell and Pressburger&#x27;s &quot;A Matter of Life and Death&quot; presents an early example of spirits being jealous of the lives of humans. The shift from monochrome to colour, to distinguish the angels&#x27; reality from that of the mortals, was also used in Powell and Pressburger&#x27;s film. While &quot;Wings of Desire&quot; does not portray Berliners as living in a utopia, academic Roger Cook wrote that the fact that people have pleasure &quot;gives, as the English title suggests, wings to desire&quot;.

God is not mentioned in the film, and is only referred to in the sequel &quot;Faraway, So Close!&quot; when the angels state a purpose to connect humans with &quot;Him&quot;. Scholars Robert Phillip Kolker and Peter Beickene attributed the apparent lack of God to New Age beliefs, remarking Damiel&#x27;s &quot;fall&quot; is similar to the story of Lucifer, though not related to evil. Reviewer Jeffrey Overstreet concurred that &quot;Wenders had left his church upbringing behind&quot;, and the cinematic angels are &quot;inventions he could craft to his specifications&quot;, with little regard for biblical beliefs. Overstreet characterized them as &quot;whimsical metaphors, characters who have lost the joy of sensual human experience&quot;. Nevertheless, Professor Craig Detweiler believed the sky-level view of Berlin and the idea of guardian angels evoke God. Authors Martin Brady and Joanne Leal added that even if Damiel is tempted by seemingly profane things, the atmosphere of Berlin means the human Damiel is still in &quot;a place of poetry, myth and religion&quot;.

In one scene, Damiel and Cassiel meet to share stories in their observations, with their function revealed to be one of preserving the past. Professor Alexander Graf wrote this connects them to cinema, with Wenders noting &quot;Wings of Desire&quot; itself depicts or shows places in Berlin that have since been destroyed or altered, including a bridge, Potsdamer Platz and the Wall.

The closing titles state: &quot;Dedicated to all the former angels, but especially to Yasujiro, François and Andrej&quot; (all references to Wenders&#x27; fellow filmmakers Yasujirō Ozu, François Truffaut, and Andrei Tarkovsky). These directors had all died before the release of the film, with Kolker and Beickene arguing they were an influence on Wenders: Ozu had taught Wenders order; Truffaut the observation of people, especially youth; and Tarkovsky, a less clear influence on Wenders, consideration of morality and beauty. Identifying directors as angels could tie in with the film characters&#x27; function to record.
Academic Laura Marcus believed a connection between cinema and print is also established in the angels&#x27; affinity for libraries, as Wenders portrays the library as a tool of &quot;memory, and public space&quot;, making it a miraculous place. The depiction of Damiel, by using a pen or an immaterial pen, to write &quot;Song of Childhood&quot;, is also tribute to print and literacy, introducing, or as Marcus hypothesized, &quot;perhaps even releasing, the visual images that follow&quot;. Kolker and Beickene interpreted the use of poetry as part of screenwriter Peter Handke&#x27;s efforts to elevate language above common rhetoric to the spiritual. Reviewing the poetry, Detweiler remarked that Handke&#x27;s &quot;Song of Childhood&quot; bears parallels to St. Paul&#x27;s 1 Corinthians 13 (&quot;When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child ... &quot;). Professor Terrie Waddell added that the poem established &quot;centrality of childhood&quot; as a key theme, noting that the children can see angels and accept them without question, tying them in with the phenomenon of imaginary friends.

The film has also been read as a call for German reunification, which followed in 1990. Essayists David Caldwell and Paul Rea saw it as presenting a series of two opposites: East and West, angel and human, male and female. Wenders&#x27; angels are not bound by the Wall, reflecting East and West Berlin&#x27;s shared space, though East Berlin remains primarily black and white. Scholar Martin Jesinghausen believed the film presumed reunification would never happen, and contemplated its statements on divides, including territorial and &quot;higher&quot; divides, &quot;physicality and spirituality, art and reality, black and white and colour&quot;.

Researcher Helen Stoddart, in discussing the depiction of the circus and trapeze artist Marion in particular, submitted that Marion is the classic circus character, creating an image of danger and then potential. Stoddart argued that Homer and Marion may find the future in what remains of history found in Berlin. Stoddart considered the circular nature of the story, including a parallel between the angel who cannot see the physical (Damiel), and the faux angel (Marion) who can &quot;see the faces&quot;. Marion also observes that all directions lead to the Wall, and the final French dialogue &quot;We have embarked&quot; while the screen states &quot;To be continued&quot;, suggests &quot;final movement to a new beginning&quot;.

Writing in the journal &quot;Film and Philosophy&quot;, Nathan Wolfson cites Roland Barthes&#x27;s work—especially &quot;S/Z&quot;—as a model to argue that &quot;This &#x27;angelic&#x27; portion of Wings of Desire deliberately invokes in the viewer a set of specific responses. These responses provide the foundation for the transformation that Damiel and Marion participate in. The film prepares the viewer for an analogous transformation, and invites the viewer to participate in this process, through an exploration of authorship and agency.&quot;

==Style==

British Film Institute writer Leigh Singer assessed the cinematic style as &quot;bold&quot; and artistic in its use of colour, &quot;existential voiceover&quot; and &quot;languorous pacing&quot;. Singer also commented on the use of symbolism and the combinations of diverse pieces of culture, from the poetry of Rainer Maria Rilke to the music of Nick Cave. In Singer&#x27;s estimation, the cinematography is able to communicate the angels&#x27; &quot;invisible intimacy and empathy&quot;. Professor Terrie Waddell described the &quot;dialogue and monologue&quot; as &quot;lyrical&quot;, in the mold of Rilke&#x27;s poetry. Scholar Alexander Graf considered how these voice-overs and verbal exchanges are frequently combined with background radio and television sounds, and concluded the &quot;image and soundtrack&quot; that comprise the style convey a point of &quot;blindness&quot;: &quot;men and women are plagued by their everyday problems; children are, like the angels, in their own dreamy world&quot;.

Professor Russell J.A. Kilbourn judged the style as opposed to realism and &quot;emphatically German&quot; in looking at particular situations of human life. Authors Martin Brady and Joanne Leal remarked the storytelling shies away from an entirely narrative format, and the film&#x27;s writing style is embodied in the Homer character as &quot;the angel of story-telling&quot;. Perception of people becomes key to the storytelling, with Brady and Leal quoting Handke&#x27;s vision for a new narrative: &quot;You have only interpreted and changed the world; what matters is to &quot;describe&quot; it&quot;. Psychologist Ryan Niemiec wrote that, by focusing on &quot;the beauty of each moment&quot;, &quot;Wings of Desire&quot; conveys &quot;awe and wonder&quot;.

As Singer observed, &quot;Wings of Desire&quot; serves as a &quot;Symphony of a city&quot; in capturing a &quot;wintry, pre-unification Berlin&quot;. Kilbourn said that the place highlighted in the German title &quot;Der Himmel über Berlin&quot;, like the desire referenced in the English title, is of great importance, and that the &quot;frequent angel&#x27;s-eye-view shots of East and West Berlin&quot; allows for &quot;quasi-objective voyeuristic surveillance&quot;. Observing the angels&#x27; trench-coat fashion, sociologist Andrew Greeley wrote it fit the &quot;wet, blustery, cold northern Germany&quot; setting. Looking at the coats and ponytails, Dr. Detweiler found the visualization of the angels &quot;so cool and stylish&quot;.

Music is used in differing ways throughout the story. Musicologist Annette Davison argued Knieper&#x27;s score in angel scenes is artistic, with elements of Eastern European and Orthodox Christian music, and Petitgand&#x27;s music displays a &quot;slippery&quot; harmony frequently heard in circus entertainment. When Marion leaves the Circus Alekan, there is an increase in rock music, particularly by Cave and Crime &amp; the City Solution. Davison submitted this symbolizes &quot;utopian promise of the sensual mortal world&quot;, and that lyrics echo the plot: Cave&#x27;s &quot;The Carny&quot; suggests a disappearing carnival worker as the Circus Alekan closes, and &quot;From Her to Eternity&quot; suggests a desire for a woman&#x27;s love. Professor Adrian Danks wrote that Cave&#x27;s rock music symbolized &quot;the physical, worldly reality of Berlin&quot;, with &quot;The Carny&quot; adding a feel of sorrow in the background, while Marion gives &quot;breathy accompaniment&quot;.

==Release==

The film debuted at the Cannes Film Festival on 17 May 1987. &quot;Der Himmel über Berlin&quot; subsequently opened in West Germany late in October 1987. With Orion Classics as its U.S. distributor, it opened in New York City as &quot;Wings of Desire&quot; on 29 April 1988 with a PG-13 rating. Sander said that it had a release in Japan, and that while angels do not appear in Japanese mythology, Tokyo audiences would approach him after and share their impressions about the characters.

After a videotape printing in Germany in 1988, Kinowelt released a DVD in Germany and Region 2 in 2005. In 2009, The Criterion Collection released the film in Region 1 on DVD and Blu-ray. It later screened at the 65th Berlin International Film Festival in February 2015, to mark Wenders&#x27; Honorary Golden Bear.

The Wim Wenders Foundation produced a digital 4K restoration using the original black-and-white and colour film stock. This new version of the film premiered on 16 February 2018 during the 68th Berlin International Film Festival at Kino International, as part of the &quot;Berlinale Classics&quot; programme.

==Reception==
===Box office===
&quot;Der Himmel über Berlin&quot; had 922,718 admissions in Germany. Under the title &quot;Les Ailes du désir&quot;, it had a further 1,079,432 admissions in France.

The film finished its run in North America on 11 May 1989, having grossed $3.2 million, or possibly nearly $4 million, a beneficial investment for Orion. Critic James Monaco assessed the financial performance as above that of typical art films. In 2000, &quot;Variety&quot; calculated that it was 48th in the top 50 highest-grossing foreign language films ever released in the U.S., and one of only three in German, along with &quot;Das Boot&quot; and &quot;Run Lola Run&quot;.

===Critical reception===
&quot;Wings of Desire&quot; received widespread critical acclaim. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, it holds an approval rating of 95% based on 65 reviews, with an average rating of 8.7/10. The website&#x27;s critics consensus reads, “Beyond ravishing, Wings of Desire is Wim Wenders&#x27; aching and heartbreaking exploration of how love makes us human.” The film received &quot;Two Thumbs Up&quot; from Gene Siskel and Roger Ebert on &quot;Siskel &amp; Ebert &amp; The Movies&quot;, where Siskel credited Wenders for a story that &quot;praises life as it is lived yet making sense of life&#x27;s confusions&quot;. In &quot;New York&quot;, David Denby hailed it as &quot;extraordinary&quot;, and possibly &quot;the ultimate German movie&quot;. Desson Howe cited it for &quot;a soaring vision that appeals to the senses and the spirit.&quot; Janet Maslin, writing for &quot;The New York Times&quot;, called it &quot;enchanting&quot; in its concept, but &quot;damagingly overloaded&quot; in execution. In &quot;Variety&quot;, David Stratton embraced the visuals, the performances and Knieper&#x27;s score, adding the film also showcased Wenders&#x27; taste for rock music. &quot;The Washington Post&quot;″s Rita Kempley credited Wenders and Handke for crafting a &quot;whimsical realm of myth and philosophical pretense, dense with imagery and sweetened by Ganz&#x27;s performance&quot;. Dissenting, Pauline Kael remarked, &quot;It&#x27;s enough to make moviegoers feel impotent&quot;. 
By 1990, &quot;Wings of Desire&quot; was placed in the top 10 best films of the 1980s by critics David Denby (first), the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot;″s Sheila Benson (fourth), &quot;The Orange County Register&quot;″s Jim Emerson (fifth) and Richard Schickel and Richard Corliss (tenth). &quot;Premiere&quot; voted it the second greatest film of the 1980s, after &quot;Raging Bull&quot;. James Monaco awarded it four and a half stars in his 1992 &quot;Movie Guide&quot;, praising it as &quot;A rich, mystical near-masterpiece&quot;. In 1998, Ebert added it to his Great Movies list, championing it for &quot;a mood of reverie, elegy and meditation&quot;. &quot;Empire&quot; critic Ian Nathan gave it five stars in his 2006 review, hailing it for its poetry, themes of loneliness, and Ganz&#x27;s acting style. In 2004, &quot;The New York Times&quot; included the film on its list of &quot;the Best 1,000 Movies Ever Made&quot;. On reflecting on Solveig Dommartin&#x27;s death in 2007, &quot;Der Spiegel&quot; recalled the film as a poetic masterpiece. Reviewing the Criterion DVD in 2009, &quot;Time Out&quot; critic Joshua Rothkopf called it an introduction to the art film, but also a product of its time, mentioning the songs.

John Simon of the &quot;National Review&quot; had a differing opinion. He described &quot;Wings of Desire&quot; as both &quot;obnoxious&quot; and as a &quot;130 minute mess&quot;.

It was later ranked 64th in &quot;Empire&quot; magazine&#x27;s &quot;The 100 Best Films Of World Cinema&quot; in 2010. In 2011, &quot;The Guardian&quot; placed it in the 10 best films ever set in Berlin. The next year, it received 10 votes in the 2012 &quot;Sight &amp; Sound&quot; polls of the greatest films ever made. &quot;Les Inrockuptibles&quot;″s 2014 review declared it a great film, timeless, and poetic. That year, French critics at &quot;aVoir-aLire&quot; also praised its poetry, and said Berlin becomes one of the characters, crediting Alekan, Handke, Cave and Knieper for important contributions. German journalist Michael Sontheimer recommended seeing it to understand how radically Berlin has been altered since the 1980s, particularly looking at the somber images when the human Damiel walks through Berlin. In his &quot;2015 Movie Guide&quot;, Leonard Maltin awarded it three and a half stars, describing it as &quot;Haunting&quot; and &quot;lyrical&quot;. Jonathan Rosenbaum declared the bulk of the film before Damiel becomes human as &quot;one of Wenders&#x27;s most stunning achievements&quot;. In 2017, &quot;Le Monde&quot; rated it four stars out of five, citing the aesthetics of its black-and-white photography, poetry and contemplation of history. The German news publication &quot;Der Tagesspiegel&quot; recounted the film&#x27;s memorable imagery in 2016, listing Damiel as an angel and the library scenes. On the 30th anniversary of the Cannes screening, Jessica Ritchey posted on Rogerebert.com that she found it odd to be an atheist and love the film, expressing admiration for the black-and-white photography and the overall message that when the world seems terrible, desire is powerful. On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of based on reviews from critics, with an average rating of . The website&#x27;s critical consensus reads, &quot;Beyond ravishing, Wings of Desire is Wim Wenders&#x27; aching and heartbreaking exploration of how love makes us human.&quot; The film ranked 34th in BBC&#x27;s 2018 list of The 100 greatest foreign language films voted by 209 critics from 43 countries around the world.

===Accolades===
The film competed for the Palme d&#x27;Or and won for Best Director at the 1987 Cannes Film Festival. In 1988, it won the prestigious Grand Prix of the Belgian Film Critics Association.

It was submitted by West Germany for consideration for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film, a bid supported by its distribution company. It was not nominated; the academy seldom recognized West German cinema.

==Legacy==
In 1993, Wenders made a sequel, &quot;Faraway, So Close!&quot;, which he found desirable to explore Berlin post-reunification, more so than for the sake of a sequel. In 1998, a U.S. remake directed by Brad Silberling called &quot;City of Angels&quot; was released. The setting was moved to Los Angeles and Meg Ryan and Nicolas Cage starred. In 2023, a second American remake was announced to be in the works to be written and directed by Ashley Avis. In Prague, Czech Republic, architect Jean Nouvel designed &quot;Angel&quot;, a building that features an angel from the film observing the people of the Smíchov district.

A stage adaptation of &quot;Wings of Desire&quot; was created by the Northern Stage theatre company in Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K. in 2003. This particular adaptation, which used film footage of the city and stories from the community, was adapted and directed by Alan Lyddiard. In 2006, the American Repertory Theater in Cambridge, Massachusetts, and Toneelgroep Amsterdam presented another stage adaptation, created by Gideon Lester and Dirkje Houtman and directed by Ola Mafaalani.

Wenders&#x27; story was also an influence on the play &quot;Angels in America&quot; by Tony Kushner, in which angels intermingle with troubled mortals. R.E.M.&#x27;s music video for &quot;Everybody Hurts&quot; also takes cues from the film. &quot;Wings of Desire&quot; was possibly Ganz&#x27;s most remembered role before &quot;Downfall&quot; in 2004.

==See also==
* List of cult films
* List of films about angels
* List of submissions to the 60th Academy Awards for Best Foreign Language Film
* List of German submissions for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film
* August Sander&#x27;s People of the 20th Century (1980 edition), the portrait photo book Homer studies during his library visit

==References==
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==
* 
* 
*&quot;Wings of Desire: Watch the Skies&quot; an essay by Michael Atkinson at the Criterion Collection</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q930383" start="33" end="49" title="romantic fantasy" label="romantic fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q55411" start="66" end="77" title="Wim Wenders" label="Wim Wenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q44107" start="79" end="91" title="Peter Handke" label="Peter Handke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150430" start="96" end="113" title="Richard Reitinger" label="Richard Reitinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q235113" start="178" end="183" title="angel" label="angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q123206" start="425" end="435" title="Bruno Ganz" label="Bruno Ganz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200918" start="476" end="483" title="trapeze" label="trapeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q436978" start="502" end="519" title="Solveig Dommartin" label="Solveig Dommartin"/>
<link wikidata="Q56036" start="772" end="783" title="West Berlin" label="West Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086" start="814" end="825" title="Berlin Wall" label="Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q242080" start="937" end="943" title="Cinema of France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q688510" start="948" end="954" title="Cinema of Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q958139" start="991" end="1003" title="Henri Alekan" label="Henri Alekan"/>
<link wikidata="Q68468" start="1140" end="1151" title="Otto Sander" label="Otto Sander"/>
<link wikidata="Q66479" start="1153" end="1162" title="Curt Bois" label="Curt Bois"/>
<link wikidata="Q484881" start="1167" end="1177" title="Peter Falk" label="Peter Falk"/>
<link wikidata="Q510175" start="1262" end="1282" title="Best Director Award (Cannes Film Festival)" label="Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377755" start="1287" end="1307" title="European Film Award for Best Director" label="European Film Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="1460" end="1472" title="German reunification" label="German unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q183308" start="1485" end="1492" title="New Age" label="New Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q657477" start="1566" end="1584" title="Faraway, So Close!" label="Faraway, So Close!"/>
<link wikidata="Q168010" start="1616" end="1630" title="City of Angels (film)" label="City of Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252289" start="1754" end="1772" title="1980s in film" label="films of the 1980s"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="1789" end="1795" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086" start="1811" end="1822" title="Berlin Wall" label="Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q235113" start="1828" end="1833" title="angel" label="angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12605" start="2050" end="2060" title="prostitution in Germany" label="prostitute"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2147" end="2165" title=":wikt:raison d&amp;#x27;être" label="raison d&amp;#x27;être"/>
<link wikidata="Q152252" start="2562" end="2577" title="Potsdamer Platz" label="Potsdamer Platz"/>
<link wikidata="Q17514" start="2615" end="2623" title="graffiti" label="graffiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q56036" start="2898" end="2909" title="West Berlin" label="West Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q46663" start="3040" end="3069" title="Crime &amp;amp; the City Solution" label="Crime &amp;amp; the City Solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q484881" start="3118" end="3128" title="Peter Falk" label="Peter Falk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="3189" end="3193" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q192668" start="4155" end="4164" title="Nick Cave" label="Nick Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q123206" start="4434" end="4444" title="Bruno Ganz" label="Bruno Ganz"/>
<link wikidata="Q436978" start="4457" end="4474" title="Solveig Dommartin" label="Solveig Dommartin"/>
<link wikidata="Q68468" start="4487" end="4498" title="Otto Sander" label="Otto Sander"/>
<link wikidata="Q66479" start="4512" end="4521" title="Curt Bois" label="Curt Bois"/>
<link wikidata="Q484881" start="4533" end="4543" title="Peter Falk" label="Peter Falk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120300" start="4817" end="4829" title="Lajos Kovács (actor)" label="Lajos Kovács"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219443" start="4974" end="4991" title="Laurent Petitgand" label="Laurent Petitgand"/>
<link wikidata="Q55411" start="5481" end="5492" title="Wim Wenders" label="Wim Wenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="5516" end="5528" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q56036" start="5603" end="5614" title="West Berlin" label="West Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q571053" start="5639" end="5665" title="Until the End of the World" label="Until the End of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q76483" start="5829" end="5847" title="Rainer Maria Rilke" label="Rainer Maria Rilke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345947" start="6100" end="6109" title="film treatment" label="treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q44107" start="6291" end="6303" title="Peter Handke" label="Peter Handke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5049405" start="6461" end="6468" title="Cassiel" label="Cassiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q436978" start="6530" end="6547" title="Solveig Dommartin" label="Solveig Dommartin"/>
<link wikidata="Q123206" start="6549" end="6559" title="Bruno Ganz" label="Bruno Ganz"/>
<link wikidata="Q68468" start="6564" end="6575" title="Otto Sander" label="Otto Sander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150430" start="7067" end="7084" title="Richard Reitinger" label="Richard Reitinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845576" start="7345" end="7359" title="Anatole Dauman" label="Anatole Dauman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16068" start="7443" end="7445" title="Deutsche Mark" label="DM"/>
<link wikidata="Q66479" start="7715" end="7724" title="Curt Bois" label="Curt Bois"/>
<link wikidata="Q484881" start="7876" end="7886" title="Peter Falk" label="Peter Falk"/>
<link wikidata="Q238315" start="8048" end="8060" title="Claire Denis" label="Claire Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q371207" start="8081" end="8088" title="Columbo" label="Columbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q192668" start="8419" end="8428" title="Nick Cave" label="Nick Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q958139" start="8677" end="8689" title="Henri Alekan" label="Henri Alekan"/>
<link wikidata="Q56036" start="9552" end="9563" title="West Berlin" label="West Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q154987" start="9577" end="9588" title="Berlin Victory Column" label="Siegessäule"/>
<link wikidata="Q57481" start="9590" end="9603" title="Hans Scharoun" label="Hans Scharoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q170109" start="9611" end="9631" title="Berlin State Library" label="Berlin State Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q152252" start="9633" end="9647" title="Potsdamerplatz" label="Potsdamerplatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q648121" start="9687" end="9693" title="M-Bahn" label="M-Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q695244" start="9951" end="9967" title="Berlin Anhalter Bahnhof" label="Anhalter Bahnhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q321562" start="10072" end="10087" title="Hotel Esplanade Berlin" label="Hotel Esplanade"/>
<link wikidata="Q725449" start="10584" end="10599" title="Brad Silberling" label="Brad Silberling"/>
<link wikidata="Q91260" start="11176" end="11191" title="Peter Przygodda" label="Peter Przygodda"/>
<link wikidata="Q226730" start="11226" end="11237" title="silent film" label="silent film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146822" start="11375" end="11385" title="voice-over" label="voice-over"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="11467" end="11478" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124733" start="11594" end="11598" title="take" label="take"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670875" start="11807" end="11816" title="Pieing" label="pie fight"/>
<link wikidata="Q106273" start="11899" end="11913" title="Jürgen Knieper" label="Jürgen Knieper"/>
<link wikidata="Q492264" start="11960" end="11965" title="film score" label="score"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219443" start="12128" end="12145" title="Laurent Petitgand" label="Laurent Petitgand"/>
<link wikidata="Q583525" start="12383" end="12404" title="Here Comes Mr. Jordan" label="Here Comes Mr. Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q204191" start="12442" end="12468" title="It&amp;#x27;s a Wonderful Life" label="It&amp;#x27;s a Wonderful Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546792" start="12485" end="12511" title="A Matter of Life and Death (film)" label="A Matter of Life and Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400831" start="12637" end="12659" title="Powell and Pressburger" label="Powell and Pressburger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546792" start="12673" end="12699" title="A Matter of Life and Death (film)" label="A Matter of Life and Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232376" start="13155" end="13158" title="Portrayals of God in popular media" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q657477" start="13233" end="13251" title="Faraway, So Close!" label="Faraway, So Close!"/>
<link wikidata="Q105489698" start="13339" end="13360" title="Robert P. Kolker" label="Robert Phillip Kolker"/>
<link wikidata="Q183308" start="13419" end="13426" title="New Age" label="New Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q581450" start="13466" end="13470" title="fallen angel" label="fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q185498" start="13504" end="13511" title="Lucifer" label="Lucifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6176200" start="13550" end="13568" title="Jeffrey Overstreet" label="Jeffrey Overstreet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180892" start="13926" end="13941" title="Craig Detweiler" label="Craig Detweiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q728388" start="13996" end="14010" title="guardian angel" label="guardian angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q152252" start="14591" end="14606" title="Potsdamer Platz" label="Potsdamer Platz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086" start="14615" end="14619" title="Berlin Wall" label="Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q55402" start="14795" end="14807" title="Yasujirō Ozu" label="Yasujirō Ozu"/>
<link wikidata="Q53002" start="14809" end="14826" title="François Truffaut" label="François Truffaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q853" start="14832" end="14848" title="Andrei Tarkovsky" label="Andrei Tarkovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="16013" end="16021" title="St. Paul" label="St. Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q80355" start="16029" end="16045" title="1 Corinthians 13" label="1 Corinthians 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q259065" start="16372" end="16388" title="imaginary friend" label="imaginary friend"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="16434" end="16454" title="German reunification" label="German reunification"/>
<link wikidata="Q665478" start="17702" end="17717" title="To be continued" label="To be continued"/>
<link wikidata="Q65041681" start="17811" end="17830" title="Film and Philosophy" label="Film and Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q179109" start="17859" end="17873" title="Roland Barthes" label="Roland Barthes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379903" start="17903" end="17906" title="S/Z" label="S/Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q260528" start="18345" end="18367" title="British Film Institute" label="British Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q76483" start="18657" end="18675" title="Rainer Maria Rilke" label="Rainer Maria Rilke"/>
<link wikidata="Q192668" start="18692" end="18701" title="Nick Cave" label="Nick Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q10857409" start="19419" end="19426" title="realism (arts)" label="realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318295" start="19605" end="19614" title="narrative" label="narrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q504923" start="20652" end="20666" title="Andrew Greeley" label="Andrew Greeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="21239" end="21249" title="rock music" label="rock music"/>
<link wikidata="Q46663" start="21276" end="21305" title="Crime &amp;amp; the City Solution" label="Crime &amp;amp; the City Solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q22043216" start="21447" end="21456" title="The Carny" label="The Carny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004079" start="21542" end="21562" title="From Her to Eternity" label="From Her to Eternity"/>
<link wikidata="Q898310" start="21895" end="21915" title="1987 Cannes Film Festival" label="Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102772" start="22030" end="22044" title="Orion Classics" label="Orion Classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="22083" end="22096" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987792" start="22152" end="22164" title="Motion Picture Association of America film rating system" label="PG-13 rating"/>
<link wikidata="Q814158" start="22249" end="22267" title="Japanese mythology" label="Japanese mythology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22447" end="22455" title="DVD region code#2" label="Region 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204187" start="22474" end="22498" title="The Criterion Collection" label="The Criterion Collection"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22520" end="22528" title="DVD region code#1" label="Region 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="22532" end="22535" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="22540" end="22547" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q18208614" start="22574" end="22613" title="65th Berlin International Film Festival" label="65th Berlin International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q154590" start="22663" end="22674" title="Golden Bear" label="Golden Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q238162" start="22723" end="22725" title="4K resolution" label="4K"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415247" start="22726" end="22737" title="film restoration" label="restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q42562641" start="22866" end="22905" title="68th Berlin International Film Festival" label="68th Berlin International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670774" start="22909" end="22927" title="Kino International" label="Kino International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680845" start="23347" end="23359" title="James Monaco" label="James Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="23446" end="23453" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="23594" end="23600" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q62730" start="23619" end="23627" title="Das Boot" label="Das Boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q468697" start="23644" end="23656" title="Run Lola Run" label="Run Lola Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491832" start="23763" end="23780" title="review aggregator" label="review aggregator"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="23789" end="23804" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q969105" start="24111" end="24122" title="Gene Siskel" label="Gene Siskel"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="24127" end="24138" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812547" start="24148" end="24183" title="Siskel &amp;amp; Ebert &amp;amp; The Movies" label="Siskel &amp;amp; Ebert &amp;amp; The Movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507987" start="24331" end="24339" title="New York (magazine)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174197" start="24347" end="24358" title="David Denby" label="David Denby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024639" start="24451" end="24462" title="Desson Howe" label="Desson Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q509946" start="24548" end="24560" title="Janet Maslin" label="Janet Maslin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="24580" end="24598" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="24716" end="24723" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240137" start="24731" end="24745" title="David Stratton" label="David Stratton"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="24884" end="24903" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q436910" start="25105" end="25117" title="Pauline Kael" label="Pauline Kael"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="25320" end="25337" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413231" start="25376" end="25402" title="The Orange County Register" label="The Orange County Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454098" start="25435" end="25451" title="Richard Schickel" label="Richard Schickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q38670" start="25456" end="25471" title="Richard Corliss" label="Richard Corliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q130706" start="25487" end="25495" title="Premiere (magazine)" label="Premiere"/>
<link wikidata="Q220780" start="25562" end="25573" title="Raging Bull" label="Raging Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680845" start="25581" end="25593" title="James Monaco" label="James Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q20001903" start="25757" end="25769" title="The Great Movies" label="Great Movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122760" start="25854" end="25860" title="Empire (film magazine)" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q131478" start="26184" end="26195" title="Der Spiegel" label="Der Spiegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657609" start="26288" end="26296" title="Time Out (magazine)" label="Time Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135802" start="26359" end="26367" title="art film" label="art film"/>
<link wikidata="Q6257894" start="26424" end="26434" title="John Simon (critic)" label="John Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699649" start="26448" end="26463" title="National Review" label="National Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="26739" end="26751" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546271" start="26863" end="26880" title="Sight &amp;amp; Sound" label="Sight &amp;amp; Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898121" start="26900" end="26924" title="List of films considered the best" label="greatest films ever made"/>
<link wikidata="Q2758142" start="26932" end="26950" title="Les Inrockuptibles" label="Les Inrockuptibles"/>
<link wikidata="Q731195" start="27467" end="27481" title="Leonard Maltin" label="Leonard Maltin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343526" start="27580" end="27598" title="Jonathan Rosenbaum" label="Jonathan Rosenbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12461" start="27737" end="27745" title="Le Monde" label="Le Monde"/>
<link wikidata="Q10189" start="27914" end="27930" title="Der Tagesspiegel" label="Der Tagesspiegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q30588211" start="28116" end="28130" title="Rogerebert.com" label="Rogerebert.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491832" start="28330" end="28347" title="review aggregator" label="review aggregator"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="28356" end="28371" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="28668" end="28671" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q179808" start="28832" end="28847" title="Palme d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Palme d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q510175" start="28860" end="28873" title="Best Director Award (Cannes Film Festival)" label="Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q898310" start="28881" end="28906" title="1987 Cannes Film Festival" label="1987 Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114772" start="28940" end="28950" title="Grand Prix (Belgian Film Critics Association)" label="Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550079" start="28958" end="28990" title="Belgian Film Critics Association" label="Belgian Film Critics Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q105304" start="29052" end="29096" title="Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film" label="Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q657477" start="29265" end="29283" title="Faraway, So Close!" label="Faraway, So Close!"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="29339" end="29352" title="German reunification" label="reunification"/>
<link wikidata="Q725449" start="29428" end="29443" title="Brad Silberling" label="Brad Silberling"/>
<link wikidata="Q168010" start="29457" end="29471" title="City of Angels (film)" label="City of Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="29517" end="29528" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q167498" start="29533" end="29541" title="Meg Ryan" label="Meg Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42869" start="29546" end="29558" title="Nicolas Cage" label="Nicolas Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q52274421" start="29665" end="29676" title="Ashley Avis" label="Ashley Avis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="29681" end="29687" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q214317" start="29715" end="29726" title="Jean Nouvel" label="Jean Nouvel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579128" start="29742" end="29747" title="Golden Angel" label="Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q942842" start="29831" end="29838" title="Smíchov" label="Smíchov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058982" start="29919" end="29933" title="Northern Stage" label="Northern Stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="29953" end="29972" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle upon Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113755" start="30140" end="30166" title="American Repertory Theater" label="American Repertory Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q49111" start="30170" end="30194" title="Cambridge, Massachusetts" label="Cambridge, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261170" start="30200" end="30221" title="Toneelgroep Amsterdam" label="Toneelgroep Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559619" start="30269" end="30282" title="Gideon Lester" label="Gideon Lester"/>
<link wikidata="Q14853557" start="30318" end="30331" title="Ola Mafaalani" label="Ola Mafaalani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337685" start="30394" end="30411" title="Angels in America" label="Angels in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q704433" start="30421" end="30433" title="Tony Kushner" label="Tony Kushner"/>
<link wikidata="Q134969" start="30486" end="30492" title="R.E.M." label="R.E.M."/>
<link wikidata="Q2287361" start="30522" end="30537" title="Everybody Hurts" label="Everybody Hurts"/>
<link wikidata="Q152857" start="30662" end="30670" title="Downfall (2004 film)" label="Downfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6614871" start="30702" end="30720" title="List of cult films" label="List of cult films"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849306" start="30723" end="30749" title="List of films about angels" label="List of films about angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q6641694" start="30752" end="30829" title="List of submissions to the 60th Academy Awards for Best Foreign Language Film" label="List of submissions to the 60th Academy Awards for Best Foreign Language Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q6571859" start="30832" end="30911" title="List of German submissions for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film" label="List of German submissions for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q61530" start="30935" end="30961" title="People of the 20th Century" label="People of the 20th Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q4072107" start="31213" end="31229" title="Michael Atkinson (writer)" label="Michael Atkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204187" start="31237" end="31257" title="Criterion Collection" label="Criterion Collection"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33123" wikidata="Q11902465" url="?curid=33123" title="Wireless Valley">
<text>Wireless Valley is a term that was coined by Professor Ted Rappaport in 1990 when he was a faculty member at Virginia Tech, and was used to describe the Roanoke/Blacksburg, Virginia region and the potential of research to create spin-out companies. In 1990 he and his students founded TSR Technologies, a company that made software-defined cellular and paging intercept and drive test equipment that was sold to Allen Telecom in 1993, and in 1995 Wireless Valley Communications, a company that pioneered the creation of computer-aided wireless network prediction and management software that was sold to Motorola in late 2005. This term was later used as nickname to describe several regional clusters of companies in the information technology sector, in analogy to California&#x27;s Silicon Valley:

* One such cluster is located in northern Stockholm, Sweden. This also included a number of companies that saw themselves as belonging to the new information based economy. Ericsson, the telecommunications supplier, has one of its main design centers in the Stockholm suburb of Kista.
* Finland also has a high-tech area in Espoo, sometimes called &quot;Wireless Valley&quot;, based on Nokia and Nokia Siemens Networks. There is a secondary hub located in Oulu which is the base for other wireless specialist companies too.
* A third such cluster consists of the telecommunications formed in San Diego, based on Qualcomm
* A new high-tech program has been initialed in Nanjing, China, called &#x27;China Wireless valley&#x27;. It is based on two national key laboratories of Southeast University.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q18619463" start="55" end="68" title="Theodore Rappaport" label="Ted Rappaport"/>
<link wikidata="Q65379" start="109" end="122" title="Virginia Tech" label="Virginia Tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q501796" start="153" end="160" title="Roanoke, Virginia" label="Roanoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q285816" start="161" end="181" title="Blacksburg, Virginia" label="Blacksburg, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="285" end="301" title="TSR Technologies" label="TSR Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q11375" start="535" end="551" title="wireless network" label="wireless network"/>
<link wikidata="Q259011" start="604" end="612" title="Motorola" label="Motorola"/>
<link wikidata="Q11661" start="722" end="744" title="information technology" label="information technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="767" end="784" title="California" label="California&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q163820" start="785" end="799" title="Silicon Valley" label="Silicon Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="844" end="853" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="855" end="861" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="966" end="973" title="Economics" label="economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q52618" start="975" end="983" title="Ericsson" label="Ericsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="989" end="1007" title="telecommunications" label="telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245744" start="1080" end="1085" title="Kista" label="Kista"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="1089" end="1096" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q47034" start="1126" end="1131" title="Espoo" label="Espoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418" start="1188" end="1193" title="Nokia" label="Nokia"/>
<link wikidata="Q322731" start="1198" end="1220" title="Nokia Siemens Networks" label="Nokia Siemens Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q47048" start="1258" end="1262" title="Oulu" label="Oulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="1394" end="1403" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q544847" start="1414" end="1422" title="Qualcomm" label="Qualcomm"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33124" wikidata="Q239756" url="?curid=33124" title="Wild Strawberries (film)">
<text>Wild Strawberries is a 1957 Swedish drama film written and directed by Ingmar Bergman. The original Swedish title is Smultronstället, which literally means &quot;the wild strawberry patch&quot; but idiomatically signifies a hidden gem of a place, often with personal or sentimental value, and not widely known. The cast includes Victor Sjöström in his final screen performance as an old man recalling his past, as well as Bergman regulars Bibi Andersson, Ingrid Thulin, and Gunnar Björnstrand. Max von Sydow and Gunnel Lindblom also appear in small roles.

Bergman wrote the screenplay while hospitalized. Exploring philosophical themes such as introspection and human existence, &quot;Wild Strawberries&quot; received wide positive domestic reception upon release, and won the Golden Bear for Best Film at the 8th Berlin International Film Festival. It is often considered to be one of Bergman&#x27;s best films, as well as one of the greatest films ever made.

==Plot==
Grouchy, stubborn, and egotistical Professor Isak Borg is a widowed 78-year-old physician who specialized in bacteriology. Before specializing, he served as a general practitioner in rural Sweden. He sets out on a long car ride from Stockholm to Lund to be awarded the degree of Doctor Jubilaris 50 years after he received his doctorate from Lund University. He is accompanied by his pregnant daughter-in-law Marianne who does not much like her father-in-law and is planning to separate from her husband, Evald, Isak&#x27;s only son. Evald does not want her to have the baby, their first.

During the trip, Isak is forced by nightmares, daydreams, old age, and impending death to reevaluate his life. He meets a series of hitchhikers, each of whom sets off dreams or reveries into Borg&#x27;s troubled past. The first group consists of two young men and their companion, a woman named Sara who is adored by both men. Sara is a double for the love of Isak&#x27;s youth. He reminisces about his childhood at the seaside and his sweetheart Sara, with whom he remembered gathering strawberries, but who instead married his brother. The first group remains with him throughout his journey. Next Isak and Marianne pick up an embittered middle-aged couple, the Almans, whose vehicle had nearly collided with theirs. The pair exchanges such terrible vitriol and venom that Marianne stops the car and demands that they leave. The couple reminds Isak of his own unhappy marriage. In a dream sequence, Isak is asked by Sten Alman, now the examiner, to read &quot;foreign&quot; letters on the blackboard. He cannot. So, Alman reads it for him: &quot;A doctor&#x27;s first duty is to ask forgiveness,&quot; from which he concludes, &quot;You are guilty of guilt.&quot;

He is confronted by his loneliness and aloofness, recognizing these traits in both his elderly mother (whom they stop to visit) and in his middle-aged physician son, and he gradually begins to accept himself, his past, his present, and his approaching death.

Borg finally arrives at his destination and is promoted to Doctor Jubilaris, but this proves to be an empty ritual. That night, he bids a loving goodbye to his young friends, to whom the once bitter old man whispers in response to a playful declaration of the young girl&#x27;s love, &quot;I&#x27;ll remember.&quot; As he goes to his bed in his son&#x27;s home, he is overcome by a sense of peace, and dreams of a family picnic by a lake. Closure and affirmation of life have finally come, and Borg&#x27;s face radiates joy.

==Cast==

* Victor Sjöström as Professor Isak Borg
* Bibi Andersson as Sara (both: Isak&#x27;s cousin/hitchhiker)
* Ingrid Thulin as Marianne Borg
* Gunnar Björnstrand as Evald Borg
* Jullan Kindahl as Agda, Isak&#x27;s housekeeper
* Folke Sundquist as Anders, hitchhiker
* Björn Bjelfvenstam as Viktor, hitchhiker
* Naima Wifstrand as Isak&#x27;s Mother
* Gunnel Broström as Berit Alman, angry wife
* Gunnar Sjöberg as Sten Alman, angry husband / The Examiner
* Max von Sydow as Henrik Åkerman, gas station attendant
* Ann-Marie Wiman as Eva Åkerman
* Gertrud Fridh as Karin Borg, Isak&#x27;s wife 
* Åke Fridell as Karin&#x27;s lover
* Sif Ruud as Aunt Olga
* Yngve Nordwall as Uncle Aron
* Per Sjöstrand as Sigfrid Borg
* Gio Petré as Sigbritt Borg
* Gunnel Lindblom as Charlotta Borg
* Maud Hansson as Angelica Borg
* Eva Norée as Anna Borg 
* Göran Lundquist as Benjamin Borg
* Per Skogsberg as Hagbart Borg
* Lena Bergman as Kristina Borg, twin
* Monica Ehrling as Birgitta Borg, twin
==Production==
===Origins===

Bergman&#x27;s idea for the film originated on a drive from Stockholm to Dalarna during which he stopped in Uppsala, his hometown. Driving by his grandmother&#x27;s house, he suddenly imagined how it would be if he could open the door and inside find everything just as it was during his childhood. &quot;So it struck me — what if you could make a film about this; that you just walk up in a realistic way and open a door, and then you walk into your childhood, and then you open another door and come back to reality, and then you make a turn around a street corner and arrive in some other period of your existence, and everything goes on, lives. That was actually the idea behind &quot;Wild Strawberries&quot;&quot;. Later, he would revise the story of the film&#x27;s genesis. In &quot;Images: My Life in Film,&quot; he comments on his own earlier statement: &quot;That&#x27;s a lie. The truth is that I am forever living in my childhood.&quot;

===Development===
Bergman wrote the screenplay of &quot;Wild Strawberries&quot; in Stockholm&#x27;s Karolinska Hospital (the workplace of Isak Borg) in the late spring of 1957; he&#x27;d recently been given permission to proceed by producer Carl Anders Dymling on the basis of a short synopsis. He was in the hospital for two months, being treated for recurrent gastric problems and general stress. Bergman&#x27;s doctor at Karolinska was his good friend Sture Helander who invited him to attend his lectures on psychosomatics. Helander was married to Gunnel Lindblom who was to play Isak&#x27;s sister Charlotta in the film. Bergman was at a high point of his professional career after a triumphant season at the Malmö City Theatre (where he had been artistic director since 1952), in addition to the success of both &quot;Smiles of a Summer Night&quot; (1955) and &quot;The Seventh Seal&quot; (1957). His private life, however, was in disarray. His third marriage was on the rocks; his affair with Bibi Andersson, which had begun in 1954, was coming to an end; and his relationship with his parents was, after an attempted reconciliation with his mother, at a desperately low ebb.

Casting and pre-production progressed rapidly. The completed screenplay is dated 31 May. Shooting took place between 2 July 1957 and 27 August 1957. The scenes at the summer house were filmed in Saltsjöbaden, a fashionable resort in the Stockholm archipelago. Part of the nightmare sequence was shot with predawn summer light in Gamla stan, the old part of central Stockholm. Most of the movie was made at SF&#x27;s studio and on its back lot at Råsunda in northern Stockholm.

===Casting===
The director&#x27;s immediate choice for the leading role of the old professor was Victor Sjöström, Bergman&#x27;s silent film idol and early counselor at Svensk Filmindustri, whom he had directed in &quot;To Joy&quot; eight years earlier. &quot;Victor,&quot; Bergman remarked, &quot;was feeling wretched and didn&#x27;t want to [do it];... he must have been seventy eight. He was misanthropic and tired and felt old. I had to use all my powers of persuasion to get him to play the part.&quot;

In &quot;Bergman on Bergman,&quot; he has stated that he only thought of Sjöström when the screenplay was complete, and that he asked Dymling to contact the famous actor and film director. Yet in &quot;Images: My Life in Film,&quot; he claims, &quot;It is probably worth noting that I never for a moment thought of Sjöström when I was writing the screenplay. The suggestion came from the film&#x27;s producer, Carl Anders Dymling. As I recall, I thought long and hard before I agreed to let him have the part.&quot;

During the shooting, the health of the 78-year-old Sjöström gave cause for concern. Dymling had persuaded him to take on the role with the words: &quot;All you have to do is lie under a tree, eat wild strawberries and think about your past, so it&#x27;s nothing too arduous.&quot; This was inaccurate and the burden of the film was completely on Sjöström who is in all but one scene of the film. Initially, Sjöström had problems with his lines which made him frustrated and angry. He would go off into a corner and beat his head against the wall in frustration, even to the point of drawing blood and producing bruises. He sometimes quibbled over details in the script. To unburden his revered mentor, Bergman made a pact with Ingrid Thulin that if anything went wrong during a scene, she would take the blame on herself. Things improved when they changed filming times so that Sjöström could get home in time for his customary late afternoon whisky at 5:00. Sjöström got along particularly well with Bibi Andersson.

As usual, Bergman chose his collaborators from a team of actors and technicians with whom he had worked before in the cinema and the theater. As Sara, Bibi Andersson plays both Borg&#x27;s childhood sweetheart who left him to marry his brother and a charming, energetic young woman who reminds him of that lost love. Andersson, then twenty one years old, was a member in Bergman&#x27;s famed repertory company. He gave her a small part in his films &quot;Smiles of a Summer Night&quot; (1955) and as the jester&#x27;s wife in &quot;The Seventh Seal&quot; (1957). She would continue to work for him in many more films, most notably in &quot;Persona&quot; (1966). Ingrid Thulin plays Marianne, the sad, gentle and warm daughter-in-law of Borg. She appeared in other Bergman films as the mistress in &quot;Winter Light&quot; (1963) and as one of three sisters in &quot;Cries and Whispers&quot; (1972).

==Reception==
===Critical reception===
&quot;Wild Strawberries&quot; received strongly positive reviews in Sweden; its acting, script, and photography were common areas of praise. It was among the films that cemented Bergman&#x27;s international reputation, but American critics were not unanimous in their praise. A number of reviewers found its story puzzling. In &quot;The New York Times&quot;, Bosley Crowther lauded the performances of Sjöström and Andersson but wrote, &quot;This one is so thoroughly mystifying that we wonder whether Mr. Bergman himself knew what he was trying to say.&quot; The film ranked 7th on Cahiers du Cinéma&#x27;s Top 10 Films of the Year List in 1959.

In a 1963 interview with &quot;Cinema&quot; magazine, director Stanley Kubrick listed the film as his second favourite of all time. It was also listed by Russian filmmaker Andrei Tarkovsky as one of his top ten favorite films. It is now considered one of Bergman&#x27;s major works. Film critic Derek Malcolm ranked the film at No. 56 on his list of the &quot;Top 100 Movies&quot; in 2001. In 2007, the film was ranked at No. 34 by &quot;The Guardian&quot;″s readers poll on the list of &quot;40 greatest foreign films of all time&quot;. In 2009, the film was ranked at No. 59 on Japanese film magazine kinema Junpo&#x27;s &quot;Top 100 Non-Japanese Films of All Time&quot; list.

In 1972, the work was ranked 10th, in 2002 it was ranked 27th, and in 2012, it ranked 63rd on the &quot;Sight &amp; Sound&quot; critics&#x27; poll of the greatest films ever made. That same year the film was voted at number 11 on the 25 best Swedish films of all time list by a poll of 50 film critics and academics conducted by film magazine &quot;FLM&quot;. Its screenplay was listed in &quot;Total Film&quot; as one of the 50 best ever written. The film was included in BBC&#x27;s 2018 list of The 100 greatest foreign language films. In 2022 edition of &quot;Sight &amp; Sound&quot;″s &quot;Greatest films of all time&quot; list the film ranked 72nd in the director&#x27;s poll.

On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, &quot;Wild Strawberries&quot; has an approval rating of 96% based on 45 reviews, with an average score of 8.90/10. The site&#x27;s critical consensus reads: &quot;Wild Strawberries were never so bittersweet as Ingmar Bergman&#x27;s beautifully written and filmed look at one man&#x27;s nostalgic journey into the past.&quot; On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 88 out of 100 based on 17 critic&#x27;s reviews, indicating &quot;universal acclaim&quot;.

The philosopher Roger Scruton wrote of the film: &quot;Even now, after ten viewings, I want to see Wild Strawberries again, not for the story only, but for specific snatches of dialogue, specific images and the specific atmosphere which makes this film enter the soul with the evocative force of a play by Ibsen or Strindberg.&quot;

===Awards and honors===
The film won the Golden Bear for Best Film and the FIPRESCI Prize at the 8th Berlin International Film Festival, &quot;Best Film&quot; and &quot;Best Actor&quot; at the Mar del Plata Film Festival and won the Golden Globe Award for Best Foreign Film in 1960. The Film was nominated for a BAFTA Award in Best Film From Any Source category in 1959. It was also nominated for an Academy Award for Original Screenplay, but the nomination was refused by Bergman. In his letter to the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, Bergman wrote, &quot;I have found that the &quot;Oscar&quot; nomination is one for the motion picture art humiliating institution and ask you to be released from the attention of the jury for the future.&quot; The film won the Pasinetti Award at 1958 Venice Film Festival. It won the Bodil Award for Best European Film in 1959.

The film is included on the Vatican&#x27;s list of important films, recommended for its portrayal of a man&#x27;s &quot;interior journey from pangs of regret and anxiety to a refreshing sense of peace and reconciliation&quot;.

==Influence==
&quot;Wild Strawberries&quot; influenced the Woody Allen films &quot;Stardust Memories&quot; (1980), &quot;Another Woman&quot; (1988), &quot;Crimes and Misdemeanors&quot; (1989), and &quot;Deconstructing Harry&quot; (1997). In &quot;Stardust Memories&quot;, the film&#x27;s plot is similar in that the protagonist, filmmaker Sandy Bates (Woody Allen), is attending a viewing of his films, while reminiscing about and reflecting on his life and past relationships and trying to fix and stabilize his current ones, which are infused with flashbacks and dream sequences. In &quot;Another Woman&quot;, the film&#x27;s main character, Marion Post (Gena Rowlands), is also accused by friends and relatives of being cold and unfeeling, which forces her to reexamine her life. Allen also borrows several tropes from Bergman&#x27;s film, such as having Lynn (Frances Conroy), Post&#x27;s sister-in-law, tell her that her brother Paul (Harris Yulin) hates her and having a former student tell Post that her class changed her life. Allen has Post confront the demons of her past via several dream sequences and flashbacks that reveal important information to a viewer, as in &quot;Wild Strawberries&quot;. In &quot;Crimes and Misdemeanors&quot;, Allen made reference to the scene in which Isak watches his family have dinner. In &quot;Deconstructing Harry&quot;, the plot (a writer going on a long drive to receive an honorary award from his old university, while reflecting upon his life&#x27;s experiences, with dream sequences) essentially mirrors that of &quot;Wild Strawberries&quot;.

Satyajit Ray&#x27;s 1966 film &quot;Nayak&quot; was to some extent inspired by &quot;Wild Strawberries&quot;.

Yugoslav hard rock and heavy metal band Divlje Jagode (Serbo-Croatian for &quot;Wild Strawberries&quot;) chose their name after the film. During their short-lived international career, the band adopted the name Wild Strawberries.

==Attempted American remake==
Screenwriter Bo Goldman sought to remake the film in 1995 as his directorial debut. Gregory Peck would have starred in the titular role of the elderly professor. Despite the support of Martin Scorsese, who agreed to produce, the film was not green lit.

==References==
==External links==
* 
* 
* &quot;Wild Strawberries&quot; an essay by Peter Cowie at the Criterion Collection</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q130232" start="36" end="46" title="Drama (film and television)" label="drama film"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546" start="71" end="85" title="Ingmar Bergman" label="Ingmar Bergman"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="100" end="107" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q146684" start="166" end="181" title="Fragaria vesca" label="wild strawberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q55170" start="329" end="344" title="Victor Sjöström" label="Victor Sjöström"/>
<link wikidata="Q234921" start="439" end="453" title="Bibi Andersson" label="Bibi Andersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q233732" start="455" end="468" title="Ingrid Thulin" label="Ingrid Thulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q524529" start="474" end="492" title="Gunnar Björnstrand" label="Gunnar Björnstrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q203215" start="494" end="507" title="Max von Sydow" label="Max von Sydow"/>
<link wikidata="Q259911" start="512" end="527" title="Gunnel Lindblom" label="Gunnel Lindblom"/>
<link wikidata="Q210501" start="645" end="658" title="introspection" label="introspection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124515" start="663" end="678" title="human existence" label="human existence"/>
<link wikidata="Q154590" start="778" end="789" title="Golden Bear" label="Golden Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q552223" start="811" end="849" title="8th Berlin International Film Festival" label="8th Berlin International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898121" start="936" end="960" title="List of films considered the best" label="greatest films ever made"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="1205" end="1214" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167" start="1218" end="1222" title="Lund" label="Lund"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436915" start="1251" end="1267" title="Jubilee doctor" label="Doctor Jubilaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q218506" start="1314" end="1329" title="Lund University" label="Lund University"/>
<link wikidata="Q192692" start="1597" end="1606" title="nightmare" label="nightmare"/>
<link wikidata="Q6028924" start="1609" end="1617" title="daydream" label="daydream"/>
<link wikidata="Q191089" start="1620" end="1627" title="old age" label="old age"/>
<link wikidata="Q55170" start="3527" end="3542" title="Victor Sjöström" label="Victor Sjöström"/>
<link wikidata="Q234921" start="3568" end="3582" title="Bibi Andersson" label="Bibi Andersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q233732" start="3631" end="3644" title="Ingrid Thulin" label="Ingrid Thulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q524529" start="3664" end="3682" title="Gunnar Björnstrand" label="Gunnar Björnstrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958821" start="3699" end="3713" title="Jullan Kindahl" label="Jullan Kindahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q505590" start="3749" end="3764" title="Folke Sundquist" label="Folke Sundquist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3888440" start="3789" end="3807" title="Björn Bjelfvenstam" label="Björn Bjelfvenstam"/>
<link wikidata="Q446668" start="3832" end="3847" title="Naima Wifstrand" label="Naima Wifstrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940840" start="3872" end="3887" title="Gunnel Broström" label="Gunnel Broström"/>
<link wikidata="Q5619122" start="3917" end="3931" title="Gunnar Sjöberg" label="Gunnar Sjöberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q203215" start="3978" end="3991" title="Max von Sydow" label="Max von Sydow"/>
<link wikidata="Q433799" start="4068" end="4081" title="Gertrud Fridh" label="Gertrud Fridh"/>
<link wikidata="Q270872" start="4117" end="4128" title="Åke Fridell" label="Åke Fridell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346227" start="4153" end="4161" title="Sif Ruud" label="Sif Ruud"/>
<link wikidata="Q6016378" start="4177" end="4191" title="Yngve Nordwall" label="Yngve Nordwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6179079" start="4208" end="4221" title="Per Sjöstrand" label="Per Sjöstrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972663" start="4240" end="4249" title="Gio Petré" label="Gio Petré"/>
<link wikidata="Q259911" start="4269" end="4284" title="Gunnel Lindblom" label="Gunnel Lindblom"/>
<link wikidata="Q532441" start="4305" end="4317" title="Maud Hansson" label="Maud Hansson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="4596" end="4605" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q205218" start="4609" end="4616" title="Dalarna" label="Dalarna"/>
<link wikidata="Q25286" start="4644" end="4651" title="Uppsala" label="Uppsala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734280" start="5586" end="5605" title="Karolinska University Hospital" label="Karolinska Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5626263" start="5727" end="5746" title="Carl Anders Dymling" label="Carl Anders Dymling"/>
<link wikidata="Q259911" start="6038" end="6053" title="Gunnel Lindblom" label="Gunnel Lindblom"/>
<link wikidata="Q837070" start="6310" end="6334" title="Smiles of a Summer Night" label="Smiles of a Summer Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q217189" start="6358" end="6374" title="The Seventh Seal" label="The Seventh Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q234921" start="6486" end="6500" title="Bibi Andersson" label="Bibi Andersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q342868" start="6682" end="6696" title="pre-production" label="pre-production"/>
<link wikidata="Q990771" start="6865" end="6877" title="Saltsjöbaden" label="Saltsjöbaden"/>
<link wikidata="Q579854" start="6999" end="7009" title="Gamla stan" label="Gamla stan"/>
<link wikidata="Q55170" start="7245" end="7260" title="Victor Sjöström" label="Victor Sjöström"/>
<link wikidata="Q226730" start="7277" end="7288" title="silent film" label="silent film"/>
<link wikidata="Q177955" start="7317" end="7336" title="AB Svensk Filmindustri" label="Svensk Filmindustri"/>
<link wikidata="Q463907" start="7368" end="7374" title="To Joy (film)" label="To Joy"/>
<link wikidata="Q233732" start="8901" end="8914" title="Ingrid Thulin" label="Ingrid Thulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q234921" start="9175" end="9189" title="Bibi Andersson" label="Bibi Andersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q217189" start="9724" end="9740" title="The Seventh Seal" label="The Seventh Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q695255" start="9832" end="9839" title="Persona (1966 film)" label="Persona"/>
<link wikidata="Q233732" start="9854" end="9867" title="Ingrid Thulin" label="Ingrid Thulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q842067" start="9995" end="10007" title="Winter Light" label="Winter Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q830874" start="10058" end="10076" title="Cries and Whispers" label="Cries and Whispers"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="10464" end="10482" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q894444" start="10490" end="10505" title="Bosley Crowther" label="Bosley Crowther"/>
<link wikidata="Q909176" start="10714" end="10731" title="Cahiers du Cinéma" label="Cahiers du Cinéma"/>
<link wikidata="Q20724369" start="10739" end="10768" title="Cahiers du Cinéma&amp;#x27;s Annual Top 10 Lists" label="Top 10 Films of the Year List"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001" start="10842" end="10857" title="Stanley Kubrick" label="Stanley Kubrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q853" start="10951" end="10967" title="Andrei Tarkovsky" label="Andrei Tarkovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262166" start="11074" end="11087" title="Derek Malcolm" label="Derek Malcolm"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="11217" end="11229" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052227" start="11382" end="11394" title="kinema Junpo" label="kinema Junpo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546271" start="11564" end="11581" title="Sight &amp;amp; Sound" label="Sight &amp;amp; Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270191" start="11855" end="11865" title="Total Film" label="Total Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546271" start="12023" end="12040" title="Sight &amp;amp; Sound" label="Sight &amp;amp; Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="12177" end="12192" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="12522" end="12532" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q445939" start="12683" end="12696" title="Roger Scruton" label="Roger Scruton"/>
<link wikidata="Q154590" start="13042" end="13053" title="Golden Bear" label="Golden Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q253988" start="13076" end="13090" title="FIPRESCI Prize" label="FIPRESCI Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q552223" start="13098" end="13136" title="8th Berlin International Film Festival" label="8th Berlin International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q949173" start="13194" end="13221" title="Mar del Plata Film Festival" label="Mar del Plata Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="13234" end="13252" title="Golden Globe Awards" label="Golden Globe Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q387380" start="13257" end="13274" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Foreign Language Film" label="Best Foreign Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q732997" start="13313" end="13324" title="British Academy Film Awards" label="BAFTA Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q139184" start="13328" end="13353" title="BAFTA Award for Best Film" label="Best Film From Any Source"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060923" start="13366" end="13370" title="12th British Academy Film Awards" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="13401" end="13414" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q41417" start="13419" end="13438" title="Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay" label="Original Screenplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q212329" start="13504" end="13547" title="Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences" label="Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324992" start="13795" end="13820" title="19th Venice International Film Festival" label="1958 Venice Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q889842" start="13833" end="13844" title="Bodil Awards" label="Bodil Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352913" start="13849" end="13867" title="Bodil Award for Best Non-American Film" label="Best European Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557998" start="13906" end="13944" title="Vatican&amp;#x27;s list of films" label="Vatican&amp;#x27;s list of important films"/>
<link wikidata="Q25089" start="14165" end="14176" title="Woody Allen" label="Woody Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q653518" start="14189" end="14206" title="Stardust Memories" label="Stardust Memories"/>
<link wikidata="Q541185" start="14227" end="14240" title="Another Woman (1988 film)" label="Another Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q181555" start="14261" end="14284" title="Crimes and Misdemeanors" label="Crimes and Misdemeanors"/>
<link wikidata="Q551762" start="14309" end="14329" title="Deconstructing Harry" label="Deconstructing Harry"/>
<link wikidata="Q229258" start="14763" end="14776" title="Gena Rowlands" label="Gena Rowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q233882" start="14970" end="14984" title="Frances Conroy" label="Frances Conroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346123" start="15046" end="15058" title="Harris Yulin" label="Harris Yulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8873" start="15700" end="15712" title="Satyajit Ray" label="Satyajit Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q639604" start="15736" end="15741" title="Nayak (1966 film)" label="Nayak"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="15811" end="15819" title="SFR Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q83270" start="15820" end="15829" title="hard rock" label="hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="15834" end="15845" title="Heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q93292" start="15851" end="15864" title="Divlje Jagode" label="Divlje Jagode"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="15866" end="15880" title="Serbo-Croatian" label="Serbo-Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q724586" start="16085" end="16095" title="Bo Goldman" label="Bo Goldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q108366" start="16156" end="16168" title="Gregory Peck" label="Gregory Peck"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="16257" end="16272" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173424" start="16410" end="16421" title="Peter Cowie" label="Peter Cowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204187" start="16429" end="16449" title="Criterion Collection" label="Criterion Collection"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33125" wikidata="Q41364" url="?curid=33125" title="Wavelength">
<text>In physics and mathematics, wavelength or spatial period of a wave or periodic function is the distance over which the wave&#x27;s shape repeats. In other words, it is the distance between consecutive corresponding points of the same &quot;phase&quot; on the wave, such as two adjacent crests, troughs, or zero crossings. Wavelength is a characteristic of both traveling waves and standing waves, as well as other spatial wave patterns. The inverse of the wavelength is called the &quot;spatial frequency&quot;. Wavelength is commonly designated by the Greek letter lambda (&quot;λ&quot;). For a modulated wave, &quot;wavelength&quot; may refer to the carrier wavelength of the signal. The term &quot;wavelength&quot; may also apply to the repeating envelope of modulated waves or waves formed by interference of several sinusoids.

Assuming a sinusoidal wave moving at a fixed wave speed, wavelength is inversely proportional to the frequency of the wave: waves with higher frequencies have shorter wavelengths, and lower frequencies have longer wavelengths.

Wavelength depends on the medium (for example, vacuum, air, or water) that a wave travels through. Examples of waves are sound waves, light, water waves and periodic electrical signals in a conductor. A sound wave is a variation in air pressure, while in light and other electromagnetic radiation the strength of the electric and the magnetic field vary. Water waves are variations in the height of a body of water. In a crystal lattice vibration, atomic positions vary.

The range of wavelengths or frequencies for wave phenomena is called a &quot;spectrum&quot;. The name originated with the visible light spectrum but now can be applied to the entire electromagnetic spectrum as well as to a sound spectrum or vibration spectrum.

== Sinusoidal waves ==
In linear media, any wave pattern can be described in terms of the independent propagation of sinusoidal components. The wavelength &quot;λ&quot; of a sinusoidal waveform traveling at constant speed &quot;formula_1&quot; is given by
: formula_2
where formula_1 is called the phase speed (magnitude of the phase velocity) of the wave and formula_4 is the wave&#x27;s frequency. In a dispersive medium, the phase speed itself depends upon the frequency of the wave, making the relationship between wavelength and frequency nonlinear.

In the case of electromagnetic radiation—such as light—in free space, the phase speed is the speed of light, about . Thus the wavelength of a 100 MHz electromagnetic (radio) wave is about: divided by = 3 m. The wavelength of visible light ranges from deep red, roughly 700 nm, to violet, roughly 400 nm (for other examples, see electromagnetic spectrum).

For sound waves in air, the speed of sound is 343 m/s (at room temperature and atmospheric pressure). The wavelengths of sound frequencies audible to the human ear (20 Hz–20 kHz) are thus between approximately 17 m and 17 mm, respectively. Somewhat higher frequencies are used by bats so they can resolve targets smaller than 17 mm. Wavelengths in audible sound are much longer than those in visible light.


=== Standing waves ===
A standing wave is an undulatory motion that stays in one place. A sinusoidal standing wave includes stationary points of no motion, called nodes, and the wavelength is twice the distance between nodes.

The upper figure shows three standing waves in a box. The walls of the box are considered to require the wave to have nodes at the walls of the box (an example of boundary conditions), thus determining the allowed wavelengths. For example, for an electromagnetic wave, if the box has ideal conductive walls, the condition for nodes at the walls results because the conductive walls cannot support a tangential electric field, forcing the wave to have zero amplitude at the wall.

The stationary wave can be viewed as the sum of two traveling sinusoidal waves of oppositely directed velocities. Consequently, wavelength, period, and wave velocity are related just as for a traveling wave. For example, the speed of light can be determined from observation of standing waves in a metal box containing an ideal vacuum.

=== Mathematical representation ===
Traveling sinusoidal waves are often represented mathematically in terms of their velocity &quot;v&quot; (in the x direction), frequency &quot;f&quot; and wavelength &quot;λ&quot; as:
: formula_5
where &quot;y&quot; is the value of the wave at any position &quot;x&quot; and time &quot;t&quot;, and &quot;A&quot; is the amplitude of the wave. They are also commonly expressed in terms of wavenumber &quot;k&quot; (2π times the reciprocal of wavelength) and angular frequency &quot;ω&quot; (2π times the frequency) as:
: formula_6
in which wavelength and wavenumber are related to velocity and frequency as:
: formula_7
or
: formula_8

In the second form given above, the phase is often generalized to , by replacing the wavenumber &quot;k&quot; with a wave vector that specifies the direction and wavenumber of a plane wave in 3-space, parameterized by position vector r. In that case, the wavenumber &quot;k&quot;, the magnitude of k, is still in the same relationship with wavelength as shown above, with &quot;v&quot; being interpreted as scalar speed in the direction of the wave vector. The first form, using reciprocal wavelength in the phase, does not generalize as easily to a wave in an arbitrary direction.

Generalizations to sinusoids of other phases, and to complex exponentials, are also common; see plane wave. The typical convention of using the cosine phase instead of the sine phase when describing a wave is based on the fact that the cosine is the real part of the complex exponential in the wave
: formula_9

=== General media ===


The speed of a wave depends upon the medium in which it propagates. In particular, the speed of light in a medium is less than in vacuum, which means that the same frequency will correspond to a shorter wavelength in the medium than in vacuum, as shown in the figure at right.

This change in speed upon entering a medium causes refraction, or a change in direction of waves that encounter the interface between media at an angle. For electromagnetic waves, this change in the angle of propagation is governed by Snell&#x27;s law.

The wave velocity in one medium not only may differ from that in another, but the velocity typically varies with wavelength. As a result, the change in direction upon entering a different medium changes with the wavelength of the wave.

For electromagnetic waves the speed in a medium is governed by its &quot;refractive index&quot; according to
: formula_10
where &quot;c&quot; is the speed of light in vacuum and &quot;n&quot;(&quot;λ&quot;0) is the refractive index of the medium at wavelength λ0, where the latter is measured in vacuum rather than in the medium. The corresponding wavelength in the medium is
: formula_11

When wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation are quoted, the wavelength in vacuum usually is intended unless the wavelength is specifically identified as the wavelength in some other medium. In acoustics, where a medium is essential for the waves to exist, the wavelength value is given for a specified medium.

The variation in speed of light with wavelength is known as dispersion, and is also responsible for the familiar phenomenon in which light is separated into component colours by a prism. Separation occurs when the refractive index inside the prism varies with wavelength, so different wavelengths propagate at different speeds inside the prism, causing them to refract at different angles. The mathematical relationship that describes how the speed of light within a medium varies with wavelength is known as a dispersion relation.

==== Nonuniform media ====

Wavelength can be a useful concept even if the wave is not periodic in space. For example, in an ocean wave approaching shore, shown in the figure, the incoming wave undulates with a varying &quot;local&quot; wavelength that depends in part on the depth of the sea floor compared to the wave height. The analysis of the wave can be based upon comparison of the local wavelength with the local water depth.
Waves that are sinusoidal in time but propagate through a medium whose properties vary with position (an &quot;inhomogeneous&quot; medium) may propagate at a velocity that varies with position, and as a result may not be sinusoidal in space. The figure at right shows an example. As the wave slows down, the wavelength gets shorter and the amplitude increases; after a place of maximum response, the short wavelength is associated with a high loss and the wave dies out.

The analysis of differential equations of such systems is often done approximately, using the &quot;WKB method&quot; (also known as the &quot;Liouville–Green method&quot;). The method integrates phase through space using a local wavenumber, which can be interpreted as indicating a &quot;local wavelength&quot; of the solution as a function of time and space.
This method treats the system locally as if it were uniform with the local properties; in particular, the local wave velocity associated with a frequency is the only thing needed to estimate the corresponding local wavenumber or wavelength. In addition, the method computes a slowly changing amplitude to satisfy other constraints of the equations or of the physical system, such as for conservation of energy in the wave.

==== Crystals ====
Waves in crystalline solids are not continuous, because they are composed of vibrations of discrete particles arranged in a regular lattice. This produces aliasing because the same vibration can be considered to have a variety of different wavelengths, as shown in the figure. Descriptions using more than one of these wavelengths are redundant; it is conventional to choose the longest wavelength that fits the phenomenon. The range of wavelengths sufficient to provide a description of all possible waves in a crystalline medium corresponds to the wave vectors confined to the Brillouin zone.

This indeterminacy in wavelength in solids is important in the analysis of wave phenomena such as energy bands and lattice vibrations. It is mathematically equivalent to the aliasing of a signal that is sampled at discrete intervals.

== More general waveforms ==
The concept of wavelength is most often applied to sinusoidal, or nearly sinusoidal, waves, because in a linear system the sinusoid is the unique shape that propagates with no shape change – just a phase change and potentially an amplitude change. The wavelength (or alternatively wavenumber or wave vector) is a characterization of the wave in space, that is functionally related to its frequency, as constrained by the physics of the system. Sinusoids are the simplest traveling wave solutions, and more complex solutions can be built up by superposition.

In the special case of dispersion-free and uniform media, waves other than sinusoids propagate with unchanging shape and constant velocity. In certain circumstances, waves of unchanging shape also can occur in nonlinear media; for example, the figure shows ocean waves in shallow water that have sharper crests and flatter troughs than those of a sinusoid, typical of a cnoidal wave, a traveling wave so named because it is described by the Jacobi elliptic function of &quot;m&quot;th order, usually denoted as . Large-amplitude ocean waves with certain shapes can propagate unchanged, because of properties of the nonlinear surface-wave medium.

If a traveling wave has a fixed shape that repeats in space or in time, it is a &quot;periodic wave&quot;. Such waves are sometimes regarded as having a wavelength even though they are not sinusoidal. As shown in the figure, wavelength is measured between consecutive corresponding points on the waveform.

=== Wave packets ===


Localized wave packets, &quot;bursts&quot; of wave action where each wave packet travels as a unit, find application in many fields of physics. A wave packet has an &quot;envelope&quot; that describes the overall amplitude of the wave; within the envelope, the distance between adjacent peaks or troughs is sometimes called a &quot;local wavelength&quot;. An example is shown in the figure. In general, the &quot;envelope&quot; of the wave packet moves at a speed different from the constituent waves.

Using Fourier analysis, wave packets can be analyzed into infinite sums (or integrals) of sinusoidal waves of different wavenumbers or wavelengths.

Louis de Broglie postulated that all particles with a specific value of momentum &quot;p&quot; have a wavelength &quot;λ&quot; = &quot;h&quot;/&quot;p&quot;, where &quot;h&quot; is the Planck constant. This hypothesis was at the basis of quantum mechanics. Nowadays, this wavelength is called the de Broglie wavelength. For example, the electrons in a CRT display have a De Broglie wavelength of about . To prevent the wave function for such a particle being spread over all space, de Broglie proposed using wave packets to represent particles that are localized in space. The spatial spread of the wave packet, and the spread of the wavenumbers of sinusoids that make up the packet, correspond to the uncertainties in the particle&#x27;s position and momentum, the product of which is bounded by Heisenberg uncertainty principle.

== Interference and diffraction ==
=== Double-slit interference ===


When sinusoidal waveforms add, they may reinforce each other (constructive interference) or cancel each other (destructive interference) depending upon their relative phase. This phenomenon is used in the interferometer. A simple example is an experiment due to Young where light is passed through two slits.
As shown in the figure, light is passed through two slits and shines on a screen. The path of the light to a position on the screen is different for the two slits, and depends upon the angle θ the path makes with the screen. If we suppose the screen is far enough from the slits (that is, &quot;s&quot; is large compared to the slit separation &quot;d&quot;) then the paths are nearly parallel, and the path difference is simply . Accordingly, the condition for constructive interference is:
: formula_12
where &quot;m&quot; is an integer, and for destructive interference is:
: formula_13

Thus, if the wavelength of the light is known, the slit separation can be determined from the interference pattern or &quot;fringes&quot;, and &quot;vice versa&quot;.

For multiple slits, the pattern is
: formula_14
where &quot;q&quot; is the number of slits, and &quot;g&quot; is the grating constant. The first factor, &quot;I&quot;1, is the single-slit result, which modulates the more rapidly varying second factor that depends upon the number of slits and their spacing. In the figure &quot;I&quot;1 has been set to unity, a very rough approximation.

The effect of interference is to &quot;redistribute&quot; the light, so the energy contained in the light is not altered, just where it shows up.

=== Single-slit diffraction ===

The notion of path difference and constructive or destructive interference used above for the double-slit experiment applies as well to the display of a single slit of light intercepted on a screen. The main result of this interference is to spread out the light from the narrow slit into a broader image on the screen. This distribution of wave energy is called diffraction.

Two types of diffraction are distinguished, depending upon the separation between the source and the screen: Fraunhofer diffraction or far-field diffraction at large separations and Fresnel diffraction or near-field diffraction at close separations.

In the analysis of the single slit, the non-zero width of the slit is taken into account, and each point in the aperture is taken as the source of one contribution to the beam of light (&quot;Huygens&#x27; wavelets&quot;). On the screen, the light arriving from each position within the slit has a different path length, albeit possibly a very small difference. Consequently, interference occurs.

In the Fraunhofer diffraction pattern sufficiently far from a single slit, within a small-angle approximation, the intensity spread &quot;S&quot; is related to position &quot;x&quot; via a squared sinc function:
: formula_15 with formula_16
where &quot;L&quot; is the slit width, &quot;R&quot; is the distance of the pattern (on the screen) from the slit, and λ is the wavelength of light used. The function &quot;S&quot; has zeros where &quot;u&quot; is a non-zero integer, where are at &quot;x&quot; values at a separation proportion to wavelength.

=== Diffraction-limited resolution ===
Diffraction is the fundamental limitation on the resolving power of optical instruments, such as telescopes (including radiotelescopes) and microscopes.
For a circular aperture, the diffraction-limited image spot is known as an Airy disk; the distance &quot;x&quot; in the single-slit diffraction formula is replaced by radial distance &quot;r&quot; and the sine is replaced by 2&quot;J&quot;1, where &quot;J&quot;1 is a first order Bessel function.

The resolvable &quot;spatial&quot; size of objects viewed through a microscope is limited according to the Rayleigh criterion, the radius to the first null of the Airy disk, to a size proportional to the wavelength of the light used, and depending on the numerical aperture:
: formula_17
where the numerical aperture is defined as formula_18 for θ being the half-angle of the cone of rays accepted by the microscope objective.

The &quot;angular&quot; size of the central bright portion (radius to first null of the Airy disk) of the image diffracted by a circular aperture, a measure most commonly used for telescopes and cameras, is:
: formula_19
where &quot;λ&quot; is the wavelength of the waves that are focused for imaging, &quot;D&quot; the entrance pupil diameter of the imaging system, in the same units, and the angular resolution &quot;δ&quot; is in radians.

As with other diffraction patterns, the pattern scales in proportion to wavelength, so shorter wavelengths can lead to higher resolution.

== Subwavelength ==
The term &quot;subwavelength&quot; is used to describe an object having one or more dimensions smaller than the length of the wave with which the object interacts. For example, the term &quot;subwavelength-diameter optical fibre&quot; means an optical fibre whose diameter is less than the wavelength of light propagating through it.

A subwavelength particle is a particle smaller than the wavelength of light with which it interacts (see Rayleigh scattering). Subwavelength apertures are holes smaller than the wavelength of light propagating through them. Such structures have applications in extraordinary optical transmission, and zero-mode waveguides, among other areas of photonics.

&quot;Subwavelength&quot; may also refer to a phenomenon involving subwavelength objects; for example, subwavelength imaging.

== Angular wavelength ==
A quantity related to the wavelength is the angular wavelength (also known as reduced wavelength), usually symbolized by &quot;ƛ&quot; (&quot;lambda-bar&quot; or barred lambda). It is equal to the ordinary wavelength reduced by a factor of 2π (), with SI units of meter per radian. It is the inverse of &quot;angular wavenumber&quot; (). It is usually encountered in quantum mechanics, where it is used in combination with the reduced Planck constant (symbol &quot;ħ&quot;, h-bar) and the angular frequency (symbol ).

== See also ==

* Emission spectrum
* Envelope (waves)
* Fraunhofer lines – dark lines in the solar spectrum, traditionally used as standard optical wavelength references
* Index of wave articles
* Length measurement
* Spectral line
* Spectroscopy
* Spectrum

== References ==
== External links ==

* Conversion: Wavelength to Frequency and vice versa – Sound waves and radio waves
* Teaching resource for 14–16 years on sound including wavelength 
* The visible electromagnetic spectrum displayed in web colors with according wavelengths</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="3" end="10" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="15" end="26" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="28" end="38" title="Wavelength" label="wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="42" end="56" title="Wavelength" label="spatial period"/>
<link wikidata="Q37172" start="62" end="66" title="wave" label="wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q184743" start="70" end="87" title="periodic function" label="periodic function"/>
<link wikidata="Q185553" start="240" end="245" title="phase (waves)" label="phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q462383" start="306" end="319" title="zero crossing" label="zero crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q123300" start="381" end="394" title="standing wave" label="standing wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q216906" start="441" end="448" title="multiplicative inverse" label="inverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650811" start="487" end="504" title="spatial frequency" label="spatial frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q8216" start="553" end="565" title="Greek letter" label="Greek letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q10897" start="566" end="572" title="lambda" label="lambda"/>
<link wikidata="Q499193" start="652" end="670" title="carrier wavelength" label="carrier wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060372" start="750" end="758" title="envelope (mathematics)" label="envelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q136980" start="797" end="809" title="Interference (wave propagation)" label="interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q207527" start="844" end="859" title="sinusoidal wave" label="sinusoidal wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="934" end="943" title="frequency" label="frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q11461" start="1182" end="1192" title="sound wave" label="sound wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="1195" end="1200" title="light" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q165848" start="1202" end="1212" title="water wave" label="water wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q124291" start="1251" end="1260" title="Electrical conductor" label="conductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11461" start="1264" end="1269" title="sound" label="sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068172" start="1297" end="1305" title="sound pressure" label="pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="1316" end="1321" title="light" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="1332" end="1357" title="electromagnetic radiation" label="electromagnetic radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q46221" start="1378" end="1386" title="electric field" label="electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="1395" end="1409" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q186608" start="1490" end="1507" title="lattice vibration" label="lattice vibration"/>
<link wikidata="Q654182" start="1610" end="1618" title="spectrum" label="spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q76299" start="1655" end="1677" title="Visible spectrum" label="visible light spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q133139" start="1715" end="1739" title="electromagnetic spectrum" label="electromagnetic spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q113581936" start="1756" end="1770" title="sound spectrum" label="sound spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q900121" start="1774" end="1792" title="vibration spectrum" label="vibration spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753188" start="1821" end="1827" title="linear" label="linear"/>
<link wikidata="Q13824" start="2123" end="2137" title="phase velocity" label="phase velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="2184" end="2193" title="frequency" label="frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q182893" start="2200" end="2217" title="dispersive medium" label="dispersive medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q590051" start="2293" end="2338" title="dispersion relation" label="relationship between wavelength and frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="2366" end="2391" title="electromagnetic radiation" label="electromagnetic radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11475" start="2409" end="2419" title="free space" label="free space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111" start="2444" end="2458" title="speed of light" label="speed of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142" start="2607" end="2610" title="red" label="red"/>
<link wikidata="Q178674" start="2624" end="2626" title="nanometre" label="nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q428124" start="2631" end="2637" title="Violet (color)" label="violet"/>
<link wikidata="Q133139" start="2679" end="2703" title="electromagnetic spectrum" label="electromagnetic spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11461" start="2711" end="2721" title="sound wave" label="sound wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q124003" start="2735" end="2749" title="speed of sound" label="speed of sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q102145" start="2765" end="2806" title="standard conditions for temperature and pressure" label="room temperature and atmospheric pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="2875" end="2877" title="hertz" label="Hz"/>
<link wikidata="Q11573" start="2920" end="2921" title="metre" label="m"/>
<link wikidata="Q174789" start="2929" end="2931" title="millimetre" label="mm"/>
<link wikidata="Q28425" start="2987" end="2990" title="bat" label="bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q123300" start="3141" end="3154" title="standing wave" label="standing wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062658" start="3279" end="3284" title="node (physics)" label="nodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332643" start="3506" end="3525" title="boundary conditions" label="boundary conditions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4048" end="4062" title="Speed of light#Cavity resonance" label="speed of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q159190" start="4516" end="4525" title="amplitude" label="amplitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q192510" start="4584" end="4594" title="wavenumber" label="wavenumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q834020" start="4653" end="4670" title="angular frequency" label="angular frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q657009" start="4948" end="4959" title="wave vector" label="wave vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q122518" start="5009" end="5019" title="plane wave" label="plane wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q526901" start="5023" end="5030" title="3-space" label="3-space"/>
<link wikidata="Q122518" start="5510" end="5520" title="plane wave" label="plane wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q13647261" start="5558" end="5564" title="cosine" label="cosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q13647261" start="5586" end="5590" title="sine" label="sine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5880" end="5886" title="Vacuum#In electromagnetism" label="vacuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q72277" start="6079" end="6089" title="refraction" label="refraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="6185" end="6206" title="electromagnetic waves" label="electromagnetic waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q208391" start="6263" end="6279" title="Snell&amp;#x27;s law" label="Snell&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q174102" start="6592" end="6608" title="refractive index" label="refractive index"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111" start="6668" end="6682" title="speed of light" label="speed of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q182893" start="7282" end="7292" title="dispersion (optics)" label="dispersion"/>
<link wikidata="Q181477" start="7402" end="7407" title="dispersive prism" label="prism"/>
<link wikidata="Q72277" start="7583" end="7590" title="refract" label="refract"/>
<link wikidata="Q590051" start="7733" end="7752" title="dispersion relation" label="dispersion relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q184743" start="7842" end="7850" title="periodic function" label="periodic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11214" start="8677" end="8698" title="differential equation" label="differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q907306" start="8761" end="8771" title="WKB approximation" label="WKB method"/>
<link wikidata="Q192510" start="8890" end="8900" title="wavenumber" label="wavenumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q11382" start="9408" end="9430" title="conservation of energy" label="conservation of energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q868732" start="9619" end="9627" title="aliasing" label="aliasing"/>
<link wikidata="Q917246" start="10043" end="10057" title="Brillouin zone" label="Brillouin zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q806380" start="10158" end="10170" title="energy bands" label="energy bands"/>
<link wikidata="Q186608" start="10175" end="10193" title="phonons" label="lattice vibrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q868732" start="10234" end="10242" title="aliasing" label="aliasing"/>
<link wikidata="Q210868" start="10263" end="10270" title="sampling (signal processing)" label="sampled"/>
<link wikidata="Q192510" start="10605" end="10615" title="wavenumber" label="wavenumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q657009" start="10619" end="10630" title="wave vector" label="wave vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q37172" start="10795" end="10809" title="Wave" label="traveling wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q284885" start="10867" end="10880" title="superposition principle" label="superposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137392" start="11253" end="11265" title="cnoidal wave" label="cnoidal wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473526" start="11324" end="11348" title="Jacobi elliptic function" label="Jacobi elliptic function"/>
<link wikidata="Q165848" start="11412" end="11422" title="ocean wave" label="ocean wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412691" start="11870" end="11881" title="wave packet" label="wave packet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365258" start="12369" end="12385" title="Fourier analysis" label="Fourier analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q192510" start="12483" end="12493" title="wavenumber" label="wavenumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q83331" start="12512" end="12528" title="Louis de Broglie" label="Louis de Broglie"/>
<link wikidata="Q41273" start="12584" end="12592" title="momentum" label="momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q122894" start="12697" end="12712" title="Planck constant" label="Planck constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="12750" end="12767" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q193907" start="12809" end="12830" title="de Broglie wavelength" label="de Broglie wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="12849" end="12857" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="12864" end="12867" title="cathode-ray tube" label="CRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362761" start="12931" end="12944" title="wave function" label="wave function"/>
<link wikidata="Q192510" start="13146" end="13156" title="wavenumber" label="wavenumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q44746" start="13309" end="13341" title="Heisenberg uncertainty principle" label="Heisenberg uncertainty principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q850283" start="13619" end="13633" title="Interferometry" label="interferometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q25820" start="13676" end="13681" title="Thomas Young (scientist)" label="Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q217785" start="13712" end="13721" title="Double-slit experiment" label="two slits"/>
<link wikidata="Q133900" start="15414" end="15425" title="diffraction" label="diffraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q851014" start="15537" end="15559" title="Fraunhofer diffraction" label="Fraunhofer diffraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2286895" start="15610" end="15629" title="Fresnel diffraction" label="Fresnel diffraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760468" start="16161" end="16186" title="small-angle approximation" label="small-angle approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q855949" start="16274" end="16287" title="sinc function" label="sinc function"/>
<link wikidata="Q740898" start="16717" end="16732" title="Angular resolution" label="resolving power"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213" start="16765" end="16774" title="telescope" label="telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q184356" start="16787" end="16801" title="radiotelescope" label="radiotelescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q196538" start="16808" end="16819" title="microscopes" label="microscopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q851016" start="16896" end="16905" title="Airy disk" label="Airy disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q219637" start="17101" end="17116" title="Bessel function" label="Bessel function"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17226" end="17244" title="Angular resolution#The_Rayleigh_criterion" label="Rayleigh criterion"/>
<link wikidata="Q898896" start="17374" end="17392" title="numerical aperture" label="numerical aperture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3880557" start="17524" end="17544" title="microscope objective" label="microscope objective"/>
<link wikidata="Q851016" start="17635" end="17644" title="Airy disk" label="Airy disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q359518" start="17867" end="17881" title="entrance pupil" label="entrance pupil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4445018" start="18341" end="18377" title="subwavelength-diameter optical fibre" label="subwavelength-diameter optical fibre"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="18393" end="18406" title="optical fiber" label="optical fibre"/>
<link wikidata="Q193709" start="18589" end="18608" title="Rayleigh scattering" label="Rayleigh scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q6434802" start="18625" end="18633" title="aperture" label="aperture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422238" start="18745" end="18779" title="extraordinary optical transmission" label="extraordinary optical transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q8069454" start="18785" end="18804" title="zero-mode waveguide" label="zero-mode waveguide"/>
<link wikidata="Q467054" start="18828" end="18837" title="photonics" label="photonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504693" start="18943" end="18964" title="subwavelength imaging" label="subwavelength imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q394671" start="19154" end="19167" title="barred lambda" label="barred lambda"/>
<link wikidata="Q192510" start="19301" end="19319" title="angular wavenumber" label="angular wavenumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q122894" start="19419" end="19442" title="reduced Planck constant" label="reduced Planck constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q834020" start="19481" end="19498" title="angular frequency" label="angular frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q216817" start="19529" end="19546" title="Emission spectrum" label="Emission spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380913" start="19549" end="19565" title="Envelope (waves)" label="Envelope (waves)"/>
<link wikidata="Q311552" start="19568" end="19584" title="Fraunhofer lines" label="Fraunhofer lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q13637840" start="19684" end="19706" title="Index of wave articles" label="Index of wave articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6522493" start="19709" end="19727" title="Length measurement" label="Length measurement"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="19730" end="19743" title="Spectral line" label="Spectral line"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="19746" end="19758" title="Spectroscopy" label="Spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q654182" start="19761" end="19769" title="Spectrum" label="Spectrum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33126" wikidata="Q195719" url="?curid=33126" title="The Wachowskis">
<text>Lana Wachowski (born Larry Wachowski, June 21, 1965) and Lilly Wachowski (born Andy Wachowski, December 29, 1967) are American film and television directors, writers and producers. The sisters are both trans women.

Together known as the Wachowskis (), the sisters have worked as a writing and directing team through most of their careers. They made their directing debut in 1996 with &quot;Bound&quot; and achieved fame with their second film, &quot;The Matrix&quot; (1999), a major box-office success for which they won the Saturn Award for Best Director. They wrote and directed its two sequels, &quot;The Matrix Reloaded&quot; and &quot;The Matrix Revolutions&quot; (both in 2003), and were involved in the writing and production of other works in the &quot;Matrix&quot; franchise.

Following the commercial success of the &quot;Matrix&quot; series, the Wachowskis wrote and produced the 2005 film &quot;V for Vendetta&quot;, an adaptation of the graphic novel by Alan Moore and David Lloyd, and in 2008 released the film &quot;Speed Racer&quot;, a live-action adaptation of the Japanese anime series. Their next film, &quot;Cloud Atlas&quot;, based on the novel by David Mitchell and co-written and co-directed by Tom Tykwer, was released in 2012. Their film &quot;Jupiter Ascending&quot; and the Netflix series &quot;Sense8&quot;, the latter of which they co-created with J. Michael Straczynski, debuted in 2015; the second season of &quot;Sense8&quot; ended the series in 2018 and was Lana&#x27;s first major project without Lilly.

Since the series finale of &quot;Sense8&quot;, the Wachowskis have been working separately on different projects: Lilly directed, wrote, and executive-produced several episodes of Showtime&#x27;s &quot;Work in Progress&quot; (2019) with creators Abby McEnany and Tim Mason, while Lana filmed &quot;The Matrix Resurrections&quot;, written with Mitchell and Aleksandar Hemon, which was released in December 2021.

== Early lives and careers ==
Lana was born in Chicago in 1965; Lilly was born two and a half years later, in 1967. Their mother, Lynne (née Luckinbill), was a nurse and painter. Their father, Ron Wachowski, was a businessman of Polish descent. Their uncle is an actor and Primetime Emmy Award-winning producer, Laurence Luckinbill. Ron and Lynne died five weeks apart in the late 2010s. Lana and Lilly have two other sisters, Julie and Laura. Julie was assistant coordinator for the film &quot;Bound&quot;; she is a novelist and screenwriter.

The Wachowskis attended the Kellogg Elementary School in Chicago&#x27;s Beverly area, and graduated from Whitney Young High School, known for its performing arts and science curriculum, in 1983 and 1985. Former classmates recall them playing &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot; and working in the school&#x27;s theater and TV program.

Lana went to Bard College, in New York state; Lilly attended Emerson College, in Boston. Each dropped out before graduating, and they ran a house-painting and construction business in Chicago.

Beginning in 1993, they wrote several issues of &quot;Ectokid&quot; for Marvel Comics&#x27; Razorline imprint (created by horror novelist Clive Barker), which were credited to Lana. They also wrote for the series &quot;Clive Barker&#x27;s Hellraiser&quot; and &quot;Clive Barker&#x27;s Nightbreed&quot; for Marvel&#x27;s Epic Comics imprint.

== Film and television careers ==
=== Early film projects ===
In the mid-1990s, they went into film writing, including the script for &quot;Assassins&quot; in 1994, which was directed by Richard Donner and released in 1995. Warner Bros. bought the script and included two more pictures in the contract. Donner had their script &quot;totally rewritten&quot; by Brian Helgeland and the Wachowskis tried unsuccessfully to remove their names from the film. They say the experience gave them the perspective that they should become directors or &quot;[they will] never survive as writers in this town&quot;.

Their next project was the 1996 neo-noir thriller &quot;Bound&quot;, for which they wrote the script and made their debut as directors. The film was well received for its style and craft, and was noted as one of the first mainstream films to feature a same-sex relationship without it being central to the plot. Taking advantage of the positive buzz, the Wachowskis asked to direct their next picture, &quot;The Matrix&quot;.

=== &quot;The Matrix&quot; franchise ===

They completed &quot;The Matrix&quot;, a science fiction action film, in 1999. The movie stars Keanu Reeves as Neo, a hacker recruited by a rebellion to aid them in the fight against machines who have taken over the world and placed humanity inside a simulated reality called &quot;the Matrix&quot;. Laurence Fishburne, Carrie-Anne Moss, Hugo Weaving and Joe Pantoliano also star. The movie was a critical and commercial hit for Warner Bros. It won four Academy Awards, including for &quot;Best Visual Effects&quot; for popularizing the bullet time visual effect. &quot;The Matrix&quot; came to be a major influence for action movies and has appeared in several &quot;greatest science fiction films&quot; lists. In 2012, the film was selected for preservation in the National Film Registry by the Library of Congress for being &quot;culturally, historically, and aesthetically significant&quot;.

After its success, the Wachowskis directed two sequels back-to-back, &quot;The Matrix Reloaded&quot; and &quot;The Matrix Revolutions&quot;, both released in 2003. &quot;The Matrix Reloaded&quot; received positive critical reception, although not on the level of the original. It became a major box office hit, retaining the spot of the highest-grossing R-rated film for over a decade (until 2016&#x27;s &quot;Deadpool&quot;). &quot;The Matrix Revolutions&quot; received a mixed critical reception and performed only moderately in the box office. Although profitable, it was slightly less so compared to the original film.

During production of the first film, the Wachowskis and Spencer Lamm, who ran the film&#x27;s official website, developed comics based on the setting of the film, which were published free of charge on the website. These and a few short stories were released in three series from 1999 to 2003, with several of them (along with new material) collected in two print volumes in 2003 and 2004. The Wachowskis themselves contributed &quot;Bits and Pieces&quot;, a prequel to the movie that explains the origins of the Matrix, featuring illustrations by Geof Darrow, the movie&#x27;s conceptual designer. Other writers and artists that contributed to the series include Neil Gaiman, Dave Gibbons, Paul Chadwick, Ted McKeever, Poppy Z. Brite, and Steve Skroce.

After Lilly Wachowski came out as transgender, she encouraged looking back on her and Lana&#x27;s works &quot;through the lens of our transness&quot;, saying that the themes of identity, self-image and transformation are apparent in &quot;The Matrix&quot;.

=== Later collaborations ===
The Wachowskis&#x27; next feature film was &quot;V for Vendetta&quot;, an adaptation of Alan Moore and David Lloyd&#x27;s graphic novel of the same name, starring Natalie Portman and Hugo Weaving. They wrote and produced the film with &quot;Matrix&quot; producer Joel Silver, who had previously purchased the film rights to the graphic novel. The Wachowskis offered the film to James McTeigue, the first assistant director of &quot;The Matrix&quot; trilogy, as his directorial debut. Moore did not participate in the production, as he was disappointed by previous Hollywood adaptations of his work, and disagreed with differences between his graphic novel and the screenplay. Following a statement to the press by Silver that Moore was supposedly excited to learn more about the movie, Moore demanded that Silver retract it, and had his own name removed from the credits when he did not. The film&#x27;s controversial storyline and themes have been both criticized and praised by sociopolitical groups. It was released in 2005 and was well received critically; it was a box office success but did not rank on the scale of &quot;The Matrix&quot; films. The film popularized the image of the Guy Fawkes mask, as the version designed by David Lloyd for the graphic novel and used in the movie was adopted as a symbol by the online hacktivist group Anonymous two years later.

In 2006, Silver had the Wachowskis and McTeigue hired to revamp &quot;The Invasion&quot; for Warner Bros. The studio was disappointed in the original cut of the film by director Oliver Hirschbiegel and hired the Wachowskis to rewrite a portion of the script and add new action scenes, which McTeigue directed. The film, the fourth adaptation of the novel &quot;The Body Snatchers&quot;, was released in 2007 and was not a critical or box office success. The Wachowskis and McTeigue are not credited on the film.

The Wachowskis returned to directing with &quot;Speed Racer&quot; (2008) which starred Emile Hirsch. The film, which was again produced by Silver, was an adaptation of a 1960s Japanese manga series originally called &quot;Mach GoGoGo&quot;, which had previously been adapted as an anime television series in 1967. The Wachowskis were attracted to the project because the series was the first anime they had watched, and they wanted to make a family-friendly film for their nieces and nephews to enjoy. In an effort to simulate the look of anime in live action, the Wachowskis had cinematographer David Tattersall shoot the movie digitally on a digital backlot with the intention of adding extensive visual effects in post-production. The movie was considered a critical and commercial failure. While its special effects were noted as outstanding, the storyline is considered lacking. It was nominated in the category of &quot;Worst Prequel, Remake, Rip-off or Sequel&quot; for the 29th Golden Raspberry Awards. Its box office gross was $93 million compared to a production budget of $120 million. Since then, critics periodically have put the film on lists of underrated or cult films.

The Wachowskis&#x27; next film project was &quot;Ninja Assassin&quot;, a martial arts film starring Rain, which was released in 2009. It was inspired by Rain&#x27;s fighting scene in &quot;Speed Racer&quot;. It was produced by the Wachowskis in their last involvement with Silver, and directed by McTeigue. The screenplay was written by Matthew Sand and J. Michael Straczynski, whom the Wachowskis called six weeks before filming to ask him for a total rewrite completed within a week, because they were dissatisfied with the earlier drafts and were running out of time. &quot;Ninja Assassin&quot; received negative reviews and performed lukewarmly in the theaters but respectably on home video.
Their next directorial outing was &quot;Cloud Atlas&quot;, which was adapted from David Mitchell&#x27;s 2004 novel of the same name and starred an ensemble cast which included Tom Hanks and Halle Berry. &quot;Cloud Atlas&quot; was written and directed in collaboration with German filmmaker Tom Tykwer, to whom the Wachowskis had introduced the novel several years earlier. The filmmakers failed to secure funding from a studio (save for $20 million by Warner Bros.) and the film was produced independently after much trouble. With a budget of over $100 million it was noted as the most expensive independent movie to that date and the first attempt at a German blockbuster. The movie opened at the 37th annual Toronto International Film Festival in September 2012 to acclaim and received a loud and lengthy standing ovation. In its general release a month later, it received polarized reviews and eventually appeared in both &quot;Best Film&quot; and &quot;Worst Film&quot; lists. Overall reviews were mixed to positive. The film received many nominations and awards, particularly for its technical aspects, including 10 nominations for the German Film Award, out of which it won five. It also received five Saturn Award nominations, out of which it won two. David Mitchell liked the script of &quot;Cloud Atlas&quot;, spent some time on the set (including filming a cameo), and had a positive impression about the result. According to the Wachowskis the movie was the hardest of their films to make, the one they are the most proud of, and the one they have been told has touched people&#x27;s lives the most. They believe &quot;Cloud Atlas&quot; will be the film for which they will be remembered.
The Wachowskis subsequently produced and directed &quot;Jupiter Ascending&quot;, an original space opera screenplay they wrote. The film was released in 2015. It stars Channing Tatum and Mila Kunis, and features the Wachowskis&#x27; regular collaborators John Gaeta on visual effects and Kym Barrett on costumes. According to &quot;Deadline&quot;, the financial and critical failure of &quot;Jupiter Ascending&quot; caused their business relationship with Warner Bros, that began with &quot;The Matrix&quot; franchise, to be terminated.

Their next project was the Netflix science fiction drama series &quot;Sense8&quot;, created and written with J. Michael Straczynski. &quot;Sense8&quot; features an international ensemble cast and was shot in multiple cities around the world. The Wachowskis directed most of the episodes of the first season, with the rest being handled by McTeigue, Tykwer, and their go-to visual effects supervisor on their movies, Dan Glass, in his directorial debut. The first season premiered in 2015 to generally positive reviews, particularly for the scale of the production and the presentation of diverse and LGBT characters and themes, winning the GLAAD Media Award for Outstanding Drama Series. It also received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Original Main Title Theme Music. After the first season, Lilly took a break from it, for what turned out to be the remainder of the series. A Christmas special was released on December 23, 2016, with the remainder of the show&#x27;s second season released in May 2017. Subsequently, the third season was canceled, and &quot;Sense8&quot; concluded with a two-hour finale which aired in June 2018.

In June 2016, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences invited the Wachowskis to join its ranks.

=== Solo projects ===
In May 2019, it was reported that Lilly would co-write, and co-showrun the eight-episode first season of the drama-comedy series &quot;Work in Progress&quot;, created by Abby McEnany and Tim Mason for Showtime. The series premiered in December 2019. In January 2020, the series was renewed for a 10-episode second season, with which Lilly would continue to be involved.

In August 2019, it was announced that Lana would be returning to write, direct and produce &quot;The Matrix Resurrections&quot;, the fourth installment of the &quot;Matrix&quot; series, with Reeves and Moss also reprising their roles; it marks the first film made by only one of the Wachowskis. Lana wrote the script with David Mitchell and Aleksandar Hemon. The film was released in December 2021.

In February 2024, Collider announced that Lily would direct &quot;Trash Mountain&quot;, a film about a young gay man returning from Chicago to rural Missouri to deal with the aftermath of his hoarder father&#x27;s death. The film, Lilly&#x27;s first directorial effort since &quot;Jupiter Ascending&quot;, will star Caleb Hearon, be written by Hearon and Ruby Caster and will be produced by Colin Trevorrow, Eddie Vaisman and Julia Lebedev.

In April 2024, it was announced that Warner Bros. was developing a new &quot;Matrix&quot; installment with Drew Goddard attached to write and direct, for which Lana will serve as an executive producer.

== Style and influences ==
J. Michael Straczynski, who has worked with the Wachowskis on &quot;Ninja Assassin&quot; and &quot;Sense8&quot;, has said that the sisters told him they were reading his column on scriptwriting for the &quot;Writer&#x27;s Digest&quot; magazine, for inspiration and pointers. Straczynski contributed to the magazine from 1981 to 1991.

In 1998, in the context of explaining how they got their start in filmmaking, the Wachowskis mentioned Roger Corman&#x27;s book &quot;How I Made A Hundred Movies in Hollywood and Never Lost a Dime&quot;, and indicated, with laughter, that they liked his movies, and began by wanting to &quot;make a low-budget horror movie&quot;. In the same interview they stated that they felt flattered, after their first film, by comparisons others had made between them and the Coen brothers, who had &quot;made five, maybe six great movies...&quot; at that time.

Speaking to Bernard Weintraub of &quot;The New York Times&quot; in April 1999, the Wachowskis mentioned explicitly that they prepared for their first &quot;Matrix&quot; production by studying the works of John Woo &quot;and other Hong Kong filmmakers&quot;, as well as reading and rereading Homer&#x27;s &quot;Odyssey&quot;, and studying the works of John Huston, Stanley Kubrick, Fritz Lang, George Lucas, Ridley Scott, and Billy Wilder.

Mark Miller, writing in &quot;Wired&quot; in 2003, also listed Homer, Hermann Hesse, Fyodor Dostoyevsky, and philosopher Cornel West. In an interview with &quot;Gadfly&quot; in 1998 (after their first movie), the Wachowskis reiterated their influence by or enjoyment of Huston (e.g. &quot;Treasure of the Sierra Madre&quot;) and Wilder (e.g., &quot;Sunset Boulevard&quot; and &quot;Lost Weekend&quot;), and added to these the impacts of Alfred Hitchcock (e.g. &quot;Strangers on a Train&quot; and &quot;Psycho&quot;), Roman Polanski (e.g. &quot;Repulsion&quot;), and Francis Ford Coppola (the &quot;Godfather&quot; movies, and &quot;The Conversation&quot;).

Ken Wilber has been cited as an influence.

The Wachowskis admit to a love for telling multi-part stories. &quot;Because we grew up on comic books and the Tolkien trilogy, one of the things we&#x27;re interested in is bringing serial fiction to cinema,&quot; Lana has said. Lilly says: &quot;We think movies are fairly boring and predictable. We want to screw with audiences&#x27; expectations.&quot; In terms of themes expressed in their body of work, Lana has cited &quot;the inexplicable nature of the universe [being] in constant dialogue with our own consciousness and our consciousness actually affect[ing] the inexplicable nature of the universe&quot;, &quot;interconnectivity and about truth beneath the surface&quot;, &quot;the paradox of choice and choicelessness&quot;, &quot;transcendence ... transcending archetypal boxes, stereotypes&quot;, &quot;race ... an important component&quot; and &quot;gender ... it&#x27;s one of our most significant cultural subjects&quot;.

The Wachowskis cited the art of comic book artist Geof Darrow as an influence on the look of &quot;The Matrix&quot;. Also, they said that &quot;Ghost in the Shell&quot;, &quot;Ninja Scroll&quot;, and &quot;Akira&quot; were anime that inspired them, saying &quot;in anime, one thing that they do that we tried to bring to our film was a juxtaposition of time and space in action beats&quot;.

The Wachowskis cited Stanley Kubrick&#x27;s &quot;2001: A Space Odyssey&quot; as a major influence for &quot;Cloud Atlas&quot;. They first saw the film when they were ten and seven, respectively.

Lana has most been influenced by &quot;2001: A Space Odyssey&quot;, &quot;Blade Runner&quot;, &quot;Ma vie en rose&quot;, and &quot;My Neighbor Totoro&quot;. Both Wachowskis are fans of the &quot;Ghost in the Shell&quot;, &quot;Akira&quot;, &quot;Wicked City&quot;, &quot;Ninja Scroll&quot; and &quot;Fist of the North Star&quot; anime films.

None of the home video releases of their films feature any deleted scenes. Lana says that despite often having to cut scenes from their movies, they do not want to include deleted scenes in such releases, as this would suggest that their films suffer from incompleteness. They love their finished products and believe them complete. For the same reason, they have not released their films for home video with director&#x27;s or extended cuts. They also avoid recording audio commentary tracks, having participated only on the track recorded for the LaserDisc of &quot;Bound&quot;. The sisters say they learned that offering an interpretation of their films means that viewers will be less likely to express their own interpretation.

== Frequent collaborators ==
The Wachowskis frequently hire the same basic film crew to make their movies. Lana says they do it in part to ensure a positive environment. &quot;It&#x27;s like family. Everyone is very respectful of each other,&quot; says Lana. They used the same practice while selecting the television crew for their Netflix show, &quot;Sense8&quot;.

Some of their most notable frequent collaborators are:

===Crew members===
===Cast member===
== Film production and comic book publishing ==

During &quot;The Matrix Reloaded&quot;, &quot;The Matrix Revolutions&quot;, &quot;The Animatrix&quot; and &quot;Enter the Matrix&quot; production, the Wachowskis created EON Entertainment (not to be confused with Eon Productions), their production company to coordinate and direct all involved partners. It is also where the films were edited together, after the various FX vendors sent their finished work. EON&#x27;s internal VFX team, ESC, did a number of visual effect shots for the two &quot;Matrix&quot; sequels and coordinated the other vendors. ESC was shut down in summer 2004. Anarchos Productions (credited in &quot;Cloud Atlas&quot; as Anarchos Pictures) is their production company that has been billed for all their films starting with &quot;V for Vendetta&quot; up to the first season of &quot;Sense8&quot;. In the second season and following Lilly&#x27;s break from the show, Anarchos is replaced by Venus Castina Productions, a production company created by Lana Wachowski and her wife Karin Winslow. Venus Castina is an epithet of the Roman goddess Venus, who in this form, was supposedly associated with &quot;the yearnings of feminine souls locked up in male bodies&quot;. In the &quot;Sense8&quot; series finale, the real book &quot;Venus Castina: Famous Female Impersonators Celestial and Human&quot; makes an appearance as the unlikely object that brought a lesbian couple together; according to Lana and the actresses that portray the couple, the duo have been based on Lana and Karin.

&quot;Kinowerks&quot; is their pre- and post-production and effects studio, based in the Ravenswood neighborhood of Chicago. It has been acclaimed for its green-friendly design, including solar panels, a planted roof, countertops and floors made of recycled materials, plug-in car stations, a water reuse and filtration system, skylights, and a pneumatic elevator. Roger Ebert was invited to watch a restored print of &quot;The Godfather&quot; in the &quot;Kinowerks&quot; facilities and met the Wachowskis, but he was oblivious to the fact the studio belonged to them. According to the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot;″s Christopher Pirelli, the facility is very low-key: &quot;an industrial building that appears neither old nor especially new&quot; and &quot;It could be an upscale dentist&#x27;s office&quot; while the &quot;inside is rather unexpected&quot; and has numerous mementos of past film projects. On October 22, 2018, the Wachowskis announced their plans to close and list &quot;Kinowerks&quot; for $5 million.

In 2003, they created Burlyman Entertainment and released comic books based on &quot;The Matrix&quot; as well as two original bi-monthly series:

* &quot;Shaolin Cowboy&quot; – created, written, and drawn by Geof Darrow (the Wachowskis contributed the opening dialogue to each issue)
* &quot;Doc Frankenstein&quot; – created by Geof Darrow and Steve Skroce, written by the Wachowskis, with art by Skroce.

== Unrealized projects ==

The Wachowskis&#x27; first script was a thriller called &quot;Carnivore&quot;. It has been described as &quot;a Corman-style, low-budget horror movie that dealt with cannibalism or, more specifically, rich people being eaten by cannibals&quot;. The writing was well received and the script achieved notice for the duo; however, interest in making the movie was low, for executives told them: &quot;This is a bad idea. I can&#x27;t make this. I&#x27;m rich.&quot; Years later, on April 6, 1999, a week after &quot;The Matrix&quot; opened in American theaters, &quot;Variety&quot; reported Trimark was looking to buy the script and were in talks with George A. Romero to direct it with production scheduled to begin in August. In April 2001, news of the Wachowskis producing it for Lionsgate and looking for a director surfaced again, and in August 2003 a second time, with their go-to cinematographer Bill Pope rumored to be making his directorial debut with it. The film ultimately went unproduced.

Another two of their earliest scripts which were never produced were &quot;Plastic Man&quot;, based on the DC Comics superhero of the same name and &quot;Vertical Run&quot; based on the book of the same name by Joseph R. Garber.

After completing &quot;The Matrix&quot;, the Wachowskis were looking to make an animated adaptation of Frank Miller&#x27;s &quot;Hard Boiled&quot; graphic novel. The comic was drawn by Geof Darrow, the conceptional designer of &quot;The Matrix&quot; and later its sequels. The project didn&#x27;t move forward because Miller didn&#x27;t want it to be an animated film.

In November 2000, &quot;Variety&quot; reported the Wachowskis would produce, co-create and direct second unit on a new &quot;Conan the Barbarian&quot; movie for Warner Bros. which was to be written and directed by John Milius and which could see Arnold Schwarzenegger make an appearance. The Wachowskis were planning to juggle their pre-production involvement on the movie and work on &quot;The Matrix&quot; sequels at the same time. In January 2004 it was reported that development on &quot;King Conan: Crown of Iron&quot; had stalled for years because of the Wachowskis&#x27; involvement in &quot;The Matrix&quot; sequels and now that the movies were complete they decided to abandon the project of their own volition because of the frequent clashes they had experienced with Milius concerning the tone and direction of the movie. Lana once suggested &quot;Conan the Barbarian&quot; as her favorite movie based on comics, to which Lilly also responded enthusiastically.

In 2008, the Wachowskis were producing for Madhouse an animated film based on their comic book company&#x27;s &quot;Shaolin Cowboy&quot;, titled &quot;Shaolin Cowboy in The Tomb of Doom&quot;. The feature is co-directed by the comic book&#x27;s creator Geof Darrow and Seiji Mizushima, a Japanese director. When the American financiers backed out, the film was left half-finished and in need of $3 million. Darrow does not believe that the required amount of money to finish it will be found.

In December 2009, Arianna Huffington tweeted pictures of herself on the set of &quot;a Wachowskis movie on Iraq from the perspective of the future&quot;. &quot;CHUD.com&quot; reported what the Wachowskis were doing was camera tests and shooting of test footage on the Red digital camera for a future movie, but not shooting the movie itself. In March 2010, Jesse Ventura said he had also shot for the project right before Huffington. Both of them were dressed as people from roughly 100 years in the future and they were asked to improvise without a script about the Iraq War. In May 2010, &quot;Deadline&quot; reported the movie was going to be a hard-R story that would begin in the future but move back to the then-current war in Iraq and center on the homosexual relationship between an American soldier and an Iraqi. The Wachowskis completed the script and were searching for funding to direct it. In July 2010, the movie was reported to have begun casting under the codename &quot;CN9&quot; (or &quot;CN-9&quot;), and in August 2010 the full name was revealed as &quot;Cobalt Neural 9&quot;. In September 2010, &quot;Vulture&quot; posted additional details about the script and revealed the movie would be told in found footage-style from the perspective of digital archaeologists from the future. An estimated $20 million budget was reported although they were told a studio would &quot;never, ever&quot; finance it but perhaps the Wachowskis could do it themselves. In December 2010, &quot;The Hollywood Reporter&quot; wrote that Salman Rushdie and Cornel West had also shot talking head sequences along with the previously reported involvement of Huffington and Ventura but the Wachowskis were looking into other movies because of troubles financing it. In September 2012, Aleksandar Hemon wrote about the making of &quot;Cloud Atlas&quot; and recalled he too was one of the people the Wachowskis had invited to interview in December 2009, to help inspire the script of &quot;Cobalt Neural 9&quot;. The last update on the film was in October 2012, when the Wachowskis were asked about it and they responded they were still keen to make it, because they had invested both financially ($5 million) and emotionally into it, even if that ends up being in a different form than film.

In December 2010, &quot;The Hollywood Reporter&quot; wrote that the Wachowskis were planning to direct for Warner Bros. a script of theirs called &quot;Hood&quot;, which was a modern adaptation of the Robin Hood legend. The Wachowskis were said to be reaching out to actors, including Will Smith.

== Personal lives ==
Lilly married Alisa Blasingame in 1991. In 2016, Lilly mentioned having a boyfriend. In 2019, she said Mickey Ray Mahoney was now her partner and that they had moved in together. Mahoney is an adjunct professor at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago and a trans man.

Lana married Thea Bloom in 1993. Following the release of &quot;The Matrix&quot;, Lana began attending the Los Angeles BDSM club The Dungeon, where she met Karin Winslow, who worked there as a dominatrix under the name Ilsa Strix. Bloom divorced Lana in 2002 after discovering the relationship. Lana and Karin made their first public appearance together at the premiere of &quot;The Matrix Reloaded&quot; in 2003, and married in 2009. Winslow is a board member of the Chicago House and Social Service Agency.

Raised by a &quot;hardcore atheist&quot; father and an &quot;ex-Catholic turned Shamanist&quot; mother, the duo once described their religious beliefs as non-denominational. Lana is a vegetarian. During the Democratic Party presidential primaries of 2016, &quot;The Advocate&quot; posted a video message of Lana talking about why she would be supporting Bernie Sanders.

=== Lana&#x27;s transition ===
Rumors that Lana Wachowski was transitioning spread in the early 2000s, though neither sister spoke directly on the subject at the time. In 2003, &quot;Gothamist&quot; reported the possible transition. In a 2007 interview, Joel Silver, the producer of numerous Wachowski films, said that the rumors concerning the transition were &quot;all untrue&quot;, saying that &quot;they just don&#x27;t do interviews, so people make things up.&quot; Crew members working on &quot;Speed Racer&quot; said similar things.

Lana publicly revealed her transition after &quot;Speed Racer&quot;″s release in 2008 and by at least December 2010, after which trade magazines and newspapers began to refer to her as &quot;Lana Wachowski&quot;, and to the duo as &quot;Andy and Lana Wachowski&quot;. On some documents her name is shown as Laurenca Wachowski. In July 2012, Lana made her first public appearance after transitioning, in a video discussing the creative process behind &quot;Cloud Atlas&quot;. Lana is the first major Hollywood director to come out as transgender.

In a September 2012 interview with Aleksandar Hemon of &quot;The New Yorker&quot;, Lana described an incident in third grade at her Catholic school where she was hesitant to join the boys&#x27; line and unconsciously accepted herself as belonging to the girls&#x27; line.

In October 2012, Lana Wachowski received the Human Rights Campaign&#x27;s Visibility Award. In her acceptance speech, she revealed that once during her youth, she had considered suicide because of her feelings of confusion about her gender identity. Her acceptance speech was one of the longest public appearances by either of the reclusive sisters. Lana said that, although she and Lilly had not publicly commented on her transitioning during the previous decade, it was not because she was ashamed of it, nor had she kept it a secret from her family and friends. Rather, she stated, the two are generally shy about the news media and prefer to maintain their privacy. Comparing media exposure to losing one&#x27;s virginity as an irreversible event that only happens once, the Wachowskis had tried to stay out of the public eye. They feared losing their privacy and the ability to go to public places without being noticed and harassed as celebrities.

Explaining her decision to appear at the HRC event, Lana said: 
There are some things we do for ourselves, but there are some things we do for others. I am here because when I was young, I wanted very badly to be a writer, I wanted to be a filmmaker, but I couldn&#x27;t find anyone like me in the world and it felt like my dreams were foreclosed simply because my gender was less typical than others. If I can be that person for someone else, then the sacrifice of my private civic life may have value.
In February 2014, Lana received the Freedom Award from Equality Illinois at their annual gala in Chicago.

=== Lilly&#x27;s transition ===
In March 2016, Lilly Wachowski also came out as a transgender woman, issuing a statement to the &quot;Windy City Times&quot; after a visit from a reporter from the &quot;Daily Mail&quot; newspaper who had attempted to get an interview with her about it. In that article, she said, &quot;I am one of the lucky ones. Having the support of my family and the means to afford doctors and therapists has given me the chance to actually survive this process. Transgender people without support, means and privilege do not have this luxury. And many do not survive.&quot;

Her first public appearance since beginning transitioning was a few weeks later, at the 27th GLAAD Media Awards, where she accepted an award for her Netflix series &quot;Sense8&quot; for Outstanding Drama Series. She said, &quot;I didn&#x27;t feel obligated to be here, but I wanted to do something. And it&#x27;s serendipitous that the awards were a couple of weeks later and our show was up for an award.&quot;

== Gaming ==
The Wachowskis are self-proclaimed gamers. As teens, they spent their weekends in the attic playing &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;. They liken the process of their gaming sessions to their process of filmmaking. Along with some of their friends, they wrote a 350-page role-playing game of their own called &quot;High Adventure&quot;.

On the video game front, they had been exchanging letters with Hideo Kojima and met him during a &quot;Famitsu&quot; interview in late 1999. &quot;Metal Gear Solid&quot; was the first video game they played after finishing work on &quot;The Matrix&quot;. Candidates for an adaptation of the first &quot;Matrix&quot; movie to video game form included Kojima, Bungie and Shiny Entertainment, whose &quot;Messiah&quot; PC game impressed them. Shiny&#x27;s David Perry, who ultimately had his company develop and collaborate with them on the &quot;Enter the Matrix&quot; and &quot;The Matrix: Path of Neo&quot; video games, was impressed with their familiarity with the medium; this proved helpful during development. The Wachowskis owned both a PlayStation 2 and Xbox video game console and played several games such as &quot;Splinter Cell&quot; and &quot;Halo 2&quot;. They reportedly destroyed their Xbox during a &quot;Halo&quot; deathmatch. Actor Collin Chou recounts an instance of visiting their office and finding them playing video games on the floor. Lilly is a fan of the &quot;Death Jr.&quot; PlayStation Portable game.

Asked about their feelings about turning the tightly controlled &quot;Matrix&quot; saga to the unpredictable form of an MMORPG with &quot;The Matrix Online&quot;, the duo appeared enthusiastic about the nature and possibilities of video games:

== Box office ==

== Works ==

=== Films ===
=== Television ===

=== Video games ===
=== Comic books ===
=== Music videos ===
&quot;The Art of the Matrix&quot; book credits them for including their screenplay and additional art. The Wachowskis also wrote an introduction to the 2005 published &quot;Vol. 2: Tag&quot; trade paperback of &quot;Ex Machina&quot; comic book, being big fans of it. Additionally Lana Wachowski wrote the introduction to the 2012 published &quot;No Straight Lines: Four Decades of Queer Comics&quot; collection of LGBTQ comic book stories.

Additionally classifying themselves as &quot;lifelong rabid Bulls fans&quot; they created a revamped introductory animation for Chicago Bulls to open the 2006–2007 regular season.

==See also==
* List of transgender film and television directors

== Notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q195719" start="0" end="14" title="The Wachowskis" label="Lana Wachowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q195719" start="21" end="36" title="The Wachowskis" label="Larry Wachowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q195719" start="57" end="72" title="The Wachowskis" label="Lilly Wachowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q195719" start="79" end="93" title="The Wachowskis" label="Andy Wachowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052281" start="202" end="213" title="trans women" label="trans women"/>
<link wikidata="Q195719" start="234" end="248" title="The Wachowskis" label="the Wachowskis"/>
<link wikidata="Q864930" start="391" end="396" title="Bound (1996 film)" label="Bound"/>
<link wikidata="Q83495" start="451" end="461" title="The Matrix" label="The Matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265702" start="526" end="556" title="Saturn Award for Best Director" label="Saturn Award for Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q189600" start="605" end="624" title="The Matrix Reloaded" label="The Matrix Reloaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q207536" start="641" end="663" title="The Matrix Revolutions" label="The Matrix Revolutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q13014087" start="756" end="784" title="The Matrix (franchise)" label="&amp;quot;Matrix&amp;quot; franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q5890" start="908" end="922" title="V for Vendetta (film)" label="V for Vendetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q103411" start="947" end="964" title="V for Vendetta" label="the graphic novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q205739" start="968" end="978" title="Alan Moore" label="Alan Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q729902" start="983" end="994" title="David Lloyd (comics)" label="David Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q312078" start="1032" end="1043" title="Speed Racer (film)" label="Speed Racer"/>
<link wikidata="Q432319" start="1079" end="1104" title="Speed Racer" label="the Japanese anime series"/>
<link wikidata="Q28936" start="1129" end="1140" title="Cloud Atlas (film)" label="Cloud Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q40205" start="1157" end="1166" title="Cloud Atlas (novel)" label="the novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q40479" start="1170" end="1184" title="David Mitchell (author)" label="David Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q57231" start="1219" end="1229" title="Tom Tykwer" label="Tom Tykwer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12125299" start="1270" end="1287" title="Jupiter Ascending" label="Jupiter Ascending"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="1302" end="1309" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q17080059" start="1323" end="1329" title="Sense8" label="Sense8"/>
<link wikidata="Q126941" start="1378" end="1400" title="J. Michael Straczynski" label="J. Michael Straczynski"/>
<link wikidata="Q3252662" start="1550" end="1563" title="series finale" label="series finale"/>
<link wikidata="Q23589" start="1720" end="1728" title="Showtime (TV network)" label="Showtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q79336003" start="1742" end="1758" title="Work in Progress (TV series)" label="Work in Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q80322391" start="1838" end="1862" title="The Matrix Resurrections" label="The Matrix Resurrections"/>
<link wikidata="Q738114" start="1896" end="1912" title="Aleksandar Hemon" label="Aleksandar Hemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="1999" end="2006" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507958" start="2089" end="2092" title="née" label="née"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189552" start="2181" end="2187" title="Polish American" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="2225" end="2245" title="Primetime Emmy Award" label="Primetime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q356846" start="2264" end="2283" title="Laurence Luckinbill" label="Laurence Luckinbill"/>
<link wikidata="Q864930" start="2447" end="2452" title="Bound (1996 film)" label="Bound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900382" start="2569" end="2576" title="Beverly, Chicago" label="Beverly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996715" start="2602" end="2627" title="Whitney Young Magnet High School" label="Whitney Young High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375" start="2745" end="2767" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q49109" start="2845" end="2857" title="Bard College" label="Bard College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335573" start="2893" end="2908" title="Emerson College" label="Emerson College"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="2913" end="2919" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544311" start="3080" end="3087" title="Ectokid" label="Ectokid"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="3098" end="3111" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7299658" start="3118" end="3127" title="Razorline" label="Razorline"/>
<link wikidata="Q298761" start="3164" end="3176" title="Clive Barker" label="Clive Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3553206" start="3245" end="3275" title="Hellraiser (comics)" label="Clive Barker&amp;#x27;s Hellraiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024694" start="3292" end="3322" title="Nightbreed (comics)" label="Clive Barker&amp;#x27;s Nightbreed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465548" start="3347" end="3358" title="Epic Comics" label="Epic Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q739498" start="3509" end="3518" title="Assassins (1995 film)" label="Assassins"/>
<link wikidata="Q262130" start="3556" end="3570" title="Richard Donner" label="Richard Donner"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="3593" end="3605" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q912327" start="3729" end="3744" title="Brian Helgeland" label="Brian Helgeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421031" start="4005" end="4013" title="neo-noir" label="neo-noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q864930" start="4029" end="4034" title="Bound (1996 film)" label="Bound"/>
<link wikidata="Q83495" start="4381" end="4391" title="The Matrix" label="The Matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q471839" start="4483" end="4498" title="Science fiction film" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q43416" start="4537" end="4549" title="Keanu Reeves" label="Keanu Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q247120" start="4553" end="4556" title="Neo (The Matrix)" label="Neo"/>
<link wikidata="Q125547326" start="4693" end="4710" title="simulated reality" label="simulated reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q193048" start="4742" end="4760" title="Laurence Fishburne" label="Laurence Fishburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q206890" start="4762" end="4778" title="Carrie-Anne Moss" label="Carrie-Anne Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q42204" start="4780" end="4792" title="Hugo Weaving" label="Hugo Weaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q296883" start="4797" end="4811" title="Joe Pantoliano" label="Joe Pantoliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q393686" start="4926" end="4957" title="Academy Award for Best Visual Effects" label="&amp;quot;Best Visual Effects&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004422" start="4979" end="4990" title="bullet time" label="bullet time"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5042" end="5075" title="The Matrix#Legacy" label="major influence for action movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q823422" start="5209" end="5231" title="National Film Registry" label="National Film Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="5239" end="5258" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q979925" start="5394" end="5406" title="Back to back film production" label="back-to-back"/>
<link wikidata="Q189600" start="5414" end="5433" title="The Matrix Reloaded" label="The Matrix Reloaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q207536" start="5450" end="5472" title="The Matrix Revolutions" label="The Matrix Revolutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987792" start="5693" end="5705" title="R rating (Motion Picture Association of America)" label="R-rated film"/>
<link wikidata="Q19347291" start="5749" end="5757" title="Deadpool (film)" label="Deadpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q528982" start="6511" end="6522" title="Geof Darrow" label="Geof Darrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q210059" start="6627" end="6638" title="Neil Gaiman" label="Neil Gaiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q445765" start="6640" end="6652" title="Dave Gibbons" label="Dave Gibbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q287876" start="6654" end="6667" title="Paul Chadwick" label="Paul Chadwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3380176" start="6669" end="6681" title="Ted McKeever" label="Ted McKeever"/>
<link wikidata="Q450868" start="6683" end="6697" title="Poppy Z. Brite" label="Poppy Z. Brite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613947" start="6703" end="6715" title="Steve Skroce" label="Steve Skroce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5890" start="7054" end="7068" title="V for Vendetta (film)" label="V for Vendetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q205739" start="7093" end="7103" title="Alan Moore" label="Alan Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q729902" start="7108" end="7119" title="David Lloyd (comics)" label="David Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q103411" start="7141" end="7157" title="V for Vendetta" label="of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q37876" start="7168" end="7183" title="Natalie Portman" label="Natalie Portman"/>
<link wikidata="Q42204" start="7188" end="7200" title="Hugo Weaving" label="Hugo Weaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q539718" start="7268" end="7279" title="Joel Silver" label="Joel Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q456008" start="7383" end="7397" title="James McTeigue" label="James McTeigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q13905" start="8195" end="8210" title="Guy Fawkes mask" label="Guy Fawkes mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q729902" start="8239" end="8250" title="David Lloyd (comics)" label="David Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q22685" start="8333" end="8343" title="hacktivist" label="hacktivist"/>
<link wikidata="Q10920" start="8350" end="8359" title="Anonymous (group)" label="Anonymous"/>
<link wikidata="Q652592" start="8448" end="8460" title="The Invasion (film)" label="The Invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q60634" start="8556" end="8575" title="Oliver Hirschbiegel" label="Oliver Hirschbiegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q963466" start="8739" end="8757" title="The Body Snatchers" label="The Body Snatchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q312078" start="8939" end="8950" title="Speed Racer (film)" label="Speed Racer"/>
<link wikidata="Q244678" start="8978" end="8990" title="Emile Hirsch" label="Emile Hirsch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9061" end="9088" title="Speed Racer#Manga" label="1960s Japanese manga series"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9172" end="9195" title="Speed Racer#Anime" label="anime television series"/>
<link wikidata="Q854168" start="9487" end="9503" title="David Tattersall" label="David Tattersall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224918" start="9520" end="9529" title="Digital cinematography" label="digitally"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276040" start="9535" end="9550" title="digital backlot" label="digital backlot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165644" start="9665" end="9683" title="Box-office bomb" label="commercial failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q290748" start="9872" end="9900" title="29th Golden Raspberry Awards" label="29th Golden Raspberry Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q219557" start="10065" end="10074" title="cult film" label="cult film"/>
<link wikidata="Q671631" start="10127" end="10141" title="Ninja Assassin" label="Ninja Assassin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033891" start="10151" end="10168" title="martial arts film" label="martial arts film"/>
<link wikidata="Q318485" start="10178" end="10182" title="Rain (entertainer)" label="Rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q126941" start="10432" end="10454" title="J. Michael Straczynski" label="J. Michael Straczynski"/>
<link wikidata="Q28936" start="10814" end="10825" title="Cloud Atlas (film)" label="Cloud Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q40479" start="10856" end="10870" title="David Mitchell (author)" label="David Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q40205" start="10878" end="10888" title="Cloud Atlas (novel)" label="2004 novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154757" start="10921" end="10934" title="ensemble cast" label="ensemble cast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263" start="10950" end="10959" title="Tom Hanks" label="Tom Hanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033016" start="10964" end="10975" title="Halle Berry" label="Halle Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q57231" start="11065" end="11075" title="Tom Tykwer" label="Tom Tykwer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3950963" start="11473" end="11520" title="2012 Toronto International Film Festival" label="37th annual Toronto International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q708731" start="11916" end="11933" title="German Film Award" label="German Film Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q105447" start="11983" end="11995" title="Saturn Award" label="Saturn Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q12125299" start="12531" end="12548" title="Jupiter Ascending" label="Jupiter Ascending"/>
<link wikidata="Q468478" start="12568" end="12579" title="space opera" label="space opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q212064" start="12643" end="12657" title="Channing Tatum" label="Channing Tatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q37628" start="12662" end="12672" title="Mila Kunis" label="Mila Kunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11305" start="12730" end="12740" title="John Gaeta" label="John Gaeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3200949" start="12763" end="12774" title="Kym Barrett" label="Kym Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4037100" start="12807" end="12815" title="Deadline Hollywood" label="Deadline"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="13040" end="13047" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q17080059" start="13083" end="13089" title="Sense8" label="Sense8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154757" start="13191" end="13204" title="ensemble cast" label="ensemble cast"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="13613" end="13617" title="LGBT" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266111" start="13653" end="13670" title="GLAAD Media Award" label="GLAAD Media Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13675" end="13699" title="GLAAD Media Award#Categories" label="Outstanding Drama Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="13720" end="13740" title="Primetime Emmy Award" label="Primetime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243507" start="13756" end="13799" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Main Title Theme Music" label="Outstanding Original Main Title Theme Music"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13910" end="13927" title="Christmas by medium#Television specials and episodes" label="Christmas special"/>
<link wikidata="Q212329" start="14183" end="14226" title="Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences" label="Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440873" start="14355" end="14362" title="showrunner" label="showrun"/>
<link wikidata="Q859369" start="14401" end="14413" title="Comedy drama" label="drama-comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q79336003" start="14427" end="14443" title="Work in Progress (TV series)" label="Work in Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q23589" start="14493" end="14501" title="Showtime (TV network)" label="Showtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q80322391" start="14760" end="14784" title="The Matrix Resurrections" label="The Matrix Resurrections"/>
<link wikidata="Q126730672" start="15081" end="15089" title="Collider (website)" label="Collider"/>
<link wikidata="Q592" start="15172" end="15175" title="gay" label="gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="15212" end="15220" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q107087843" start="15379" end="15391" title="Caleb Hearon" label="Caleb Hearon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145625" start="15454" end="15469" title="Colin Trevorrow" label="Colin Trevorrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q922368" start="15612" end="15624" title="Drew Goddard" label="Drew Goddard"/>
<link wikidata="Q126941" start="15735" end="15757" title="J. Michael Straczynski" label="J. Michael Straczynski"/>
<link wikidata="Q15846533" start="15943" end="15963" title="Writer&amp;#x27;s Digest" label="Writer&amp;#x27;s Digest"/>
<link wikidata="Q318292" start="16173" end="16185" title="Roger Corman" label="Roger Corman"/>
<link wikidata="Q56095" start="16536" end="16549" title="Coen brothers" label="Coen brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="16662" end="16680" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q55432" start="16828" end="16836" title="John Woo" label="John Woo"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="16933" end="16940" title="Odyssey" label="Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q51575" start="16974" end="16985" title="John Huston" label="John Huston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001" start="16987" end="17002" title="Stanley Kubrick" label="Stanley Kubrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q19504" start="17004" end="17014" title="Fritz Lang" label="Fritz Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q38222" start="17016" end="17028" title="George Lucas" label="George Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q56005" start="17030" end="17042" title="Ridley Scott" label="Ridley Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q51547" start="17048" end="17060" title="Billy Wilder" label="Billy Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="17126" end="17131" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q25973" start="17133" end="17146" title="Hermann Hesse" label="Hermann Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q991" start="17148" end="17166" title="Fyodor Dostoyevsky" label="Fyodor Dostoyevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q712469" start="17184" end="17195" title="Cornel West" label="Cornel West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516345" start="17224" end="17230" title="Gadfly Online" label="Gadfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q251559" start="17352" end="17380" title="The Treasure of the Sierra Madre (film)" label="Treasure of the Sierra Madre"/>
<link wikidata="Q193570" start="17412" end="17428" title="Sunset Boulevard (film)" label="Sunset Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q237134" start="17445" end="17457" title="The Lost Weekend (film)" label="Lost Weekend"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374" start="17500" end="17516" title="Alfred Hitchcock" label="Alfred Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q499639" start="17529" end="17549" title="Strangers on a Train (film)" label="Strangers on a Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q163038" start="17566" end="17572" title="Psycho (1960 film)" label="Psycho"/>
<link wikidata="Q51552" start="17581" end="17595" title="Roman Polanski" label="Roman Polanski"/>
<link wikidata="Q954816" start="17608" end="17617" title="Repulsion (film)" label="Repulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q56094" start="17630" end="17650" title="Francis Ford Coppola" label="Francis Ford Coppola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3225260" start="17656" end="17684" title="The Godfather (film series)" label="&amp;quot;Godfather&amp;quot; movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009788" start="17696" end="17712" title="The Conversation" label="The Conversation"/>
<link wikidata="Q309829" start="17722" end="17732" title="Ken Wilber" label="Ken Wilber"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="17877" end="17884" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="17885" end="17892" title="The Lord of the Rings" label="trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q528982" start="18756" end="18767" title="Geof Darrow" label="Geof Darrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q92580" start="18850" end="18868" title="Ghost in the Shell" label="Ghost in the Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052531" start="18882" end="18894" title="Ninja Scroll" label="Ninja Scroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1905968" start="18912" end="18917" title="Akira (1988 film)" label="Akira"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001" start="19119" end="19134" title="Stanley Kubrick" label="Stanley Kubrick"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19148" end="19169" title="2001: A Space Odyssey (film)" label="2001: A Space Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q184843" start="19369" end="19381" title="Blade Runner" label="Blade Runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q969469" start="19395" end="19409" title="Ma vie en rose" label="Ma vie en rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q39571" start="19427" end="19445" title="My Neighbor Totoro" label="My Neighbor Totoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943025" start="19542" end="19553" title="Wicked City (1987 film)" label="Wicked City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814532" start="19596" end="19618" title="Fist of the North Star (1986 film)" label="Fist of the North Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="19625" end="19630" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561317" start="19651" end="19661" title="home video" label="home video"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253643" start="19698" end="19711" title="deleted scene" label="deleted scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q240862" start="20048" end="20063" title="Director&amp;#x27;s cut" label="director&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q240862" start="20067" end="20079" title="extended cut" label="extended cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q440991" start="20108" end="20124" title="audio commentary" label="audio commentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q273309" start="20188" end="20197" title="LaserDisc" label="LaserDisc"/>
<link wikidata="Q506702" start="20448" end="20457" title="film crew" label="film crew"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696997" start="20680" end="20695" title="television crew" label="television crew"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="20706" end="20713" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q17080059" start="20726" end="20732" title="Sense8" label="Sense8"/>
<link wikidata="Q335340" start="20965" end="20978" title="The Animatrix" label="The Animatrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q736528" start="20995" end="21011" title="Enter the Matrix" label="Enter the Matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q219135" start="21096" end="21111" title="Eon Productions" label="Eon Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q8317" start="21254" end="21256" title="Visual effects" label="FX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7920577" start="21901" end="21914" title="Venus Castina" label="Venus Castina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7296558" start="22483" end="22493" title="Ravenswood, Chicago" label="Ravenswood"/>
<link wikidata="Q655870" start="22549" end="22563" title="Environmentally friendly" label="green-friendly"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="22759" end="22770" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q47703" start="22818" end="22831" title="The Godfather" label="The Godfather"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="22987" end="23002" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999320" start="23438" end="23460" title="Burlyman Entertainment" label="Burlyman Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7489166" start="23570" end="23584" title="Shaolin Cowboy" label="Shaolin Cowboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q528982" start="23624" end="23635" title="Geof Darrow" label="Geof Darrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287049" start="23708" end="23724" title="Doc Frankenstein" label="Doc Frankenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613947" start="23760" end="23772" title="Steve Skroce" label="Steve Skroce"/>
<link wikidata="Q318292" start="23961" end="23967" title="Roger Corman" label="Corman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853058" start="24015" end="24026" title="Human cannibalism" label="cannibalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="24414" end="24421" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q4853294" start="24437" end="24444" title="Trimark" label="Trimark"/>
<link wikidata="Q51511" start="24498" end="24514" title="George A. Romero" label="George A. Romero"/>
<link wikidata="Q515869" start="24629" end="24638" title="Lionsgate" label="Lionsgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q795025" start="24749" end="24758" title="Bill Pope" label="Bill Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q746838" start="24966" end="24992" title="Plastic Man" label="superhero of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553867" start="25060" end="25076" title="Joseph R. Garber" label="Joseph R. Garber"/>
<link wikidata="Q207676" start="25182" end="25194" title="Frank Miller" label="Frank Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150504" start="25208" end="25219" title="Hard Boiled (comics)" label="Hard Boiled"/>
<link wikidata="Q189169" start="25574" end="25593" title="Conan the Barbarian" label="Conan the Barbarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q83859" start="25663" end="25674" title="John Milius" label="John Milius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685" start="25695" end="25716" title="Arnold Schwarzenegger" label="Arnold Schwarzenegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q309003" start="26308" end="26327" title="Conan the Barbarian (1982 film)" label="Conan the Barbarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q650867" start="26465" end="26473" title="Madhouse (company)" label="Madhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999320" start="26506" end="26524" title="Burlyman Entertainment" label="comic book company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994628" start="26691" end="26706" title="Seiji Mizushima" label="Seiji Mizushima"/>
<link wikidata="Q233397" start="26934" end="26952" title="Arianna Huffington" label="Arianna Huffington"/>
<link wikidata="Q23680068" start="27076" end="27084" title="CHUD.com" label="CHUD.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257270" start="27184" end="27202" title="Red Digital Cinema Camera Company" label="Red digital camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q311161" start="27273" end="27286" title="Jesse Ventura" label="Jesse Ventura"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="27483" end="27491" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272147" start="28136" end="28155" title="Found footage (film technique)" label="found footage-style"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913377" start="28180" end="28202" title="Data archaeology" label="digital archaeologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q61503" start="28414" end="28436" title="The Hollywood Reporter" label="The Hollywood Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q44306" start="28454" end="28468" title="Salman Rushdie" label="Salman Rushdie"/>
<link wikidata="Q712469" start="28473" end="28484" title="Cornel West" label="Cornel West"/>
<link wikidata="Q738114" start="28698" end="28714" title="Aleksandar Hemon" label="Aleksandar Hemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q122634" start="29406" end="29416" title="Robin Hood" label="Robin Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q40096" start="29490" end="29500" title="Will Smith" label="Will Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449503" start="29787" end="29796" title="trans man" label="trans man"/>
<link wikidata="Q190845" start="29918" end="29922" title="BDSM" label="BDSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q540391" start="29992" end="30002" title="dominatrix" label="dominatrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="30336" end="30343" title="atheist" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="30373" end="30381" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42042" start="30389" end="30398" title="Shamanist" label="Shamanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882536" start="30463" end="30481" title="non-denominational" label="non-denominational"/>
<link wikidata="Q83364" start="30493" end="30503" title="Vegetarianism" label="vegetarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004294" start="30516" end="30563" title="Democratic Party presidential primaries, 2016" label="Democratic Party presidential primaries of 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q752361" start="30571" end="30583" title="The Advocate (LGBT magazine)" label="The Advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q359442" start="30663" end="30677" title="Bernie Sanders" label="Bernie Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085588" start="30742" end="30755" title="Transitioning (transgender)" label="transitioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5587827" start="30863" end="30872" title="Gothamist" label="Gothamist"/>
<link wikidata="Q539718" start="30934" end="30945" title="Joel Silver" label="Joel Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q738114" start="31803" end="31819" title="Aleksandar Hemon" label="Aleksandar Hemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="31829" end="31843" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253380" start="32086" end="32107" title="Human Rights Campaign" label="Human Rights Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q48264" start="32274" end="32289" title="gender identity" label="gender identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992694" start="33555" end="33572" title="Equality Illinois" label="Equality Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569310" start="33741" end="33757" title="Windy City Times" label="Windy City Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q210534" start="33809" end="33819" title="Daily Mail" label="Daily Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q24904989" start="34292" end="34315" title="27th GLAAD Media Awards" label="27th GLAAD Media Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276395" start="34666" end="34671" title="gamer" label="gamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375" start="34737" end="34759" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q160738" start="34903" end="34920" title="role-playing game" label="role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q315577" start="35033" end="35045" title="Hideo Kojima" label="Hideo Kojima"/>
<link wikidata="Q591573" start="35073" end="35080" title="Famitsu" label="Famitsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6582527" start="35117" end="35133" title="Metal Gear Solid (1998 video game)" label="Metal Gear Solid"/>
<link wikidata="Q735267" start="35328" end="35334" title="Bungie" label="Bungie"/>
<link wikidata="Q340209" start="35339" end="35358" title="Shiny Entertainment" label="Shiny Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255337" start="35372" end="35379" title="Messiah (video game)" label="Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4485157" start="35386" end="35393" title="PC game" label="PC game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643588" start="35423" end="35434" title="David Perry (game developer)" label="David Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q736528" start="35514" end="35530" title="Enter the Matrix" label="Enter the Matrix"/>
<link wikidata="" start="35547" end="35570" title="The Matrix: Path of Neo" label="The Matrix: Path of Neo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10680" start="35712" end="35725" title="PlayStation 2" label="PlayStation 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q132020" start="35730" end="35734" title="Xbox (console)" label="Xbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q8076" start="35735" end="35753" title="video game console" label="video game console"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514735" start="35793" end="35806" title="Splinter Cell" label="Splinter Cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q252804" start="35823" end="35829" title="Halo 2" label="Halo 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q48510" start="35900" end="35910" title="Deathmatch (video games)" label="deathmatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q338048" start="35918" end="35929" title="Collin Chou" label="Collin Chou"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247156" start="36055" end="36064" title="Death Jr." label="Death Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q170325" start="36071" end="36091" title="PlayStation Portable" label="PlayStation Portable"/>
<link wikidata="Q862490" start="36219" end="36225" title="Massively multiplayer online game" label="MMORPG"/>
<link wikidata="Q959892" start="36237" end="36254" title="The Matrix Online" label="The Matrix Online"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36476" end="36497" title="The Matrix (franchise)#Official" label="The Art of the Matrix"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36643" end="36654" title="Ex Machina (comics)#Collected editions" label="Vol. 2: Tag"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243552" start="36661" end="36676" title="Trade paperback (comics)" label="trade paperback"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263623" start="36686" end="36696" title="Ex Machina (comics)" label="Ex Machina"/>
<link wikidata="Q54488978" start="36816" end="36833" title="No Straight Lines" label="No Straight Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="36884" end="36889" title="LGBTQ" label="LGBTQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q128109" start="37039" end="37052" title="Chicago Bulls" label="Chicago Bulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q997459" start="37065" end="37089" title="2006–07 NBA season" label="2006–2007 regular season"/>
<link wikidata="Q111168686" start="37107" end="37156" title="List of transgender film and television directors" label="List of transgender film and television directors"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33127" wikidata="Q1537" url="?curid=33127" title="Wisconsin">
<text>Wisconsin ( ) is a state in the Great Lakes region of the Upper Midwest of the United States. It borders Minnesota to the west, Iowa to the southwest, Illinois to the south, Lake Michigan to the east, Michigan to the northeast, and Lake Superior to the north. With a population of about 6 million and an area of about 65,500 square miles, Wisconsin is the 20th-largest state by population and the 23rd-largest by area. It has 72 counties. Its most populous city is Milwaukee; its capital and second-most populous city is Madison. Other urban areas include Green Bay, Kenosha, Racine, Eau Claire, and the Fox Cities.

Wisconsin&#x27;s geography is diverse, shaped by Ice Age glaciers except in the Driftless Area. The Northern Highland and Western Upland along with a part of the Central Plain occupy the state&#x27;s western part, with lowlands stretching to Lake Michigan. Wisconsin is third to Ontario and Michigan in the length of its Great Lakes coastline. Its northern portion is home to the Chequamegon–Nicolet National Forest. At the time of European contact, the area was inhabited by Algonquian and Siouan nations, and today it is home to eleven federally recognized tribes. Originally part of the Northwest Territory, it was admitted as a state in 1848. During the 19th and early 20th centuries, many European settlers entered the state, mostly from Germany and Scandinavia. Wisconsin remains a center of German American and Scandinavian American culture, particularly in respect to its cuisine, with foods such as bratwurst and kringle.

Wisconsin is one of the nation&#x27;s leading dairy producers and is known as &quot;America&#x27;s Dairyland&quot;; it is particularly famous for its cheese. The state is also famous for its beer, particularly and historically in Milwaukee, most notably as the headquarters of the Miller Brewing Company. Wisconsin has some of the nation&#x27;s most permissive alcohol laws and is known for its drinking culture. Its economy is dominated by manufacturing, healthcare, information technology, and agriculture—specifically dairy, cranberries, and ginseng. Tourism is also a major contributor to its economy. The gross domestic product in 2020 was $348 billion. Wisconsin is home to one UNESCO World Heritage Site, comprising two of the most significant buildings designed by Wisconsin-born architect Frank Lloyd Wright: his studio at Taliesin near Spring Green and his Jacobs I House in Madison. The Republican Party was founded in Wisconsin in 1854; in modern elections, it is considered a swing state.

==Etymology==
The word &quot;Wisconsin&quot; originates from the name given to the Wisconsin River by one of the Algonquian-speaking Native American groups living in the region at the time of European colonization. The French explorer Jacques Marquette was the first European to reach the Wisconsin River, arriving in 1673 and calling the river (likely ᒣᔅᑯᐤᓯᣙ &quot;meskowsin&quot;) in his journal. Subsequent French writers changed the spelling from to , and over time this became the name for both the Wisconsin River and the surrounding lands. English speakers anglicized the spelling from to &quot;Wisconsin&quot; when they began to arrive in large numbers during the early 19th century. The legislature of Wisconsin Territory made the current spelling official in 1845.

The Algonquian word for Wisconsin and its original meaning have both grown obscure. While interpretations vary, most implicate the river and the red sandstone that lines its banks. One leading theory holds that the name originated from the Miami word , meaning , a reference to the setting of the Wisconsin River as it flows through the reddish sandstone of the Wisconsin Dells. Other theories include claims that the name originated from one of a variety of Ojibwa words meaning , , or .

==History==
===Early history===
Wisconsin has been home to a wide variety of cultures over the past 14,000 years. The first people arrived around 10,000 BCE during the Wisconsin Glaciation. These early inhabitants, called Paleo-Indians, hunted now-extinct ice age animals such as the Boaz mastodon, a prehistoric mastodon skeleton unearthed along with spear points in southwest Wisconsin. After the ice age ended around 8000 BCE, people in the subsequent Archaic period lived by hunting, fishing, and gathering food from wild plants. Agricultural societies emerged gradually over the Woodland period between 1000 BCE to 1000 CE. Toward the end of this period, Wisconsin was the heartland of the &quot;Effigy Mound culture&quot;, which built thousands of animal-shaped mounds across the landscape. Later, between 1000 and 1500 CE, the Mississippian and Oneota cultures built substantial settlements including the fortified village at Aztalan in southeast Wisconsin. The Oneota may be the ancestors of the modern Ioway and Ho-Chunk nations who shared the Wisconsin region with the Menominee at the time of European contact. Other Native American groups living in Wisconsin when Europeans first settled included the Ojibwa, Sauk, Fox, Kickapoo, and Pottawatomie, who migrated to Wisconsin from the east between 1500 and 1700.

===European settlements===

The first European to visit what became Wisconsin was probably the French explorer Jean Nicolet. He canoed west from Georgian Bay through the Great Lakes in 1634, and it is traditionally assumed that he came ashore near Green Bay at Red Banks. Pierre Radisson and Médard des Groseilliers visited Green Bay again in 1654–1666 and Chequamegon Bay in 1659–1660, where they traded for fur with local Native Americans. In 1673, Jacques Marquette and Louis Jolliet became the first to record a journey on the Fox-Wisconsin Waterway all the way to the Mississippi River near Prairie du Chien. Frenchmen like Nicholas Perrot continued to ply the fur trade across Wisconsin through the 17th and 18th centuries, but the French made no permanent settlements in Wisconsin before Great Britain won control of the region following the French and Indian War in 1763. Even so, French traders continued to work in the region after the war, and some, beginning with Charles de Langlade in 1764, settled in Wisconsin permanently, rather than returning to British-controlled Canada.

The British gradually took over Wisconsin during the French and Indian War, taking control of Green Bay in 1761 and gaining control of all of Wisconsin in 1763. Like the French, the British were interested in little but the fur trade. One notable event in the fur trading industry in Wisconsin occurred in 1791, when two free African Americans set up a fur trading post among the Menominee at present-day Marinette. The first permanent settlers, mostly French Canadians, some Anglo-New Englanders and a few African American freedmen, arrived in Wisconsin while it was under British control. Charles de Langlade is generally recognized as the first settler, establishing a trading post at Green Bay in 1745, and moving there permanently in 1764. Settlement began at Prairie du Chien around 1781. The French residents at the trading post in what is now Green Bay, referred to the town as &quot;La Baye&quot;. However, British fur traders referred to it as &quot;Green Bay&quot;, because the water and the shore assumed green tints in early spring. The old French title was gradually dropped, and the British name of &quot;Green Bay&quot; eventually stuck. The region coming under British rule had virtually no adverse effect on the French residents as the British needed the cooperation of the French fur traders and the French fur traders needed the goodwill of the British. During the French occupation of the region licenses for fur trading had been issued scarcely and only to select groups of traders, whereas the British, in an effort to make as much money as possible from the region, issued licenses for fur trading freely, both to British and to French residents. The fur trade in what is now Wisconsin reached its height under British rule, and the first self-sustaining farms in the state were established as well. From 1763 to 1780, Green Bay was a prosperous community which produced its own foodstuff, built graceful cottages and held dances and festivities.

Joseph Roi built the Tank Cottage in Green Bay in 1776. Located in Heritage Hill State Historical Park, it is the oldest standing building from Wisconsin&#x27;s early years and is listed on the National Register of Historic Places.

===U.S. territory===

Wisconsin became a territorial possession of the United States in 1783 after the American Revolutionary War. In 1787, it became part of the Northwest Territory. As territorial boundaries subsequently developed, it was then part of Indiana Territory from 1800 to 1809, Illinois Territory from 1809 to 1818, and Michigan Territory from 1818 to 1836. However, the British remained in control until after the War of 1812, the outcome of which finally established an American presence in the area. Under American control, the economy of the territory shifted from fur trading to lead mining. The prospect of easy mineral wealth drew immigrants from throughout the U.S. and Europe to the lead deposits at Mineral Point, Dodgeville, and nearby areas. Some miners found shelter in the holes they had dug, and earned the nickname &quot;badgers&quot;, leading to Wisconsin&#x27;s identity as the &quot;Badger State&quot;. The sudden influx of white miners prompted tension with the local Native American population. The Winnebago War of 1827 and the Black Hawk War of 1832 culminated in the forced removal of Native Americans from most parts of the state.

Following these conflicts, Wisconsin Territory was created by an act of the United States Congress on April 20, 1836. By fall of that year, the best prairie groves of the counties surrounding what is now Milwaukee were occupied by farmers from the New England states.

===Statehood===

The Erie Canal facilitated the travel of both Yankee settlers and European immigrants to Wisconsin Territory. Yankees from New England and upstate New York seized a dominant position in law and politics, enacting policies that marginalized the region&#x27;s earlier Native American and French-Canadian residents. Yankees also speculated in real estate, platted towns such as Racine, Beloit, Burlington, and Janesville, and established schools, civic institutions, and Congregationalist churches. At the same time, many Germans, Irish, Norwegians, and other immigrants also settled in towns and farms across the territory, establishing Catholic and Lutheran institutions.

The growing population allowed Wisconsin to gain statehood on May 29, 1848, as the 30th state. Between 1840 and 1850, Wisconsin&#x27;s non-Indian population had swollen from 31,000 to 305,000. More than a third of residents (110,500) were foreign born, including 38,000 Germans, 28,000 British immigrants from England, Scotland, and Wales, and 21,000 Irish. Another third (103,000) were Yankees from New England and western New York state. Only about 63,000 residents in 1850 had been born in Wisconsin.

Nelson Dewey, the first governor of Wisconsin, was a Democrat. Dewey oversaw the transition from the territorial to the new state government. He encouraged the development of the state&#x27;s infrastructure, particularly the construction of new roads, railroads, canals, and harbors, as well as the improvement of the Fox and Wisconsin Rivers. During his administration, the State Board of Public Works was organized. Dewey, an abolitionist, was the first of many Wisconsin governors to advocate against the spread of slavery into new states and territories.
===Civil War===

Politics in early Wisconsin were defined by the greater national debate over slavery. A free state from its foundation, Wisconsin became a center of northern abolitionism. The debate became especially intense in 1854 after Joshua Glover, a runaway slave from Missouri, was captured in Racine. Glover was taken into custody under the Federal Fugitive Slave Law, but a mob of abolitionists stormed the prison where Glover was held and helped him escape to Canada. In a trial stemming from the incident, the Wisconsin Supreme Court ultimately declared the Fugitive Slave Law unconstitutional. The Republican Party, founded on March 20, 1854, by anti-slavery expansion activists in Ripon, Wisconsin, grew to dominate state politics in the aftermath of these events. During the Civil War, around 91,000 troops from Wisconsin fought for the Union.

===Economic progress===
Wisconsin&#x27;s economy also diversified during the early years of statehood. While lead mining diminished, agriculture became a principal occupation in the southern half of the state. Railroads were built across the state to help transport grains to market, and industries like J.I. Case &amp; Company in Racine were founded to build agricultural equipment. Wisconsin briefly became one of the nation&#x27;s leading producers of wheat during the 1860s. Meanwhile, the lumber industry dominated in the heavily forested northern sections of Wisconsin, and sawmills sprang up in cities like La Crosse, Eau Claire, and Wausau. These economic activities had dire environmental consequences. By the close of the 19th century, intensive agriculture had devastated soil fertility, and lumbering had deforested most of the state. These conditions forced both wheat agriculture and the lumber industry into a precipitous decline.

Beginning in the 1890s, farmers in Wisconsin shifted from wheat to dairy production to make more sustainable and profitable use of their land. Many immigrants carried cheese-making traditions that, combined with the state&#x27;s suitable geography and dairy research led by Stephen Babcock at the University of Wisconsin, helped the state build a reputation as &quot;America&#x27;s Dairyland&quot;. Meanwhile, conservationists including Aldo Leopold helped re-establish the state&#x27;s forests during the early 20th century, paving the way for a more renewable lumber and paper milling industry as well as promoting recreational tourism in the northern woodlands. Manufacturing also boomed in Wisconsin during the early 20th century, driven by an immense immigrant workforce arriving from Europe. Industries in cities like Milwaukee ranged from brewing and food processing to heavy machine production and tool-making, leading Wisconsin to rank 8th among U.S. states in total product value by 1910.

===20th century===

The early 20th century was also notable for the emergence of progressive politics championed by Robert M. La Follette. Between 1901 and 1914, Progressive Republicans in Wisconsin created the nation&#x27;s first comprehensive statewide primary election system, the first effective workplace injury compensation law, and the first state income tax, making taxation proportional to actual earnings.

During World War I, due to the neutrality of Wisconsin and many Wisconsin Republicans, progressives, and German immigrants which made up 30 to 40 percent of the state population, Wisconsin would gain the nickname &quot;Traitor State&quot; which was used by many &quot;hyper patriots&quot;.

As the war raged on in Europe, Robert M. La Follette, leader of the anti-war movement in Wisconsin. led a group of progressive senators in blocking a bill by president Woodrow Wilson which would have armed merchant ships with guns. Many Wisconsin politicians such as Emanuel L. Philipp and Irvine Lenroot were accused of having divided loyalties. Even with outspoken opponents to the war, at the onset of the war many Wisconsinites would abandon neutrality. Businesses, labor and farms all enjoyed prosperity from the war. With over 118,000 going into military service, Wisconsin was the first state to report for the national drafts conducted by the U.S. military.

The progressive Wisconsin Idea also promoted the statewide expansion of the University of Wisconsin through the UW-Extension system at this time. Later, UW economics professors John R. Commons and Harold Groves helped Wisconsin create the first unemployment compensation program in the United States in 1932. Other Wisconsin Idea scholars at the university generated the plan that became the New Deal&#x27;s Social Security Act of 1935, with Wisconsin expert Arthur J. Altmeyer playing the key role.

In the immediate aftermath of World War II, citizens of Wisconsin were divided over issues such as creation of the United Nations, support for the European recovery, and the growth of the Soviet Union&#x27;s power. However, when Europe divided into Communist and capitalist camps and the Chinese Communist Revolution succeeded in 1949, public opinion began to move towards support for the protection of democracy and capitalism against Communist expansion.

Wisconsin took part in several political extremes in the mid to late 20th century, ranging from the anti-communist crusades of Senator Joseph McCarthy in the 1950s to the radical antiwar protests at UW-Madison that culminated in the Sterling Hall bombing in August 1970. The state undertook welfare reform under Republican Governor Tommy Thompson during the 1990s. The state&#x27;s economy also underwent further transformations towards the close of the 20th century, as heavy industry and manufacturing declined in favor of a service economy based on medicine, education, agribusiness, and tourism.

===21st century===
In 2011, Wisconsin became the focus of some controversy when newly elected governor Scott Walker proposed and then successfully passed and enacted 2011 Wisconsin Act 10, which made large changes in the areas of collective bargaining, compensation, retirement, health insurance, and sick leave of public sector employees, among other changes. A series of major protests by union supporters took place that year in protest to the changes, and Walker survived a recall election held the next year, becoming the first governor in United States history to do so.

==Geography==
Wisconsin is in the Midwestern United States and is part of both the Great Lakes region and the Upper Midwest. The state has a total area of . Wisconsin is bordered by the Montreal River; Lake Superior and Michigan to the north; by Lake Michigan to the east; by Illinois to the south; and by Iowa to the southwest and Minnesota to the northwest. A border dispute with Michigan was settled by two cases, both Wisconsin v. Michigan, in 1934 and 1935. The state&#x27;s boundaries include the Mississippi River and St. Croix River in the west, and the Menominee River in the northeast.

Lying between the Great Lakes and the Mississippi River, Wisconsin has a wide variety of geographical features. The state is divided into five distinct regions. In the north, the Lake Superior Lowland occupies a belt of land along Lake Superior. Just to the south, the Northern Highland has massive mixed hardwood and coniferous forests including the Chequamegon–Nicolet National Forest, as well as thousands of glacial lakes, and the state&#x27;s highest point, Timms Hill. In the middle of the state, the Central Plain has some unique sandstone formations like the Dells of the Wisconsin River in addition to rich farmland. The Eastern Ridges and Lowlands region in the southeast is home to many of Wisconsin&#x27;s largest cities. The ridges include the Niagara Escarpment that stretches from New York, the Black River Escarpment and the Magnesian Escarpment. In the southwest, the Western Upland is a rugged landscape with a mix of forest and farmland, including many bluffs on the Mississippi River, and the Baraboo Range. This region is part of the Driftless Area, which also includes parts of Iowa, Illinois, and Minnesota. Overall, 46% of Wisconsin&#x27;s land area is covered by forest.

Wisconsin has geologic formations and deposits that vary in age from over three billion years to several thousand years, with most rocks being millions of years old. The oldest geologic formations were created over 600 million years ago during the Precambrian, the majority below the glacial deposits. Much of the Baraboo Range consists of Baraboo Quartzite and other Precambrian metamorphic rock. This area was not covered by glaciers during the most recent ice age, the Wisconsin Glaciation. Langlade County has a soil rarely found outside the county called Antigo silt loam.

The state has more than 12,000 named rivers and streams, totaling in length. It has over 15,000 named lakes, totaling about . Lake Winnebago is the largest inland lake, with over , and of shoreline. Along the two Great Lakes, Wisconsin has over of shoreline. Many of the named islands in Wisconsin are in the Great Lakes; many surround the Door Peninsula in Lake Michigan or are part of the Apostle Islands in Lake Superior. The Mississippi River and inland lakes and rivers contain the rest of Wisconsin&#x27;s islands.

Areas under the protection of the National Park Service include the Apostle Islands National Lakeshore, Ice Age National Scenic Trail, and portions of the Saint Croix National Scenic Riverway and North Country National Scenic Trail. There are an additional 18 National Natural Landmarks in the state that include dune and swales, swamps, bogs, and old-growth forests. Wisconsin has 50 state park units, covering more than in state parks and state recreation areas maintained by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. The Division of Forestry manages a further in Wisconsin&#x27;s state forests.

===Climate===

Most of Wisconsin is classified as warm-summer humid continental climate (Köppen &quot;Dfb&quot;), while southern and southwestern portions are classified as hot-summer humid continental climate (Köppen &quot;Dfa&quot;). The highest temperature ever recorded in the state was in the Wisconsin Dells, on July 13, 1936, where it reached 114 °F (46 °C). The lowest temperature ever recorded in Wisconsin was in the village of Couderay, where it reached −55 °F (−48 °C) on both February 2 and 4, 1996. Wisconsin also receives a large amount of regular snowfall averaging around in the southern portions with up to annually in the Lake Superior snowbelt each year.


===Cities===

Wisconsin has three types of municipality: cities, villages, and towns. Cities and villages are incorporated urban areas. Towns are unincorporated minor civil divisions of counties with limited self-government.

Over two-thirds of Wisconsin residents live in urban areas. Milwaukee, in southeastern Wisconsin, is the state&#x27;s most populous city, with approximately 580,000 people. The Milwaukee metropolitan area accounts for 1.57 million of the state&#x27;s residents. With a population of nearly 280,000, the state capital of Madison is consistently ranked as one of the most livable cities in both the state and country and is the fastest-growing city in Wisconsin. The Madison metropolitan area in southern Wisconsin has about 680,000 residents.

Medium-size cities dot the state. The largest of these is Green Bay in northeastern Wisconsin, with approximately 320,000 people in the metro area. Other metropolitan cities in the state include Appleton, Racine, Oshkosh, Eau Claire, Janesville, Wausau, La Crosse, Sheboygan, and Fond du Lac. Furthermore, another 12 cities function as centers of micropolitan statistical areas which typically anchor a network of working farms surrounding them. As of 2011, there were 12 cities in Wisconsin with a population of 50,000 or more, accounting for 73% of the state&#x27;s employment.


==Demographics==

===Population===

The United States Census Bureau estimates that the population of Wisconsin was 5,822,434 on July 1, 2019, a 2.4% increase since the 2010 United States census. This includes a natural increase since the last census of 150,659 people (i.e., 614,771 births minus 464,112 deaths) and a decrease due to net migration of 12,755 people. Immigration resulted in a net increase of 59,251 people, and migration from within the U.S. resulted in a net decrease of 72,006 people.

According to HUD&#x27;s 2022 Annual Homeless Assessment Report, there were an estimated 4,775 homeless people in Wisconsin.

In 2022, the five largest European ancestry groups were: German (36%), Irish (10.2%), Polish (7.9%), English (6.7%), and Norwegian (6.3%). German is the most common ancestry in every county in the state, except Menominee, Trempealeau, and Vernon. Wisconsin has the highest percentage of residents of Polish ancestry of any state. According to the 2022 American Community Survey, 7.6% of Wisconsin&#x27;s population were of Hispanic or Latino origin (of any race). The largest Hispanic ancestry groups were Mexican (5.1%), Puerto Rican (1.1%), Central American (0.4%), and Cuban (0.1%), with 0.9% reporting other Hispanic or Latino origins.

Since its founding, Wisconsin has been ethnically heterogeneous. Following the period of French fur traders, the next wave of settlers were miners, many of whom were Cornish, who settled the southwestern area of the state. The next wave was dominated by &quot;Yankees&quot;, migrants of English descent from New England and upstate New York; in the early years of statehood, they dominated the state&#x27;s heavy industry, finance, politics, and education. Between 1850 and 1900, the immigrants were mostly Germans, Scandinavians (the largest group being Norwegian), Irish, and Poles. In the 20th century, a number of African Americans and Mexicans settled in Milwaukee; and after the end of the Vietnam War came an influx of Hmongs.

The various ethnic groups settled in different areas of the state. Although German immigrants settled throughout the state, the largest concentration was in Milwaukee. Norwegian immigrants settled in lumbering and farming areas in the north and west. Irish, Italian, and Polish immigrants settled primarily in urban areas. Menominee County is the only county in the eastern United States with a Native American majority.

African Americans came to Milwaukee, especially from 1940 on. 86% of Wisconsin&#x27;s African-American population live in four cities: Milwaukee, Racine, Beloit, Kenosha, with Milwaukee home to nearly three-fourths of the state&#x27;s black Americans. In the Great Lakes region, only Detroit and Cleveland have a higher percentage of African-American residents.

About 33% of Wisconsin&#x27;s Asian population is Hmong, with significant communities in Milwaukee, Wausau, Green Bay, Sheboygan, Appleton, Madison, La Crosse, Eau Claire, Oshkosh, and Manitowoc. 61,629 people in Wisconsin, or around 1% of the population, identify as Hmong.

Of the residents of Wisconsin, 71.7% were born in Wisconsin, 23.0% were born in a different US state, 0.7% were born in Puerto Rico, U.S. Island areas, or born abroad to American parent(s), and 4.6% were foreign born.

In 2018, the countries of origin for Wisconsin&#x27;s immigrants came from Mexico, India, China, Laos and the Philippines.

;Birth data
&quot;Note: Births in table add to over 100%, because Hispanics are counted both by their ethnicity and by their race, giving a higher overall number.&quot;

* Since 2016, data for births of White Hispanic origin are not collected, but included in one &quot;Hispanic&quot; group; persons of Hispanic origin may be of any race.

===Religion===

According to Public Religion Research Institute&#x27;s 2022 &quot;American Values Survey&quot;, those identifying with a religion or spiritual tradition were approximately 75% of the state&#x27;s population. 69% of Wisconsinites self-identified as Christian. Specifically, 25% of respondents identified as Mainline Protestant, 12% as Evangelical Protestant, 4% as other Protestants, and 27% as Catholic. Roughly 25% of the population were unaffiliated with any religious body. Small minorities of Jews (1%), Hindus (1%), Buddhists (1%), Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses (1%), Unitarian Universalists (1%), Muslims (&lt;1%), Mormons (&lt;1%), and other faiths exist according to this study.

Christianity is the predominant religion in Wisconsin. Per the Association of Religion Data Archives&#x27; 2020 study, Catholicism was the single-largest denomination with 1,237,342 adherents, followed by the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America with 316,245 members and the Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod with 209,788 adherents. 276,904 adhered to nondenominational Christianity.

===Crime===
Statewide FBI Crime statistics for 2009 include 144 murders/non-negligent manslaughter; 1,108 rapes; 4,850 robberies; 8,431 aggravated assaults; and 147,486 property crimes. Wisconsin also publishes its own statistics through the Bureau of Justice Information and Analysis. The state reported 14,603 violent crimes in 2009, with a clearance rate (% solved) of 50%. The state reported 4,633 sexual assaults in 2009, with an overall clearance rate for sexual assaults of 57%.

==Economy==
In 2023, Wisconsin&#x27;s gross state product was $413.966 billion, making it 21st among U.S. states. The economy of Wisconsin is driven by manufacturing, agriculture, and tourism. The per capita personal income was $61,475 in 2022 and was $66,596 when adjusted by regional price parity. In 2024, the state&#x27;s seasonally adjusted unemployment rate has hovered at 3.0%, lower than the U.S. average. Since 2009, Wisconsin&#x27;s minimum wage has been $7.25, the same as the federal rate.

Eight corporations based in Wisconsin are listed on the &quot;Fortune&quot; 500. In 2024, the list included Northwestern Mutual, Fiserv, ManpowerGroup, Rockwell Automation, and WEC Energy Group (all based in Milwaukee), as well as Kohl&#x27;s (based in Menomonee Falls), American Family Insurance (based in Madison), and Oshkosh Corporation (based in Oshkosh).

===Manufacturing===
As of 2015, the number of manufacturing jobs in the state was approximately 500,000, similar to the figure in 1970. However, it declined as a share of the state&#x27;s gross state product between 2000 and 2016 from about 21.5% to 18.5%, a proportion that is eighth among all states. Similarly, as a share of total employment, manufacturing declined from 28% in 1970 to 14% in 2015. The state&#x27;s economic output from manufacturing was $48.9 billion in 2008, making it the tenth largest among states in manufacturing gross domestic product.

Major Wisconsin companies in manufacturing include the Kohler Company; Mercury Marine; Rockwell Automation; Johnson Controls; John Deere; Briggs &amp; Stratton; Milwaukee Electric Tool Company; Miller Electric; Caterpillar Inc.; Joy Global; Oshkosh Corporation; Harley-Davidson; Case IH; S. C. Johnson &amp; Son; Ashley Furniture; Ariens; and Evinrude Outboard Motors.

Wisconsin has a significant lumber industry, being a major producer of paper and packaging. Wisconsin ranks first nationwide in the production of paper products; the lower Fox River from Lake Winnebago to Green Bay has 24 paper mills along its stretch.

A large part of the state&#x27;s manufacturing sector includes commercial food processing, including well-known brands such as Oscar Mayer, Tombstone frozen pizza, Johnsonville brats, and Usinger&#x27;s sausage. Kraft Foods alone employs more than 5,000 people in the state. Milwaukee is a major producer of beer and was formerly headquarters for Miller Brewing Company—the nation&#x27;s second-largest brewer—until it merged with Coors. Formerly, Schlitz, Blatz, and Pabst were cornerstone breweries in Milwaukee.

The development and manufacture of healthcare devices and software is a growing sector of the state&#x27;s economy, with key players such as GE Healthcare, Epic Systems, and TomoTherapy.

===Agriculture===


Wisconsin produces about a quarter of America&#x27;s cheese, leading the nation in cheese production. It is second in milk production, after California, and third in per-capita milk production, behind California and Vermont. Wisconsin is second in butter production, producing about one-quarter of the nation&#x27;s butter. Wisconsin requires cheese and butter makers to hold a license for production, being the only state in the US to require certification for either.

The state ranks first nationally in the production of corn for silage, cranberries, ginseng, and snap beans for processing. It grows more than half the national crop of cranberries. and 97% of the nation&#x27;s ginseng. Wisconsin is also a leading producer of oats, potatoes, carrots, tart cherries, maple syrup, and sweet corn for processing.

The significance of the state&#x27;s agricultural production is exemplified by the depiction of a Holstein cow, an ear of corn, and a wheel of cheese on Wisconsin&#x27;s state quarter design. The state annually selects an &quot;Alice in Dairyland&quot; to promote the state&#x27;s agricultural products around the world. The prominence of the dairy industry in Wisconsin has led to Wisconsin being known as &quot;America&#x27;s Dairyland&quot;, which was made the official state slogan in 1940.

===Tourism===

According to the Department of Tourism, tourism in Wisconsin generated $20.9 billion in total economic impact in 2021 and is the state&#x27;s third-largest sector. Festivals such as Summerfest and the EAA AirVenture Oshkosh draw international attention, along with hundreds of thousands of visitors annually. Notable attractions across the state include the Harley-Davidson Museum, Lambeau Field, Milwaukee Art Museum, National Railroad Museum, and Wisconsin State Capital. Other tourist destinations include Taliesin, the studio of architect Frank Lloyd Wright; House on the Rock, a complex of architecturally distinct rooms; and the Circus World Museum, located in the Ringling brothers&#x27; hometown.

The Dells of the Wisconsin River, a gorge noted for its rock formations in south-central Wisconsin, annually attracts more than four million visitors between water tours of the scenery and numerous theme parks in the region. Nearby Devil&#x27;s Lake State Park is one of the most visited of Wisconsin&#x27;s state parks due to its proximity to the Dells and its own scenery.

The Door Peninsula, which extends off the eastern coast of the state, contains Door County, a popular destination for boaters due to the large number of natural harbors and boat launches on both the Green Bay and Lake Michigan sides of the peninsula. The area draws more than two million visitors yearly to its quaint villages, seasonal cherry picking, and fish boils.

Given the large number of lakes and rivers in the state, water recreation is popular. In the Northwoods Lake Country, what had been an industrial area focused on timber has largely been transformed into a vacation destination. Popular interest in the environment and environmentalism, added to traditional interests in hunting and fishing, has attracted a large urban audience within driving range. Lake Geneva in southeastern Wisconsin is similarly popular for water recreation.

===Energy===
Wisconsin has no production of oil, gas, or coal. Its in-state electrical generation is mostly from coal. Other important electricity sources are natural gas and nuclear.

The state has a mandate that ten percent of its electrical energy come from renewable sources by the end of 2015. This goal has been met, but not with in-state sources. , a third of that ten percent comes from out-of-state sources, mostly wind-generated electricity from Minnesota and Iowa. The state has agnostic policies for developing wind power in state.

===Taxation===

Wisconsin collects personal income taxes which range from 4% to 7.65% based on five income brackets. The state sales and use tax rate is 5.0%. Fifty-nine counties have an additional sales/use tax of 0.5%.

The most common property tax assessed on Wisconsin residents is the real property tax, or their residential property tax. Wisconsin does not impose a property tax on vehicles, but does levy an annual registration fee. Property taxes are the most important tax revenue source for Wisconsin&#x27;s local governments, as well as major methods of funding school districts, vocational-technical colleges, special purpose districts and tax incremental finance districts. Equalized values are based on the full market value of all taxable property in the state, except for agricultural land. To provide property tax relief for farmers, the value of agricultural land is determined by its value for agricultural uses, rather than for its possible development value. Equalized values are used to distribute state aid payments to counties, municipalities, and technical colleges. Assessments prepared by local assessors are used to distribute the property tax burden within individual municipalities.

Wisconsin does not assess a tax on intangible property. Wisconsin does not collect inheritance taxes. Until January 1, 2008, Wisconsin&#x27;s estate tax was decoupled from the federal estate tax laws; therefore the state imposed its own estate tax on certain large estates.

There are no toll roads in Wisconsin; highway construction and maintenance are funded in part by motor fuel tax revenues, and the remaining balance is drawn from the State General Fund. Non-highway road construction and maintenance are funded by local governments (municipalities or counties).

==Culture==
Residents of Wisconsin are referred to as Wisconsinites. The traditional prominence of references to dairy farming and cheesemaking in Wisconsin&#x27;s rural economy (the state&#x27;s license plates have read &quot;America&#x27;s Dairyland&quot; since 1940) have led to the nickname (sometimes used pejoratively among non-residents) of &quot;cheeseheads&quot;, and to the creation of &quot;cheesehead hats&quot; made of yellow foam in the shape of a wedge of cheese.

Numerous ethnic festivals are held throughout Wisconsin to celebrate the heritage of its citizens. Such festivals include Summerfest, Oktoberfest, Polish Fest, Festa Italiana, Irish Fest, Bastille Days, Syttende Mai (Norwegian Constitution Day), Brat(wurst) Days in Sheboygan, Polka Days, Cheese Days in Monroe and Mequon, African World Festival, Indian Summer, Arab Fest, Wisconsin Highland Games, and many others.

===Architecture===
With the immigration of northern Europeans into Wisconsin and the upper Midwest, they brought the techniques of building log homes with them.

The Milwaukee Art Museum is known for its Quadracci Pavilion created by Spanish architect Santiago Calatrava. The Quadracci Pavilion contains a movable, wing-like Burke &quot;brise soleil&quot; that opens up for a wingspan of during the day, folding over the tall, arched structure at night or during inclement weather.

Frank Lloyd Wright, an architect known as the pioneer of Prairie School architecture and the Usonian home concept, was raised in Wisconsin. Wright&#x27;s home and studio in the 20th century was at Taliesin, south of Spring Green, Wisconsin. Taliesin and the Usonian Jacobs I House in Madison are listed as UNESCO World Heritage Sites as part of &quot;The 20th-Century Architecture of Frank Lloyd Wright&quot;. Other notable works of Wright in Wisconsin include the Annunciation Greek Orthodox Church in Wauwatosa, First Unitarian Society of Madison, and Johnson Wax Headquarters. Monona Terrace in Madison, a convention center designed by Taliesin architect Anthony Puttnam, is based on a 1930s design by Wright.

===Alcohol===
Drinking has long been considered a significant part of Wisconsin culture, and the state ranks at or near the top of national measures of per-capita alcohol consumption, consumption of alcohol per state, and proportion of drinkers. Consumption per-capita per-event, however, ranks low among the nation; number of events (number of times alcohol is involved) is significantly higher or highest, but consumption at each event smaller, marking Wisconsin&#x27;s consumption as frequent and moderate. Factors such as cultural identification with the state&#x27;s heritage of German immigration, the long-standing presence of major breweries in Milwaukee, and a cold climate are often associated with the prevalence of drinking in Wisconsin.

Many large breweries were founded in Wisconsin, largely in Milwaukee, which gained the epithet &quot;Brew City&quot; before the turn of the century. Miller Brewing Company, Pabst Brewing Company, Joseph Schlitz Brewing Company, and Jacob Leinenkugel Brewing Company all began as local businesses before entering national markets. Several other popular craft brews include Ale Asylum, Capital, Sprecher, and New Glarus, the latter being well known for the Spotted Cow Farmhouse Ale only sold in Wisconsin.

In Wisconsin, the legal drinking age is 21, except when accompanied by a parent, guardian, or spouse who is at least 21 years old. Age requirements are waived for possessing alcohol when employed by a brewer, brewpub, wholesaler, or producer of alcohol fuel. The minimum legal age to purchase alcohol is 21, with no exceptions. The Absolute Sobriety law states that any person not of legal drinking age (currently 21) may not drive after consuming alcohol. DUI offenses were lowered to BAC 0.08 in 2003 as a result of federal government pressure.

===Cuisine===

Wisconsin&#x27;s cuisine is famous for its cheese as well as other dairy products. Colby cheese was first created in Wisconsin in 1885 (named after Colby, Wisconsin), and brick cheese was first created in the state in 1877. The state is the only producer of Limburger cheese in the United States. Cheese curds are a popular variant that can be eaten separately cold as a snack, or covered in batter and fried as an appetizer, often served with ranch dressing as a dipping sauce. Hot and spicy cheese bread is a popular type of bread created and sold in Madison.

The state is the nation&#x27;s top producer and consumer of bratwurst and is also a major producer and consumer of summer sausage. Wisconsin is the country&#x27;s leading producer of cranberries, which is also the state&#x27;s official fruit. Dane County Farmers&#x27; Market in Madison is the largest producers-only farmer&#x27;s market in the nation.

The Friday night fish fry, often battered and fried perch or walleye, is traditional throughout Wisconsin, while in northeast Wisconsin and Door County the fish boil is more popular. The supper club is another common phenomenon of Wisconsin culinary heritage and often a destination for fish frys; other fried food are common side dishes, along with condiments of tartar sauce and cole slaw or crimson slaw, a variety of cole slaw that incorporates Wisconsin cranberries. Beer cheese soup is usually made from a variety of beer and cheddar or Colby cheese with sausage, potatoes, and green onions.

Booyah is a stew common to Wisconsin, commonly using meat and a mirepoix of vegetables cooked together in a &quot;booyah kettle&quot; over low heat for several days.

The southeastern city of Racine is known for its kringle, a sweet flaky pastry often served as a dessert. The recipe was brought by Danish immigrants to the region in the 1800s and became the official state pastry of Wisconsin in 2013. The Wisconsin State Fair is known for its giant cream puffs.

The butter burger originated in Wisconsin, most likely in Solly&#x27;s Grille in Glendale. Culver&#x27;s is a midwestern fast casual food restaurant chain originally from Sauk City and currently headquartered in Prairie du Sac known for serving butter burgers, fried cheese curds, and frozen custard. La Croix Sparkling Water originates from La Crosse.

===Music===

Wisconsin&#x27;s music festivals include Eaux Claires, Country Fest, Country Jam USA, the Hodag Country Festival, Lifest, Porterfield Country Music Festival, Country Thunder USA in Twin Lakes, and Country USA. Milwaukee hosts Summerfest, dubbed &quot;The World&#x27;s Largest Music Festival&quot;, every year. This festival is held at the lakefront Henry Maier Festival Park just south of downtown, as are a summer-long array of ethnic musical festivals. The Wisconsin Area Music Industry provides an annual WAMI event where it presents an awards show for top Wisconsin artists.

===Recreation===
The varied landscape of Wisconsin makes the state a popular vacation destination for outdoor recreation. Winter events include skiing, ice fishing and snowmobile derbies. Wisconsin is situated on two Great Lakes and has many inland lakes of varied size; the state contains of water, more than all but three other states—Alaska, Michigan, and Florida. The Wisconsin Shipwreck Coast National Marine Sanctuary was established in 2021 in the waters of Lake Michigan off Wisconsin and is the site of a large number of historically significant shipwrecks.

Outdoor activities are popular in Wisconsin, especially hunting and fishing. One of the most prevalent game animals is the whitetail deer. Each year in Wisconsin, well over 600,000 deer-hunting licenses are sold. In 2008, the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources projected the pre-hunt deer population to be between 1.5 and 1.7 million.

===Sports===


Wisconsin is represented by major league teams in three sports: football, baseball, and basketball. Lambeau Field, located in Green Bay, Wisconsin, is home to the National Football League&#x27;s Green Bay Packers. The Packers have been part of the NFL since the league&#x27;s second season in 1921 and are the smallest city franchise in the NFL, and the only one owned by shareholders statewide. The Milwaukee Brewers, the state&#x27;s only major league baseball team, have played in American Family Field in Milwaukee since 2001. Before the Brewers, Milwaukee had two prior Major League teams. The first team, also called the Brewers, played only one season in 1901 before becoming the St. Louis Browns. Milwaukee was also the home of the now-Atlanta Braves franchise when they moved from Boston from 1953 to 1965, winning the World Series in 1957. The Milwaukee Bucks of the National Basketball Association play home games at the Fiserv Forum.

The state also has minor league teams in hockey (Milwaukee Admirals) and baseball (the Wisconsin Timber Rattlers, based in Appleton and the Beloit Sky Carp of the High-A minor leagues). In addition to these affiliated minor league teams, Wisconsin has two American Association of Professional Baseball teams, being the Milwaukee Milkmen based in Franklin, and the Lake Country DockHounds based in Oconomowoc. Wisconsin is also home to nine Northwoods League teams. The Madison Mallards, the La Crosse Loggers, the Lakeshore Chinooks, the Eau Claire Express, the Fond du Lac Dock Spiders, the Green Bay Rockers, the Kenosha Kingfish, the Wausau Woodchucks, and the Wisconsin Rapids Rafters all play in a collegiate all-star summer league. In addition to the Packers, Green Bay is also the home to an indoor football team, the Green Bay Blizzard of the IFL. The state is home to the seven-time MISL/MASL Champion Milwaukee Wave. Wisconsin is also home to Forward Madison FC, which is a professional soccer team that plays in the USL League One. The Northern Elite Football League consists of many amateur semi-pro teams from Wisconsin.

Wisconsin also has many college sports programs, including the NCAA Division I Wisconsin Badgers, Milwaukee Panthers, and Green Bay Phoenix. The Marquette Golden Eagles of the Big East Conference, the state&#x27;s other major collegiate program, is known for its men&#x27;s basketball team. Many other schools in the University of Wisconsin system compete in the Wisconsin Intercollegiate Athletic Conference at the Division III level. The conference is one of the most successful in the nation, claiming 107 NCAA national championships in 15 different sports as of March 30, 2015.

The Milwaukee Mile, an oval track opened in 1903, is the oldest operating motorsports venue in the world, having hosted the IndyCar Series and NASCAR Xfinity Series. Road America near Elkhart Lake hosts races in the IndyCar Series, IMSA SportsCar Championship, Sports Car Club of America GT World Challenge America and Trans-Am Series and the MotoAmerica Superbike Championship as of 2024. The World Championship Snowmobile Derby is held at Eagle River, Wisconsin. The world championship off-road racing event is held at Crandon International Off-Road Raceway.

Wisconsin is home to the nation&#x27;s oldest operating velodrome in Kenosha where races have been held every year since 1927.

Sheboygan is home to Whistling Straits golf club which has hosted PGA Championships in 2004, 2010 and 2015 and the Ryder Cup golf competition between USA and Europe in 2020. The Greater Milwaukee Open, later named the U.S. Bank Championship in Milwaukee, was a PGA Tour tournament from 1968 to 2009 held annually in Brown Deer. In 2017, Erin Hills, a golf course in Erin, Wisconsin, approximately 30 miles northwest of Milwaukee, hosted the U.S. Open.

==Government and politics==
The Constitution of Wisconsin outlines the structure and function of state government, which is organized into three branches: executive, legislative, and judicial. The Wisconsin Blue Book is the primary published reference about the government and politics of the state. Re-published every two years, copies are available from state legislators. The law of the Menominee also applies within the Menominee Indian Reservation.

===State government===
The executive branch is headed by the Governor of Wisconsin. The current governor, Tony Evers, assumed office on January 7, 2019. The Wisconsin Constitution grants the governor a veto on bills passed by the state legislature as well as a line-item veto on appropriation bills. A lieutenant governor succeeds the governor in the event of any removal from office and performs any duties assigned by the governor. The current lieutenant governor is Sara Rodriguez. The other elected constitutional offices in the executive branch are the secretary of state (Sarah Godlewski), treasurer (John Leiber), attorney general (Josh Kaul), and the non-partisan superintendent of public instruction (Jill Underly).

The Wisconsin State Legislature is Wisconsin&#x27;s legislative branch. The Legislature is a bicameral body consisting of the Wisconsin State Assembly and the Wisconsin State Senate. The Assembly has 99 members, and the Senate has 33 members. All 99 members of the Wisconsin Assembly are elected in a two-year term cycle without term limits. Similarly, all 33 members of the Wisconsin Senate are elected in a four-year cycle, also without term limits. Half of the Senate is elected every two years. Members of both houses of the Legislature vote within their ranks to select presiding officers, such as the Speaker of the Assembly and the President of the Senate. Legislators in both the Senate and the Assembly receive an annual salary of $55,141. Over two years, each legislator is allotted $66,008 to cover general office expenses, printing, postage and district mailings.

Wisconsin&#x27;s court system has four levels: municipal courts, circuit courts, the Court of Appeals, and the Supreme Court. Municipal courts typically handle cases involving local ordinance matters. The circuit courts are Wisconsin&#x27;s trial courts, they have original jurisdiction in all civil and criminal cases within the state. Challenges to circuit court rulings are heard by the Wisconsin Court of Appeals, consisting of sixteen judges who typically sit in three-judge panels. As the state&#x27;s highest appellate court, the Wisconsin Supreme Court may hear both appeals from lower courts and original actions. In addition to deciding cases, the Supreme Court is responsible for administering the state&#x27;s court system and regulating the practice of law in Wisconsin.

===Federal representation===
Following the 2020 census reapportionment, Wisconsin has eight seats in the U.S. House of Representatives. As of the 119th United States Congress, six federal representatives are Republicans while two are Democrats. Gwen Moore (D-04) is the most senior member of the Wisconsin delegation to the U.S. House of Representatives. Wisconsin&#x27;s senior U.S. senator, Ron Johnson, is a Republican, while its junior, Tammy Baldwin, is a Democrat.

Wisconsin is under the appellate jurisdiction of the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, which includes district courts for the Eastern District of Wisconsin and Western District of Wisconsin.

===Politics===


Wisconsin is considered a swing state at the federal level, being won by either the Democratic or Republican nominees. Republican Donald Trump won the state by 0.58% in the 2024 presidential election; it had the closest margin of any state in that election. Democrat Joe Biden won the state by a narrow margin of 0.63% in 2020; Trump won Wisconsin in 2016 by a similarly narrow margin of 0.77%, the first time the state voted for a Republican presidential nominee since 1984. Wisconsin was part of the blue wall, a group of states the Democratic Party won in each presidential election from 1992 to 2012.

At the statewide level, Wisconsin is competitive, with control regularly alternating between the two parties. Following the 2014 general elections, the governor, lieutenant governor, attorney general, and treasurer were all Republicans, while the secretary of state was a Democrat. However, in 2018, Democrats won all constitutional statewide offices on the ballot, the first time this happened in Wisconsin since 1982.

In a 2020 study, Wisconsin was ranked as the 25th easiest state for citizens to vote in. Some have argued the state has experienced democratic backsliding since 2011. Some political scientists classify Wisconsin as a hybrid regime; the state&#x27;s House of Representative and legislature elections are considered to be free but not fair, with districts undergoing &quot;extreme partisan gerrymanders&quot; to entrench Republicans &quot;beyond electoral rotation&quot;. The Wisconsin Supreme Court overturned the legislative gerrymander in the 2023 ruling of &quot;Clarke v. Wisconsin Elections Commission.&quot;

During the American Civil War, Wisconsin was a Republican state; in fact, it is the state that gave birth to the Republican Party, although ethno-religious issues in the late 19th century caused a brief split in the coalition. The Bennett Law campaign of 1890 dealt with foreign language teaching in schools. Many Germans switched to the Democratic Party because of the Republican Party&#x27;s support of the law.

Wisconsin&#x27;s political history is broad in scope, encompassing Robert La Follette and the Progressive movement to prominent anti-communist Joseph McCarthy. From the early 20th century, the Socialist Party of America had a base in Milwaukee. The phenomenon was referred to as &quot;sewer socialism&quot; because the elected officials were more concerned with public works and reform than with revolution (although revolutionary socialism existed in the city as well). Its influence faded in the late 1950s largely because of the red scare and racial tensions. The first socialist mayor of a large city in the United States was Emil Seidel, elected mayor of Milwaukee in 1910; the city elected three more socialist mayors in Daniel Hoan, Frank P. Zeidler, and Henry Maier. Socialist newspaper editor Victor Berger was repeatedly elected as a U.S. Representative.

Through the first half of the 20th century, Wisconsin&#x27;s politics were dominated by Robert La Follette and his sons, originally of the Republican Party, but later of the revived Progressive Party. Since 1945, the state has maintained a close balance between Republicans and Democrats. In 2012, Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney chose Congressman Paul Ryan, a Janesville native, as his running mate against incumbent President Barack Obama.

===International relations===
Wisconsin has sister-state relationships with Hesse in Germany, Chiba Prefecture in Japan, Jalisco in Mexico, Heilongjiang in China, and Nicaragua. A Mexican consulate opened in Milwaukee on July 1, 2016.

==Education==

Wisconsin, along with Minnesota and Michigan, was among the Midwestern leaders in the emergent American state university movement following the Civil War in the United States. By the start of the 20th century, education in the state advocated the &quot;Wisconsin Idea&quot;, which emphasized service to the people of the state. The &quot;Wisconsin Idea&quot; exemplified the Progressive movement within colleges and universities at the time.

The Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction is the state education and public library management agency in the state. The department is led by the State Superintendent of Public Instruction, a non-partisan, constitutional officer elected every four years in the spring primary, six months after the previous year&#x27;s presidential election.

Public post-secondary education in Wisconsin consists of two organizations. The University of Wisconsin System comprises two major doctoral research universities (including the flagship University of Wisconsin–Madison), eleven other comprehensive universities, and twelve two-year branch campuses. It is one of the largest public higher education systems in the country, enrolling more than 160,000 students each year and employing approximately 41,000 faculty and staff statewide. The 16-campus Wisconsin Technical College System awards two-year associate degrees, one- and two-year technical diplomas, and short-term technical diplomas and certificates. It also provides training and technical assistance to Wisconsin&#x27;s business and industry community.

Private colleges and universities include Alverno College, Beloit College, Carroll University, Carthage College, Concordia University Wisconsin, Edgewood College, Lakeland College, Lawrence University, Marquette University, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee School of Engineering, Ripon College, St. Norbert College, Wisconsin Lutheran College, Viterbo University, and others.

==Transportation==

Wisconsin is served by eight commercial service airports, in addition to a number of general aviation airports. Milwaukee Mitchell International Airport is the largest airport located in Wisconsin, categorized as a medium-hub primary commercial service facility. Dane County Regional Airport and Appleton International Airport are classified as small-hub primary commercial airports that service the Madison and Fox Valley areas.

Wisconsin is served by multiple intercity bus operators, which provide service to 71 stops and 53 cities. The following carriers provide scheduled bus service: Amtrak Thruway, Badger Bus, Flixbus, Greyhound Lines, Indian Trails, Jefferson Lines, Lamers Bus Lines, Megabus, Van Galder Bus Company, and Wisconsin Coach Lines.

Wisconsin is served by eight Interstate Highways, consisting of five primary routes and three auxiliary routes. The first part of this system was constructed in 1956, and its most recent expansion took place in 2015, with the addition of I-41 to the system. Wisconsin&#x27;s longest Interstate Highway is I-94. There are also fourteen United States Numbered Highways in the state of Wisconsin, which were designated beginning in 1926 and ending in the mid-1930s. There are also several business routes, usually maintained by local governments. The Wisconsin Department of Transportation maintains 158 state trunk highways, ranging from two-lane rural roads to limited-access freeways. These highways are paid for by the state&#x27;s Transportation Fund, which is considered unique among state highway funds because it is kept entirely separate from the general fund, therefore, revenues received from transportation services are required to be used on transportation. The majority of state highway funding comes from gas taxes and vehicle registration fees.
Amtrak provides daily passenger rail service between Milwaukee and Chicago through the &quot;Hiawatha&quot;. The &quot;Borealis&quot; provides daily service to Chicago and Saint Paul, Minnesota, and is supplemental to the long-distance cross-country &quot;Empire Builder&quot;, both with stops in several cities across Wisconsin. Commuter rail provider Metra&#x27;s Union Pacific North (UP-N) line has its northern terminus in Kenosha, the only Metra line and station in the state of Wisconsin. The Hop, a modern streetcar system in Milwaukee, began service in 2018. The 2.1 mile (3.4 km) initial line runs from Milwaukee Intermodal Station to Burns Commons.

==State symbols==

Wisconsin is traditionally known as the &quot;Badger State&quot; due to its early history in lead mining. Many of the state&#x27;s first settlers were drawn by the prospect of mining in southwest Wisconsin, a mineral-rich region which had been contested between Native Americans and the U.S. Some of the miners lived burrowed within hillsides either due to lack of time or finances to build above-ground structures during the winter. Similar to the American badger using its claws to dig holes, the miners were nicknamed &quot;badgers&quot;. The University of Wisconsin–Madison adopted the badger as a mascot in 1889 after the nickname; the badger was named Wisconsin&#x27;s state animal in 1957.
* State nicknames: &quot;Badger State&quot;, &quot;America&#x27;s Dairyland&quot;
* State motto: &quot;Forward&quot;
* State song: &quot;On, Wisconsin!&quot;
* State bird: American robin
* State animal: American badger
* State domestic animal: dairy cow
* State wildlife animal: white-tailed deer
* State fish: muskellunge
* State insect: Western honey bee
* State dog: American Water Spaniel
* State dairy product: cheese
* State fruit: cranberry
* State grain: corn
* State pastry: kringle
* State beverage: milk
* State cocktail: brandy old fashioned
* State dance: polka
* State fossil: trilobite
* State flower: wood violet
* State tree: sugar maple
* State rock: granite
* State mineral: galena
* State quarter: US coin issued in 2004 featuring a banner with the state motto, the head of a cow, a round of cheese, and an ear of corn.
* State soil: Antigo
== See also ==

* Index of Wisconsin-related articles
* List of people from Wisconsin
* Outline of Wisconsin
* Impeachment in Wisconsin

== Notes ==
== References ==
==Sources==

== Further reading ==
* Cross, John A. and Kazimierz J. Zaniewski. &quot;The Geography of Wisconsin&quot; (University of Wisconsin Press, 2022) online review
* 
* Detailed popular history and many biographies.
* 
* Detailed popular history &amp; biographies.
* 
* .
* 
* Detailed guide to every town and city, and cultural history.
:&quot;See additional books at History of Wisconsin&quot;

==External links==
* 
* 
* 
* Wisconsin Health and Demographic Data La Crosse Medical Health Science Consortium
* Energy Profile for Wisconsin—Economic, environmental, and energy data
* Wisconsin Historical Society
* The State of Wisconsin Collection from the UW Digital Collections Center
* Wisconsin Free Speech Legacy
* Wisconsin Department of Tourism
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="0" end="9" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="19" end="24" title="U.S. state" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548416" start="32" end="43" title="Great Lakes region" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984465" start="58" end="71" title="Upper Midwest" label="Upper Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="105" end="114" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546" start="128" end="132" title="Iowa" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="151" end="159" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169" start="174" end="187" title="Lake Michigan" label="Lake Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="201" end="209" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066" start="232" end="245" title="Lake Superior" label="Lake Superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q125503" start="356" end="388" title="List of U.S. states and territories by population" label="20th-largest state by population"/>
<link wikidata="Q150340" start="397" end="417" title="List of U.S. states and territories by area" label="23rd-largest by area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135704" start="426" end="437" title="List of counties in Wisconsin" label="72 counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q6629669" start="443" end="461" title="List of municipalities in Wisconsin by population" label="most populous city"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="465" end="474" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q321470" start="480" end="487" title="List of capitals in the United States" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q43788" start="521" end="528" title="Madison, Wisconsin" label="Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q47430" start="556" end="565" title="Green Bay, Wisconsin" label="Green Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q462161" start="567" end="574" title="Kenosha, Wisconsin" label="Kenosha"/>
<link wikidata="Q40340" start="576" end="582" title="Racine, Wisconsin" label="Racine"/>
<link wikidata="Q122563" start="584" end="594" title="Eau Claire, Wisconsin" label="Eau Claire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476644" start="604" end="614" title="Fox Cities" label="Fox Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q52312701" start="617" end="643" title="Geography of Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin&amp;#x27;s geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="666" end="673" title="Last glacial period" label="Ice Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307487" start="697" end="711" title="Driftless Area" label="Driftless Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058391" start="717" end="734" title="Northern Highland" label="Northern Highland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988416" start="739" end="753" title="Western Upland" label="Western Upland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061655" start="779" end="792" title="Central Plain (Wisconsin)" label="Central Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="896" end="903" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="938" end="949" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079112" start="997" end="1032" title="Chequamegon–Nicolet National Forest" label="Chequamegon–Nicolet National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621197" start="1093" end="1103" title="Algonquian peoples" label="Algonquian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34181" start="1108" end="1114" title="Siouan" label="Siouan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1148" end="1154" title="List of federally recognized tribes by state#Wisconsin" label="eleven"/>
<link wikidata="Q12885585" start="1176" end="1182" title="Tribe (Native American)" label="tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q669315" start="1207" end="1226" title="Northwest Territory" label="Northwest Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q18350273" start="1235" end="1254" title="Admission to the Union" label="admitted as a state"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="1360" end="1367" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="1372" end="1383" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="1415" end="1430" title="German American" label="German American"/>
<link wikidata="Q105753422" start="1435" end="1456" title="Scandinavian American" label="Scandinavian American"/>
<link wikidata="Q85754770" start="1497" end="1504" title="Cuisine of Wisconsin" label="cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q899882" start="1525" end="1534" title="bratwurst" label="bratwurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098139" start="1539" end="1546" title="kringle" label="kringle"/>
<link wikidata="Q14096331" start="1595" end="1610" title="Dairy farming" label="dairy producers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027362" start="1695" end="1705" title="Wisconsin cheese" label="its cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q16824289" start="1736" end="1744" title="List of breweries in Wisconsin" label="its beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q65118639" start="1776" end="1788" title="Beer in Milwaukee" label="in Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q658637" start="1830" end="1852" title="Miller Brewing Company" label="Miller Brewing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713300" start="1910" end="1922" title="Alcohol laws of Wisconsin" label="alcohol laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068248" start="1944" end="1960" title="drinking culture" label="drinking culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q13181" start="2077" end="2088" title="cranberries" label="cranberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q20817212" start="2094" end="2101" title="ginseng" label="ginseng"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241935" start="2159" end="2181" title="List of states and territories of the United States by GDP" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="2233" end="2239" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="2240" end="2259" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q10498496" start="2272" end="2309" title="The 20th-Century Architecture of Frank Lloyd Wright" label="two of the most significant buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604" start="2347" end="2365" title="Frank Lloyd Wright" label="Frank Lloyd Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q734970" start="2381" end="2389" title="Taliesin (studio)" label="Taliesin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046759" start="2395" end="2407" title="Spring Green, Wisconsin" label="Spring Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q11680575" start="2416" end="2430" title="Herbert and Katherine Jacobs First House" label="Jacobs I House"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="2447" end="2463" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q195594" start="2538" end="2549" title="swing state" label="swing state"/>
<link wikidata="Q978496" start="2635" end="2650" title="Wisconsin River" label="Wisconsin River"/>
<link wikidata="Q33392" start="2665" end="2675" title="Algonquian languages" label="Algonquian"/>
<link wikidata="Q184716" start="2744" end="2765" title="European colonization of the Americas" label="European colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q336630" start="2787" end="2804" title="Jacques Marquette" label="Jacques Marquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q540885" start="3116" end="3126" title="anglicized" label="anglicized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186251" start="3263" end="3282" title="Wisconsin Territory" label="Wisconsin Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q33392" start="3332" end="3342" title="Algonquian languages" label="Algonquian"/>
<link wikidata="Q56523" start="3568" end="3573" title="Miami-Illinois language" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569443" start="3690" end="3705" title="Dells of the Wisconsin River" label="Wisconsin Dells"/>
<link wikidata="Q255872" start="3787" end="3793" title="Ojibwa" label="Ojibwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094246" start="3986" end="4006" title="Wisconsin Glaciation" label="Wisconsin Glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q888099" start="4040" end="4053" title="Paleo-Indians" label="Paleo-Indians"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4074" end="4089" title="Pleistocene#Fauna" label="ice age animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931573" start="4102" end="4115" title="Boaz mastodon" label="Boaz mastodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q192272" start="4131" end="4139" title="mastodon" label="mastodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q632376" start="4273" end="4287" title="Archaic period in the Americas" label="Archaic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299963" start="4402" end="4417" title="Woodland period" label="Woodland period"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356478" start="4519" end="4531" title="Effigy Mound" label="Effigy Mound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052095" start="4652" end="4665" title="Mississippian culture" label="Mississippian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376889" start="4670" end="4676" title="Oneota" label="Oneota"/>
<link wikidata="Q4832928" start="4751" end="4758" title="Aztalan" label="Aztalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517496" start="4829" end="4834" title="Ioway" label="Ioway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537653" start="4839" end="4847" title="Ho-Chunk" label="Ho-Chunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447438" start="4897" end="4906" title="Menominee" label="Menominee"/>
<link wikidata="Q255872" start="5031" end="5037" title="Ojibwa" label="Ojibwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437595" start="5039" end="5043" title="Sauk people" label="Sauk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440169" start="5045" end="5048" title="Fox people" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429504" start="5050" end="5058" title="Kickapoo people" label="Kickapoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065583" start="5064" end="5076" title="Pottawatomie" label="Pottawatomie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365484" start="5253" end="5265" title="Jean Nicolet" label="Jean Nicolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267413" start="5287" end="5299" title="Georgian Bay" label="Georgian Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="5312" end="5323" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q47430" start="5390" end="5399" title="Green Bay, Wisconsin" label="Green Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303698" start="5403" end="5412" title="Red Banks, Brown County, Wisconsin" label="Red Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q944388" start="5414" end="5429" title="Pierre Radisson" label="Pierre Radisson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957677" start="5434" end="5457" title="Médard des Groseilliers" label="Médard des Groseilliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879440" start="5499" end="5514" title="Chequamegon Bay" label="Chequamegon Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q506618" start="5615" end="5628" title="Louis Jolliet" label="Louis Jolliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562217" start="5673" end="5695" title="Fox-Wisconsin Waterway" label="Fox-Wisconsin Waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="5715" end="5732" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014155" start="5738" end="5754" title="Prairie du Chien, Wisconsin" label="Prairie du Chien"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="5756" end="5765" title="Frenchmen" label="Frenchmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3340662" start="5771" end="5786" title="Nicholas Perrot" label="Nicholas Perrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q878138" start="5808" end="5817" title="fur trade" label="fur trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="5937" end="5950" title="British Empire" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="5991" end="6012" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959824" start="6118" end="6137" title="Charles de Langlade" label="Charles de Langlade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013700" start="6639" end="6648" title="Marinette, Wisconsin" label="Marinette"/>
<link wikidata="Q857880" start="6687" end="6702" title="French Canadian" label="French Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="6716" end="6727" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7683473" start="8227" end="8239" title="Tank Cottage" label="Tank Cottage"/>
<link wikidata="Q47430" start="8243" end="8252" title="Green Bay, Wisconsin" label="Green Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5738885" start="8273" end="8308" title="Heritage Hill State Historical Park" label="Heritage Hill State Historical Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q96390311" start="8320" end="8344" title="List of the oldest buildings in Wisconsin" label="oldest standing building"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="8400" end="8436" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="8542" end="8568" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q669315" start="8601" end="8620" title="Northwest Territory" label="Northwest Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q777763" start="8692" end="8709" title="Indiana Territory" label="Indiana Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658828" start="8729" end="8747" title="Illinois Territory" label="Illinois Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360064" start="8771" end="8789" title="Michigan Territory" label="Michigan Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="8866" end="8877" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569984" start="9160" end="9173" title="Mineral Point, Wisconsin" label="Mineral Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013664" start="9175" end="9185" title="Dodgeville, Wisconsin" label="Dodgeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q4256410" start="9471" end="9484" title="Winnebago War" label="Winnebago War"/>
<link wikidata="Q879980" start="9501" end="9515" title="Black Hawk War" label="Black Hawk War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519192" start="9549" end="9576" title="Indian removal" label="removal of Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186251" start="9635" end="9654" title="Wisconsin Territory" label="Wisconsin Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="9684" end="9706" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="9856" end="9867" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q459578" start="9898" end="9908" title="Erie Canal" label="Erie Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q692062" start="9940" end="9946" title="Yankee" label="Yankee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018923" start="10033" end="10049" title="upstate New York" label="upstate New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="10362" end="10379" title="Congregationalist" label="Congregationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="10413" end="10420" title="Germans" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q188779" start="10429" end="10439" title="Norwegians" label="Norwegians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="10529" end="10537" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="10542" end="10550" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q881961" start="11071" end="11083" title="Nelson Dewey" label="Nelson Dewey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112727" start="11095" end="11116" title="governor of Wisconsin" label="governor of Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870571" start="11124" end="11132" title="History of the Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440192" start="11389" end="11392" title="Fox River (Illinois River tributary)" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q978496" start="11397" end="11412" title="Wisconsin River" label="Wisconsin River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11446" end="11473" title="Wisconsin Board of Public Works" label="State Board of Public Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q169390" start="11499" end="11511" title="abolitionist" label="abolitionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="11589" end="11596" title="slavery in the United States" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853205" start="11805" end="11817" title="Abolitionism in the United States" label="abolitionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6289848" start="11870" end="11883" title="Joshua Glover" label="Joshua Glover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="11906" end="11914" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q40340" start="11932" end="11938" title="Racine, Wisconsin" label="Racine"/>
<link wikidata="Q535519" start="11988" end="12006" title="Fugitive Slave Act of 1850" label="Fugitive Slave Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027332" start="12152" end="12175" title="Wisconsin Supreme Court" label="Wisconsin Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="12241" end="12257" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025333" start="12325" end="12341" title="Ripon, Wisconsin" label="Ripon, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="12420" end="12429" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q214102" start="12482" end="12487" title="Union (American Civil War)" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468611" start="12794" end="12817" title="Case Corporation" label="J.I. Case &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q936780" start="13104" end="13113" title="La Crosse" label="La Crosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q122563" start="13115" end="13125" title="Eau Claire, Wisconsin" label="Eau Claire"/>
<link wikidata="Q998675" start="13131" end="13137" title="Wausau, Wisconsin" label="Wausau"/>
<link wikidata="Q906497" start="13711" end="13726" title="Stephen Babcock" label="Stephen Babcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q838330" start="13734" end="13757" title="University of Wisconsin" label="University of Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q971382" start="13874" end="13886" title="Aldo Leopold" label="Aldo Leopold"/>
<link wikidata="Q918088" start="14010" end="14020" title="paper mill" label="paper mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4379869" start="14518" end="14529" title="Progressivism in the United States" label="progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q878682" start="14553" end="14574" title="Robert M. La Follette" label="Robert M. La Follette"/>
<link wikidata="Q130543050" start="14692" end="14708" title="Partisan primary" label="primary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184466" start="14737" end="14766" title="workers&amp;#x27; compensation" label="workplace injury compensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="14792" end="14802" title="income tax" label="income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="14861" end="14872" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314666" start="14918" end="14939" title="Republican Party of Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4379869" start="14941" end="14953" title="Progressivism in the United States" label="progressives"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="14959" end="14976" title="German Americans" label="German immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q878682" start="15176" end="15197" title="Robert M. La Follette" label="Robert M. La Follette"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="15313" end="15327" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q885198" start="15412" end="15430" title="Emanuel L. Philipp" label="Emanuel L. Philipp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673264" start="15435" end="15449" title="Irvine Lenroot" label="Irvine Lenroot"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="15796" end="15809" title="United States Armed Forces" label="U.S. military"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027205" start="15828" end="15842" title="Wisconsin Idea" label="Wisconsin Idea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896641" start="15924" end="15936" title="UW-Extension" label="UW-Extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701606" start="15989" end="16004" title="John R. Commons" label="John R. Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q311255" start="16057" end="16082" title="unemployment compensation" label="unemployment compensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027205" start="16127" end="16141" title="Wisconsin Idea" label="Wisconsin Idea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550813" start="16220" end="16239" title="Social Security Act" label="Social Security Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799174" start="16271" end="16289" title="Arthur J. Altmeyer" label="Arthur J. Altmeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="16343" end="16355" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="16428" end="16442" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="16501" end="16513" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q32993" start="16601" end="16629" title="Chinese Communist Revolution" label="Chinese Communist Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q207066" start="16871" end="16885" title="McCarthyism" label="anti-communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q189197" start="16906" end="16921" title="Joseph McCarthy" label="Joseph McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879847" start="17004" end="17025" title="Sterling Hall bombing" label="Sterling Hall bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7980969" start="17062" end="17076" title="welfare reform" label="welfare reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q732804" start="17103" end="17117" title="Tommy Thompson" label="Tommy Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q112730899" start="17298" end="17313" title="service economy" label="service economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q553254" start="17475" end="17487" title="Scott Walker (politician)" label="Scott Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4622895" start="17538" end="17559" title="2011 Wisconsin Act 10" label="2011 Wisconsin Act 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935930" start="17735" end="17759" title="2011 Wisconsin protests" label="series of major protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586274" start="17848" end="17884" title="Wisconsin gubernatorial recall election" label="a recall election held the next year"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="17984" end="18008" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwestern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548416" start="18033" end="18051" title="Great Lakes region" label="Great Lakes region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984465" start="18060" end="18073" title="Upper Midwest" label="Upper Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q6906320" start="18136" end="18150" title="Montreal River (Wisconsin–Michigan)" label="Montreal River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066" start="18152" end="18165" title="Lake Superior" label="Lake Superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="18170" end="18178" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169" start="18196" end="18209" title="Lake Michigan" label="Lake Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="18226" end="18234" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546" start="18256" end="18260" title="Iowa" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="18282" end="18291" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027379" start="18372" end="18393" title="Wisconsin v. Michigan" label="Wisconsin v. Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="18453" end="18470" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507416" start="18475" end="18490" title="St. Croix River (Wisconsin–Minnesota)" label="St. Croix River"/>
<link wikidata="Q13130" start="18512" end="18527" title="Menominee River" label="Menominee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="18565" end="18576" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6477889" start="18726" end="18747" title="Lake Superior Lowland" label="Lake Superior Lowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058391" start="18816" end="18833" title="Northern Highland" label="Northern Highland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079112" start="18898" end="18933" title="Chequamegon–Nicolet National Forest" label="Chequamegon–Nicolet National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862687" start="19010" end="19020" title="Timms Hill" label="Timms Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061655" start="19054" end="19067" title="Central Plain (Wisconsin)" label="Central Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="19084" end="19093" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569443" start="19114" end="19142" title="Dells of the Wisconsin River" label="Dells of the Wisconsin River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330421" start="19177" end="19204" title="Eastern Ridges and Lowlands" label="Eastern Ridges and Lowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q826965" start="19304" end="19322" title="Niagara Escarpment" label="Niagara Escarpment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921654" start="19357" end="19379" title="Black River Escarpment (Wisconsin)" label="Black River Escarpment"/>
<link wikidata="Q17125778" start="19388" end="19408" title="Magnesian Escarpment" label="Magnesian Escarpment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988416" start="19432" end="19446" title="Western Upland" label="Western Upland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2147674" start="19560" end="19573" title="Baraboo Range" label="Baraboo Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307487" start="19602" end="19616" title="Driftless Area" label="Driftless Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q103910" start="19992" end="20003" title="Precambrian" label="Precambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16971296" start="20084" end="20101" title="Baraboo Quartzite" label="Baraboo Quartzite"/>
<link wikidata="Q47069" start="20124" end="20140" title="metamorphic rock" label="metamorphic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="20171" end="20178" title="glacier" label="glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094246" start="20216" end="20236" title="Wisconsin Glaciation" label="Wisconsin Glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q495326" start="20238" end="20253" title="Langlade County" label="Langlade County"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774746" start="20304" end="20320" title="Antigo (soil)" label="Antigo silt loam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801110" start="20449" end="20463" title="Lake Winnebago" label="Lake Winnebago"/>
<link wikidata="Q85779853" start="20594" end="20620" title="List of islands of Wisconsin" label="named islands in Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q681471" start="20663" end="20677" title="Door Peninsula" label="Door Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3593572" start="20714" end="20729" title="Apostle Islands" label="Apostle Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="20879" end="20900" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855854" start="20913" end="20947" title="Apostle Islands National Lakeshore" label="Apostle Islands National Lakeshore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5985189" start="20949" end="20978" title="Ice Age Trail" label="Ice Age National Scenic Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7401144" start="21000" end="21036" title="Saint Croix National Scenic Riverway" label="Saint Croix National Scenic Riverway"/>
<link wikidata="Q14716246" start="21041" end="21076" title="North Country Trail" label="North Country National Scenic Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591560" start="21105" end="21131" title="List of National Natural Landmarks in Wisconsin" label="National Natural Landmarks"/>
<link wikidata="Q257721" start="21227" end="21246" title="List of Wisconsin state parks" label="50 state park units"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467508" start="21327" end="21368" title="Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources" label="Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q6604201" start="21416" end="21446" title="List of Wisconsin state forests" label="Wisconsin&amp;#x27;s state forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="21511" end="21536" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="21538" end="21544" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q744816" start="21887" end="21895" title="Couderay" label="Couderay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190077" start="22104" end="22112" title="snowbelt" label="snowbelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225124" start="22212" end="22218" title="City (Wisconsin)" label="Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225124" start="22223" end="22231" title="Village (Wisconsin)" label="villages"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225124" start="22262" end="22267" title="Town (Wisconsin)" label="Towns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995480" start="22287" end="22307" title="minor civil division" label="minor civil division"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22312" end="22320" title="Political subdivisions of Wisconsin#County" label="counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="22412" end="22421" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146039" start="22529" end="22556" title="Milwaukee metropolitan area" label="Milwaukee metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q43788" start="22672" end="22679" title="Madison, Wisconsin" label="Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q386191" start="22778" end="22793" title="population growth" label="fastest-growing"/>
<link wikidata="Q944103" start="22817" end="22842" title="Madison metropolitan area" label="Madison metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q47430" start="22953" end="22962" title="Green Bay, Wisconsin" label="Green Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q94928" start="23090" end="23098" title="Appleton, Wisconsin" label="Appleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q40340" start="23100" end="23106" title="Racine, Wisconsin" label="Racine"/>
<link wikidata="Q936741" start="23108" end="23115" title="Oshkosh, Wisconsin" label="Oshkosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q122563" start="23117" end="23127" title="Eau Claire, Wisconsin" label="Eau Claire"/>
<link wikidata="Q257536" start="23129" end="23139" title="Janesville, Wisconsin" label="Janesville"/>
<link wikidata="Q998675" start="23141" end="23147" title="Wausau, Wisconsin" label="Wausau"/>
<link wikidata="Q936780" start="23149" end="23158" title="La Crosse, Wisconsin" label="La Crosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q984834" start="23160" end="23169" title="Sheboygan, Wisconsin" label="Sheboygan"/>
<link wikidata="Q985584" start="23175" end="23186" title="Fond du Lac, Wisconsin" label="Fond du Lac"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270419" start="23242" end="23272" title="micropolitan statistical areas" label="micropolitan statistical areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="23517" end="23544" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="23645" end="23670" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q811595" start="23994" end="23997" title="United States Department of Housing and Urban Development" label="HUD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769654" start="24010" end="24043" title="Annual Homeless Assessment Report to Congress" label="Annual Homeless Assessment Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q131327" start="24075" end="24083" title="homeless" label="homeless"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="24163" end="24169" title="German American" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="24177" end="24182" title="Irish American" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189552" start="24192" end="24198" title="Polish American" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344183" start="24207" end="24214" title="English American" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193808" start="24227" end="24236" title="Norwegian American" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="24458" end="24483" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="24529" end="24547" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic or Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q581921" start="24612" end="24619" title="Mexican American" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q893594" start="24628" end="24640" title="Puerto Ricans" label="Puerto Rican"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="24649" end="24664" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790886" start="24678" end="24683" title="Cuban American" label="Cuban"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171801" start="24913" end="24920" title="Cornish American" label="Cornish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344183" start="25034" end="25049" title="English American" label="English descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="25055" end="25066" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018923" start="25071" end="25087" title="upstate New York" label="upstate New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="25254" end="25261" title="German Americans" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q105753422" start="25263" end="25276" title="Scandinavian Americans" label="Scandinavians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193808" start="25302" end="25311" title="Norwegian American" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="25314" end="25319" title="Irish Americans" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189552" start="25325" end="25330" title="Polish Americans" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q581921" start="25387" end="25395" title="Mexican Americans" label="Mexicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="25407" end="25416" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="25443" end="25454" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713742" start="25473" end="25479" title="Hmong Americans" label="Hmongs"/>
<link wikidata="Q500947" start="25805" end="25821" title="Menominee County, Wisconsin" label="Menominee County"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="26039" end="26048" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q40340" start="26050" end="26056" title="Racine, Wisconsin" label="Racine"/>
<link wikidata="Q816137" start="26058" end="26064" title="Beloit, Wisconsin" label="Beloit"/>
<link wikidata="Q462161" start="26066" end="26073" title="Kenosha" label="Kenosha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="26163" end="26174" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="26200" end="26209" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q219205" start="26317" end="26322" title="Hmong people" label="Hmong"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="26356" end="26365" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q998675" start="26367" end="26373" title="Wausau, Wisconsin" label="Wausau"/>
<link wikidata="Q47430" start="26375" end="26384" title="Green Bay, Wisconsin" label="Green Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q984834" start="26386" end="26395" title="Sheboygan, Wisconsin" label="Sheboygan"/>
<link wikidata="Q94928" start="26397" end="26405" title="Appleton, Wisconsin" label="Appleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q43788" start="26407" end="26414" title="Madison, Wisconsin" label="Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q936780" start="26416" end="26425" title="La Crosse" label="La Crosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q122563" start="26427" end="26437" title="Eau Claire, Wisconsin" label="Eau Claire"/>
<link wikidata="Q936741" start="26439" end="26446" title="Oshkosh, Wisconsin" label="Oshkosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q536759" start="26452" end="26461" title="Manitowoc, Wisconsin" label="Manitowoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="26859" end="26863" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="26872" end="26883" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994805" start="27089" end="27103" title="White Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="White Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257538" start="27255" end="27289" title="Public Religion Research Institute" label="Public Religion Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="27490" end="27499" title="Christian" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121095" start="27548" end="27567" title="Mainline (Protestant)" label="Mainline Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="27576" end="27598" title="Evangelicalism" label="Evangelical Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="27636" end="27644" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="27739" end="27743" title="Judaism" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="27750" end="27756" title="Hinduism" label="Hindus"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="27763" end="27772" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhists"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="27779" end="27803" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622507" start="27810" end="27833" title="Unitarian Universalism" label="Unitarian Universalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="27840" end="27847" title="Islam" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q747802" start="27858" end="27865" title="Mormonism" label="Mormons"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810029" start="27988" end="28025" title="Association of Religion Data Archives" label="Association of Religion Data Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q730726" start="28134" end="28172" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church in America" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379931" start="28202" end="28238" title="Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod" label="Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049261" start="28282" end="28312" title="nondenominational Christianity" label="nondenominational Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610525" start="28840" end="28859" title="gross state product" label="gross state product"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241935" start="28892" end="28914" title="List of U.S. states and territories by GDP" label="21st among U.S. states"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166835" start="28999" end="29025" title="Per capita personal income in the United States" label="per capita personal income"/>
<link wikidata="Q186228" start="29245" end="29257" title="minimum wage" label="minimum wage"/>
<link wikidata="Q76615" start="29361" end="29384" title="Fortune 500" label="&amp;quot;Fortune&amp;quot; 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630166" start="29413" end="29432" title="Northwestern Mutual" label="Northwestern Mutual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420513" start="29434" end="29440" title="Fiserv" label="Fiserv"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472539" start="29442" end="29455" title="ManpowerGroup" label="ManpowerGroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529234" start="29457" end="29476" title="Rockwell Automation" label="Rockwell Automation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027166" start="29482" end="29498" title="WEC Energy Group" label="WEC Energy Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q967265" start="29536" end="29547" title="Kohl&amp;#x27;s" label="Kohl&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787576" start="29558" end="29573" title="Menomonee Falls, Wisconsin" label="Menomonee Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743730" start="29576" end="29601" title="American Family Insurance" label="American Family Insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969091" start="29626" end="29645" title="Oshkosh Corporation" label="Oshkosh Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q936741" start="29656" end="29663" title="Oshkosh, Wisconsin" label="Oshkosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6426036" start="30286" end="30300" title="Kohler Company" label="Kohler Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468438" start="30302" end="30316" title="Mercury Marine" label="Mercury Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529234" start="30318" end="30337" title="Rockwell Automation" label="Rockwell Automation"/>
<link wikidata="Q667865" start="30339" end="30355" title="Johnson Controls" label="Johnson Controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q496302" start="30357" end="30367" title="John Deere" label="John Deere"/>
<link wikidata="Q915543" start="30369" end="30390" title="Briggs &amp;amp; Stratton" label="Briggs &amp;amp; Stratton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6861736" start="30392" end="30423" title="Milwaukee Electric Tool Company" label="Milwaukee Electric Tool Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859119" start="30425" end="30440" title="Miller Electric" label="Miller Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q459965" start="30442" end="30458" title="Caterpillar Inc." label="Caterpillar Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q3187203" start="30460" end="30470" title="Joy Global" label="Joy Global"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969091" start="30472" end="30491" title="Oshkosh Corporation" label="Oshkosh Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192814" start="30493" end="30508" title="Harley-Davidson" label="Harley-Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046997" start="30510" end="30517" title="Case IH" label="Case IH"/>
<link wikidata="Q683170" start="30519" end="30542" title="S. C. Johnson &amp;amp; Son" label="S. C. Johnson &amp;amp; Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805438" start="30544" end="30560" title="Ashley Furniture" label="Ashley Furniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4790503" start="30562" end="30568" title="Ariens" label="Ariens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382473" start="30574" end="30598" title="Evinrude Outboard Motors" label="Evinrude Outboard Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801110" start="30788" end="30802" title="Lake Winnebago" label="Lake Winnebago"/>
<link wikidata="Q947086" start="30806" end="30815" title="Green Bay (Lake Michigan)" label="Green Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q918088" start="30823" end="30833" title="paper mill" label="paper mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q20992639" start="30982" end="30993" title="Oscar Mayer" label="Oscar Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531195" start="30995" end="31004" title="Tombstone (pizza)" label="Tombstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6268564" start="31019" end="31031" title="Johnsonville Foods" label="Johnsonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q899882" start="31032" end="31037" title="bratwurst" label="brats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7901994" start="31043" end="31065" title="Fred Usinger" label="Usinger&amp;#x27;s sausage"/>
<link wikidata="Q327751" start="31067" end="31078" title="Kraft Foods" label="Kraft Foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q658637" start="31202" end="31224" title="Miller Brewing Company" label="Miller Brewing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286885" start="31303" end="31310" title="Joseph Schlitz Brewing Company" label="Schlitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7910733" start="31312" end="31317" title="Valentin Blatz Brewing Company" label="Blatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360013" start="31323" end="31328" title="Pabst Brewing Company" label="Pabst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152374" start="31512" end="31525" title="GE Healthcare" label="GE Healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5382468" start="31527" end="31539" title="Epic Systems" label="Epic Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q174387" start="31545" end="31556" title="TomoTherapy" label="TomoTherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="31720" end="31730" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="31795" end="31802" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q660071" start="32113" end="32119" title="silage" label="silage"/>
<link wikidata="Q13181" start="32121" end="32132" title="cranberries" label="cranberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q20817212" start="32134" end="32141" title="ginseng" label="ginseng"/>
<link wikidata="Q2987371" start="32147" end="32157" title="snap beans" label="snap beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q12104" start="32310" end="32313" title="oat" label="oat"/>
<link wikidata="Q196" start="32340" end="32348" title="cherries" label="cherries"/>
<link wikidata="Q402563" start="32350" end="32361" title="maple syrup" label="maple syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18966" start="32367" end="32377" title="sweet corn" label="sweet corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q529878" start="32565" end="32578" title="state quarter" label="state quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q30639018" start="32623" end="32641" title="Alice in Dairyland" label="Alice in Dairyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637556" start="33088" end="33098" title="Summerfest" label="Summerfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273800" start="33107" end="33129" title="EAA AirVenture Oshkosh" label="EAA AirVenture Oshkosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5658750" start="33264" end="33286" title="Harley-Davidson Museum" label="Harley-Davidson Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q860790" start="33288" end="33301" title="Lambeau Field" label="Lambeau Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q325712" start="33303" end="33323" title="Milwaukee Art Museum" label="Milwaukee Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q441849" start="33325" end="33349" title="National Railroad Museum" label="National Railroad Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915273" start="33355" end="33378" title="Wisconsin State Capital" label="Wisconsin State Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q734970" start="33415" end="33423" title="Taliesin (studio)" label="Taliesin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604" start="33449" end="33467" title="Frank Lloyd Wright" label="Frank Lloyd Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631426" start="33469" end="33486" title="House on the Rock" label="House on the Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121841" start="33541" end="33560" title="Circus World Museum" label="Circus World Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334928" start="33577" end="33594" title="Ringling brothers" label="Ringling brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569443" start="33616" end="33644" title="Dells of the Wisconsin River" label="Dells of the Wisconsin River"/>
<link wikidata="Q194195" start="33810" end="33820" title="theme park" label="theme park"/>
<link wikidata="Q14714432" start="33844" end="33872" title="Devil&amp;#x27;s Lake State Park (Wisconsin)" label="Devil&amp;#x27;s Lake State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q257721" start="33903" end="33931" title="List of Wisconsin state parks" label="Wisconsin&amp;#x27;s state parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q681471" start="33992" end="34006" title="Door Peninsula" label="Door Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q490550" start="34067" end="34078" title="Door County, Wisconsin" label="Door County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454605" start="34345" end="34354" title="fish boil" label="fish boil"/>
<link wikidata="Q82230" start="34757" end="34768" title="Lake Geneva, Wisconsin" label="Lake Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="35428" end="35438" title="income tax" label="income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498371" start="35484" end="35498" title="income bracket" label="income bracket"/>
<link wikidata="Q11055488" start="35511" end="35516" title="sales tax" label="sales"/>
<link wikidata="Q17155766" start="35521" end="35528" title="use tax" label="use tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q607695" start="35679" end="35691" title="property tax" label="property tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q6042535" start="36633" end="36652" title="intangible property" label="intangible property"/>
<link wikidata="Q628413" start="36681" end="36696" title="inheritance tax" label="inheritance tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q628413" start="36740" end="36750" title="estate tax" label="estate tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q16939396" start="36886" end="36895" title="toll road" label="toll road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931829" start="36970" end="36984" title="motor fuel tax" label="motor fuel tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q14096331" start="37281" end="37294" title="dairy farming" label="dairy farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281188" start="37299" end="37311" title="cheesemaking" label="cheesemaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q22706" start="37364" end="37378" title="license plates" label="license plates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961963" start="37522" end="37532" title="cheesehead" label="cheesehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="37657" end="37663" title="ethnic" label="ethnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637556" start="37770" end="37780" title="Summerfest" label="Summerfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082674" start="37782" end="37793" title="Oktoberfest celebrations" label="Oktoberfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209905" start="37795" end="37806" title="Polish Fest" label="Polish Fest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5725381" start="37808" end="37822" title="Festa Italiana" label="Festa Italiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6861757" start="37824" end="37834" title="Irish Fest" label="Irish Fest"/>
<link wikidata="Q974845" start="37851" end="37863" title="Syttende Mai" label="Syttende Mai"/>
<link wikidata="Q984834" start="37914" end="37923" title="Sheboygan, Wisconsin" label="Sheboygan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37925" end="37935" title="Pulaski, Wisconsin#Pulaski Polka Days" label="Polka Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006179" start="37952" end="37958" title="Monroe, Wisconsin" label="Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019382" start="37963" end="37969" title="Mequon" label="Mequon"/>
<link wikidata="Q105753422" start="38108" end="38126" title="Nordic and Scandinavian Americans" label="northern Europeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984465" start="38150" end="38163" title="upper Midwest" label="upper Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q884742" start="38205" end="38214" title="Log house" label="log homes"/>
<link wikidata="Q325712" start="38231" end="38251" title="Milwaukee Art Museum" label="Milwaukee Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q168482" start="38317" end="38335" title="Santiago Calatrava" label="Santiago Calatrava"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551586" start="38402" end="38414" title="brise soleil" label="brise soleil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604" start="38548" end="38566" title="Frank Lloyd Wright" label="Frank Lloyd Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q616358" start="38605" end="38619" title="Prairie School" label="Prairie School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032468" start="38641" end="38647" title="Usonia" label="Usonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q734970" start="38745" end="38753" title="Taliesin (studio)" label="Taliesin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046759" start="38764" end="38787" title="Spring Green, Wisconsin" label="Spring Green, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11680575" start="38814" end="38828" title="Herbert and Katherine Jacobs First House" label="Jacobs I House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="38854" end="38860" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="38861" end="38880" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q10498496" start="38899" end="38950" title="The 20th-Century Architecture of Frank Lloyd Wright" label="The 20th-Century Architecture of Frank Lloyd Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586059" start="39013" end="39047" title="Annunciation Greek Orthodox Church" label="Annunciation Greek Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453960" start="39062" end="39096" title="First Unitarian Society of Madison" label="First Unitarian Society of Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702484" start="39102" end="39126" title="Johnson Wax Headquarters" label="Johnson Wax Headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901787" start="39128" end="39142" title="Monona Terrace" label="Monona Terrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q658637" start="40162" end="40184" title="Miller Brewing Company" label="Miller Brewing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360013" start="40186" end="40207" title="Pabst Brewing Company" label="Pabst Brewing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286885" start="40209" end="40239" title="Joseph Schlitz Brewing Company" label="Joseph Schlitz Brewing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q14714485" start="40245" end="40278" title="Jacob Leinenkugel Brewing Company" label="Jacob Leinenkugel Brewing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035496" start="40397" end="40404" title="Capital Brewery" label="Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580292" start="40406" end="40414" title="Sprecher Brewery" label="Sprecher"/>
<link wikidata="Q17118795" start="40420" end="40430" title="New Glarus Brewing Company" label="New Glarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027362" start="41121" end="41131" title="Wisconsin cheese" label="its cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056769" start="41165" end="41177" title="Colby cheese" label="Colby cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569347" start="41230" end="41246" title="Colby, Wisconsin" label="Colby, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965959" start="41253" end="41265" title="brick cheese" label="brick cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q776025" start="41340" end="41356" title="Limburger cheese" label="Limburger cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088324" start="41379" end="41390" title="Cheese curd" label="Cheese curd"/>
<link wikidata="Q507816" start="41526" end="41540" title="ranch dressing" label="ranch dressing"/>
<link wikidata="Q65057632" start="41561" end="41587" title="Hot and spicy cheese bread" label="Hot and spicy cheese bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q899882" start="41705" end="41714" title="bratwurst" label="bratwurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q10818030" start="41760" end="41774" title="summer sausage" label="summer sausage"/>
<link wikidata="Q13181" start="41828" end="41839" title="cranberries" label="cranberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215796" start="41888" end="41920" title="Dane County Farmers&amp;#x27; Market" label="Dane County Farmers&amp;#x27; Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454630" start="42016" end="42024" title="fish fry" label="fish fry"/>
<link wikidata="Q600262" start="42051" end="42056" title="perch" label="perch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462862" start="42060" end="42067" title="walleye" label="walleye"/>
<link wikidata="Q490550" start="42139" end="42150" title="Door County, Wisconsin" label="Door County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454605" start="42155" end="42164" title="fish boil" label="fish boil"/>
<link wikidata="Q48767324" start="42186" end="42197" title="supper club" label="supper club"/>
<link wikidata="Q945475" start="42380" end="42389" title="cole slaw" label="cole slaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q557521" start="42471" end="42487" title="Beer soup" label="Beer cheese soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4944127" start="42598" end="42604" title="Booyah (stew)" label="Booyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920963" start="42610" end="42614" title="stew" label="stew"/>
<link wikidata="Q40340" start="42790" end="42796" title="Racine, Wisconsin" label="Racine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098139" start="42814" end="42821" title="kringle" label="kringle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015339" start="42897" end="42914" title="Danish Americans" label="Danish immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626088" start="43005" end="43025" title="Wisconsin State Fair" label="Wisconsin State Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152821" start="43049" end="43059" title="cream puff" label="cream puff"/>
<link wikidata="Q108672552" start="43067" end="43080" title="butter burger" label="butter burger"/>
<link wikidata="Q116632790" start="43121" end="43140" title="Solly&amp;#x27;s Grille" label="Solly&amp;#x27;s Grille"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569527" start="43144" end="43152" title="Glendale, Wisconsin" label="Glendale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143589" start="43154" end="43167" title="Culver&amp;#x27;s" label="Culver&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898326" start="43184" end="43217" title="fast casual restaurant" label="fast casual food restaurant chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166838" start="43234" end="43243" title="Sauk City, Wisconsin" label="Sauk City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415586" start="43275" end="43289" title="Prairie du Sac, Wisconsin" label="Prairie du Sac"/>
<link wikidata="Q6462051" start="43364" end="43388" title="La Croix Sparkling Water" label="La Croix Sparkling Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q936780" start="43405" end="43414" title="La Crosse, Wisconsin" label="La Crosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177279" start="43485" end="43497" title="Country Fest" label="Country Fest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5875925" start="43520" end="43542" title="Hodag Country Festival" label="Hodag Country Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545471" start="43544" end="43550" title="Lifest" label="Lifest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637556" start="43656" end="43666" title="Summerfest" label="Summerfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5725381" start="43779" end="43804" title="Henry Maier Festival Park" label="Henry Maier Festival Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="43859" end="43865" title="ethnic" label="ethnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027109" start="43889" end="43918" title="Wisconsin Area Music Industry" label="Wisconsin Area Music Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035486" start="44178" end="44196" title="World Championship Snowmobile Derby" label="snowmobile derbies"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="44347" end="44353" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q107538638" start="44382" end="44433" title="Wisconsin Shipwreck Coast National Marine Sanctuary" label="Wisconsin Shipwreck Coast National Marine Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q852190" start="44565" end="44574" title="shipwreck" label="shipwreck"/>
<link wikidata="Q215887" start="44701" end="44715" title="whitetail deer" label="whitetail deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467508" start="44804" end="44845" title="Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources" label="Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q860790" start="45036" end="45049" title="Lambeau Field" label="Lambeau Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q47430" start="45062" end="45082" title="Green Bay, Wisconsin" label="Green Bay, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="45099" end="45123" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q213837" start="45131" end="45148" title="Green Bay Packers" label="Green Bay Packers"/>
<link wikidata="Q848103" start="45336" end="45353" title="Milwaukee Brewers" label="Milwaukee Brewers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339293" start="45420" end="45441" title="American Family Field" label="American Family Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q11314813" start="45623" end="45639" title="St. Louis Browns" label="St. Louis Browns"/>
<link wikidata="Q461595" start="45680" end="45694" title="Atlanta Braves" label="Atlanta Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="45764" end="45776" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q169637" start="45790" end="45805" title="Milwaukee Bucks" label="Milwaukee Bucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="45813" end="45844" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q20372160" start="45868" end="45880" title="Fiserv Forum" label="Fiserv Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267828" start="45932" end="45950" title="Milwaukee Admirals" label="Milwaukee Admirals"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027338" start="45970" end="45995" title="Wisconsin Timber Rattlers" label="Wisconsin Timber Rattlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q94928" start="46006" end="46014" title="Appleton, Wisconsin" label="Appleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q109638089" start="46023" end="46038" title="Beloit Sky Carp" label="Beloit Sky Carp"/>
<link wikidata="Q22994009" start="46046" end="46052" title="High-A" label="High-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743069" start="46139" end="46184" title="American Association of Professional Baseball" label="American Association of Professional Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q54322550" start="46202" end="46219" title="Milwaukee Milkmen" label="Milwaukee Milkmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445183" start="46229" end="46237" title="Franklin, Milwaukee County, Wisconsin" label="Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q107538037" start="46247" end="46270" title="Lake Country DockHounds" label="Lake Country DockHounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q51147" start="46280" end="46290" title="Oconomowoc, Wisconsin" label="Oconomowoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060502" start="46323" end="46340" title="Northwoods League" label="Northwoods League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6728034" start="46352" end="46368" title="Madison Mallards" label="Madison Mallards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6462072" start="46374" end="46391" title="La Crosse Loggers" label="La Crosse Loggers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6479023" start="46397" end="46415" title="Lakeshore Chinooks" label="Lakeshore Chinooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5331431" start="46421" end="46439" title="Eau Claire Express" label="Eau Claire Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q28448917" start="46445" end="46469" title="Fond du Lac Dock Spiders" label="Fond du Lac Dock Spiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602323" start="46475" end="46492" title="Green Bay Rockers" label="Green Bay Rockers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998225" start="46498" end="46514" title="Kenosha Kingfish" label="Kenosha Kingfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027358" start="46520" end="46537" title="Wausau Woodchucks" label="Wausau Woodchucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027256" start="46547" end="46571" title="Wisconsin Rapids Rafters" label="Wisconsin Rapids Rafters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358545" start="46682" end="46697" title="indoor American football" label="indoor football"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906691" start="46708" end="46726" title="Green Bay Blizzard" label="Green Bay Blizzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248855" start="46734" end="46737" title="Indoor Football League" label="IFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566764" start="46794" end="46808" title="Milwaukee Wave" label="Milwaukee Wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q60745055" start="46836" end="46854" title="Forward Madison FC" label="Forward Madison FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q30636616" start="46910" end="46924" title="USL League One" label="USL League One"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146583" start="47042" end="47056" title="college sports" label="college sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="47081" end="47096" title="NCAA Division I" label="NCAA Division I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098117" start="47097" end="47114" title="Wisconsin Badgers" label="Wisconsin Badgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191824" start="47116" end="47134" title="Milwaukee Panthers" label="Milwaukee Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2880367" start="47140" end="47157" title="Green Bay Phoenix" label="Green Bay Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837064" start="47163" end="47186" title="Marquette Golden Eagles" label="Marquette Golden Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q783062" start="47194" end="47213" title="Big East Conference (1979–2013)" label="Big East Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772588" start="47281" end="47307" title="Marquette Golden Eagles men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="men&amp;#x27;s basketball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027211" start="47381" end="47426" title="Wisconsin Intercollegiate Athletic Conference" label="Wisconsin Intercollegiate Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284440" start="47434" end="47446" title="Division III (NCAA)" label="Division III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284224" start="47605" end="47619" title="Milwaukee Mile" label="Milwaukee Mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q832052" start="47725" end="47739" title="IndyCar Series" label="IndyCar Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q645499" start="47744" end="47765" title="NASCAR Xfinity Series" label="NASCAR Xfinity Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q648512" start="47767" end="47779" title="Road America" label="Road America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301283" start="47785" end="47797" title="Elkhart Lake, Wisconsin" label="Elkhart Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q832052" start="47817" end="47831" title="IndyCar Series" label="IndyCar Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889178" start="47833" end="47860" title="IMSA SportsCar Championship" label="IMSA SportsCar Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467696" start="47862" end="47888" title="Sports Car Club of America" label="Sports Car Club of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517189" start="47889" end="47915" title="GT World Challenge America" label="GT World Challenge America"/>
<link wikidata="Q935518" start="47920" end="47935" title="Trans-Am Series" label="Trans-Am Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q20804905" start="47944" end="47955" title="MotoAmerica" label="MotoAmerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035486" start="47995" end="48030" title="World Championship Snowmobile Derby" label="World Championship Snowmobile Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569567" start="48042" end="48064" title="Eagle River, Wisconsin" label="Eagle River, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3418220" start="48089" end="48104" title="off-road racing" label="off-road racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181980" start="48122" end="48160" title="Crandon International Off-Road Raceway" label="Crandon International Off-Road Raceway"/>
<link wikidata="Q830528" start="48219" end="48228" title="velodrome" label="velodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q462161" start="48232" end="48239" title="Kenosha" label="Kenosha"/>
<link wikidata="Q984834" start="48291" end="48300" title="Sheboygan, Wisconsin" label="Sheboygan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994077" start="48312" end="48329" title="Whistling Straits" label="Whistling Straits"/>
<link wikidata="Q828160" start="48357" end="48373" title="PGA Championship" label="PGA Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q854376" start="48406" end="48415" title="Ryder Cup" label="Ryder Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776498" start="48469" end="48491" title="Greater Milwaukee Open" label="Greater Milwaukee Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776498" start="48509" end="48544" title="U.S. Bank Championship in Milwaukee" label="U.S. Bank Championship in Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346859" start="48607" end="48617" title="Brown Deer" label="Brown Deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389163" start="48628" end="48638" title="Erin Hills" label="Erin Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897748" start="48657" end="48672" title="Erin, Wisconsin" label="Erin, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q259776" start="48732" end="48741" title="U.S. Open (golf)" label="U.S. Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164243" start="48776" end="48801" title="Constitution of Wisconsin" label="Constitution of Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187569" start="48941" end="48960" title="Wisconsin Blue Book" label="Wisconsin Blue Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447438" start="49134" end="49143" title="Menominee" label="Menominee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817256" start="49168" end="49196" title="Menominee Indian Reservation" label="Menominee Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112727" start="49260" end="49281" title="Governor of Wisconsin" label="Governor of Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822309" start="49305" end="49315" title="Tony Evers" label="Tony Evers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553022" start="49460" end="49474" title="line-item veto" label="line-item veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544440" start="49501" end="49520" title="Lieutenant Governor of Wisconsin" label="lieutenant governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520528" start="49668" end="49682" title="Sara Rodriguez" label="Sara Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444394" start="49757" end="49775" title="Secretary of State of Wisconsin" label="secretary of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q49658197" start="49777" end="49792" title="Sarah Godlewski" label="Sarah Godlewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092098" start="49795" end="49804" title="State Treasurer of Wisconsin" label="treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q115217673" start="49806" end="49817" title="John Leiber" label="John Leiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q6562604" start="49820" end="49836" title="Attorney General of Wisconsin" label="attorney general"/>
<link wikidata="Q58333621" start="49838" end="49847" title="Josh Kaul" label="Josh Kaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643467" start="49871" end="49907" title="Superintendent of Public Instruction of Wisconsin" label="superintendent of public instruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q106402197" start="49909" end="49921" title="Jill Underly" label="Jill Underly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270274" start="49929" end="49956" title="Wisconsin State Legislature" label="Wisconsin State Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="50018" end="50027" title="bicameral" label="bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236853" start="50051" end="50075" title="Wisconsin State Assembly" label="Wisconsin State Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412814" start="50084" end="50106" title="Wisconsin State Senate" label="Wisconsin State Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7702558" start="50254" end="50265" title="term limits in the United States" label="term limits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758037" start="50532" end="50555" title="Speaker (politics)" label="Speaker of the Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269913" start="50564" end="50587" title="President of the Senate" label="President of the Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q843713" start="50978" end="50993" title="local ordinance" label="local ordinance"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027139" start="51007" end="51021" title="Wisconsin Circuit Court" label="circuit courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125101" start="51043" end="51055" title="trial courts" label="trial courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q864400" start="51067" end="51088" title="original jurisdiction" label="original jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027145" start="51192" end="51218" title="Wisconsin Court of Appeals" label="Wisconsin Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027332" start="51339" end="51362" title="Wisconsin Supreme Court" label="Wisconsin Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892376" start="51642" end="51657" title="United States congressional apportionment" label="reapportionment"/>
<link wikidata="Q113893555" start="51733" end="51761" title="119th United States Congress" label="119th United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q461698" start="51832" end="51842" title="Gwen Moore" label="Gwen Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027092" start="51846" end="51848" title="Wisconsin&amp;#x27;s 4th congressional district" label="04"/>
<link wikidata="Q1220917" start="51959" end="51965" title="Seniority in the United States Senate" label="senior"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="51966" end="51978" title="United States Senator" label="U.S. senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q970272" start="51980" end="51991" title="Ron Johnson" label="Ron Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q40628" start="52028" end="52041" title="Tammy Baldwin" label="Tammy Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959031" start="52082" end="52104" title="appellate jurisdiction" label="appellate jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q250451" start="52112" end="52166" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit" label="United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889811" start="52207" end="52236" title="United States District Court for the Eastern District of Wisconsin" label="Eastern District of Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889860" start="52241" end="52270" title="United States District Court for the Western District of Wisconsin" label="Western District of Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q195594" start="52316" end="52327" title="swing state" label="swing state"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="52374" end="52384" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="52388" end="52398" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="52420" end="52432" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q109448232" start="52463" end="52489" title="2024 United States presidential election in Wisconsin" label="2024 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="52557" end="52566" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q60519469" start="52612" end="52616" title="2020 United States presidential election in Wisconsin" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q23018345" start="52641" end="52645" title="2016 United States presidential election in Wisconsin" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q699744" start="52760" end="52764" title="1984 United States presidential election" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q19873629" start="52792" end="52801" title="Blue wall (U.S. politics)" label="blue wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q699776" start="52881" end="52885" title="1992 United States presidential election" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q4226" start="52889" end="52893" title="2012 United States presidential election" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867135" start="53020" end="53042" title="2014 Wisconsin elections" label="2014 general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q27962274" start="53190" end="53194" title="2018 Wisconsin elections" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q30676252" start="53449" end="53471" title="democratic backsliding" label="democratic backsliding"/>
<link wikidata="Q66424254" start="53534" end="53547" title="hybrid regime" label="hybrid regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="53566" end="53589" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House of Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270264" start="53594" end="53605" title="State legislature (United States)" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q108146844" start="53637" end="53654" title="Free and fair election" label="free but not fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q476310" start="53696" end="53717" title="Gerrymandering" label="partisan gerrymanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q279283" start="53761" end="53779" title="Elections in the United States" label="electoral rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q124153811" start="53882" end="53922" title="Clarke v. Wisconsin Elections Commission" label="Clarke v. Wisconsin Elections Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="53942" end="53960" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870609" start="53978" end="53988" title="History of the United States Republican Party" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889713" start="54162" end="54173" title="Bennett Law" label="Bennett Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="54269" end="54285" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="54301" end="54324" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q878682" start="54413" end="54431" title="Robert La Follette" label="Robert La Follette"/>
<link wikidata="Q821102" start="54440" end="54460" title="Progressive movement" label="Progressive movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q189197" start="54489" end="54504" title="Joseph McCarthy" label="Joseph McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353232" start="54539" end="54565" title="Socialist Party of America" label="Socialist Party of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q14919710" start="54631" end="54646" title="sewer socialism" label="sewer socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q207066" start="54878" end="54887" title="Second Red Scare" label="red scare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632795" start="54976" end="54987" title="Emil Seidel" label="Emil Seidel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161126" start="55073" end="55084" title="Daniel Hoan" label="Daniel Hoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5490545" start="55086" end="55102" title="Frank P. Zeidler" label="Frank P. Zeidler"/>
<link wikidata="Q16013253" start="55108" end="55119" title="Henry Maier" label="Henry Maier"/>
<link wikidata="Q589298" start="55131" end="55147" title="newspaper editor" label="newspaper editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q85645" start="55148" end="55161" title="Victor Berger" label="Victor Berger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638786" start="55394" end="55411" title="Progressive Party (United States, 1924)" label="Progressive Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255727" start="55490" end="55499" title="Democratic Party of Wisconsin" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="55542" end="55553" title="Mitt Romney" label="Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q203966" start="55572" end="55581" title="Paul Ryan" label="Paul Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q257536" start="55585" end="55595" title="Janesville, Wisconsin" label="Janesville"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="55652" end="55664" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199" start="55743" end="55748" title="Hesse" label="Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q80011" start="55761" end="55777" title="Chiba Prefecture" label="Chiba Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q13160" start="55788" end="55795" title="Jalisco" label="Jalisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q19206" start="55807" end="55819" title="Heilongjiang" label="Heilongjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="55834" end="55843" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115227" start="55847" end="55864" title="Mexican consulate" label="Mexican consulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="55978" end="55988" title="Midwestern" label="Midwestern"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="56062" end="56071" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027205" start="56171" end="56185" title="Wisconsin Idea" label="Wisconsin Idea"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027160" start="56365" end="56407" title="Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction" label="Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603678" start="56415" end="56430" title="state education agency" label="state education"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643467" start="56511" end="56553" title="Superintendent of Public Instruction of Wisconsin" label="State Superintendent of Public Instruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="56715" end="56739" title="post-secondary education" label="post-secondary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q10814056" start="56788" end="56818" title="University of Wisconsin System" label="University of Wisconsin System"/>
<link wikidata="Q849697" start="56839" end="56847" title="doctoral" label="doctoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q838330" start="56894" end="56925" title="University of Wisconsin–Madison" label="University of Wisconsin–Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q48282" start="57107" end="57115" title="university student" label="students"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027335" start="57204" end="57238" title="Wisconsin Technical College System" label="Wisconsin Technical College System"/>
<link wikidata="Q4737981" start="57511" end="57526" title="Alverno College" label="Alverno College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904557" start="57528" end="57542" title="Beloit College" label="Beloit College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045167" start="57544" end="57562" title="Carroll University" label="Carroll University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298369" start="57564" end="57580" title="Carthage College" label="Carthage College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159009" start="57582" end="57612" title="Concordia University Wisconsin" label="Concordia University Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337885" start="57614" end="57630" title="Edgewood College" label="Edgewood College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6478782" start="57632" end="57648" title="Lakeland College (Wisconsin)" label="Lakeland College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809286" start="57650" end="57669" title="Lawrence University" label="Lawrence University"/>
<link wikidata="Q188370" start="57671" end="57691" title="Marquette University" label="Marquette University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806307" start="57693" end="57721" title="Medical College of Wisconsin" label="Medical College of Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538982" start="57723" end="57754" title="Milwaukee School of Engineering" label="Milwaukee School of Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335662" start="57756" end="57769" title="Ripon College (Wisconsin)" label="Ripon College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590859" start="57771" end="57790" title="St. Norbert College" label="St. Norbert College"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027229" start="57792" end="57818" title="Wisconsin Lutheran College" label="Wisconsin Lutheran College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937045" start="57820" end="57838" title="Viterbo University" label="Viterbo University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571929" start="57958" end="57974" title="general aviation" label="general aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q537950" start="57985" end="58025" title="Milwaukee Mitchell International Airport" label="Milwaukee Mitchell International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4308813" start="58071" end="58082" title="FAA airport categories" label="categorized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708612" start="58136" end="58164" title="Dane County Regional Airport" label="Dane County Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294586" start="58169" end="58199" title="Appleton International Airport" label="Appleton International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q493016" start="58336" end="58349" title="intercity bus" label="intercity bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748907" start="58464" end="58478" title="Amtrak Thruway" label="Amtrak Thruway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4840840" start="58480" end="58490" title="Badger Bus" label="Badger Bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881378" start="58492" end="58499" title="Flixbus" label="Flixbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q755309" start="58501" end="58516" title="Greyhound Lines" label="Greyhound Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6021774" start="58518" end="58531" title="Indian Trails" label="Indian Trails"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175527" start="58533" end="58548" title="Jefferson Lines" label="Jefferson Lines"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58550" end="58566" title="Lamers Bus Lines" label="Lamers Bus Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808155" start="58568" end="58575" title="Megabus (North America)" label="Megabus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913333" start="58577" end="58599" title="Van Galder Bus Company" label="Van Galder Bus Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027140" start="58605" end="58626" title="Wisconsin Coach Lines" label="Wisconsin Coach Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191711" start="58658" end="58677" title="List of Interstate Highways in Wisconsin" label="Interstate Highways"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58698" end="58712" title="Interstate Highway System#Primary (one- and two-digit) routes (contiguous U.S.)" label="primary routes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58723" end="58739" title="Interstate Highway System#Auxiliary (three-digit) Interstates (contiguous U.S.)" label="auxiliary routes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980657" start="58867" end="58871" title="Interstate 41" label="I-41"/>
<link wikidata="Q839094" start="58934" end="58938" title="Interstate 94 in Wisconsin" label="I-94"/>
<link wikidata="Q408192" start="58964" end="58995" title="United States Numbered Highways" label="United States Numbered Highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001935" start="59115" end="59129" title="business route" label="business route"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027162" start="59177" end="59215" title="Wisconsin Department of Transportation" label="Wisconsin Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q839108" start="59226" end="59250" title="Wisconsin State Trunk Highway System" label="158 state trunk highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="59687" end="59693" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036098" start="59780" end="59788" title="Hiawatha (Amtrak train)" label="Hiawatha"/>
<link wikidata="Q110147173" start="59806" end="59814" title="Borealis (train)" label="Borealis"/>
<link wikidata="Q28848" start="59859" end="59880" title="Saint Paul, Minnesota" label="Saint Paul, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q197764" start="59943" end="59957" title="Empire Builder" label="Empire Builder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814208" start="60040" end="60045" title="Metra" label="Metra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885883" start="60053" end="60084" title="Union Pacific / North Line" label="Union Pacific North (UP-N) line"/>
<link wikidata="Q462161" start="60114" end="60121" title="Kenosha" label="Kenosha"/>
<link wikidata="Q19877002" start="60182" end="60189" title="The Hop" label="The Hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q6861766" start="60299" end="60327" title="Milwaukee Intermodal Station" label="Milwaukee Intermodal Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q22033592" start="60331" end="60344" title="Burns Commons" label="Burns Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="60459" end="60463" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="60464" end="60470" title="mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="60628" end="60644" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q232129" start="60815" end="60830" title="American badger" label="American badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q838330" start="60912" end="60943" title="University of Wisconsin–Madison" label="University of Wisconsin–Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q783822" start="61065" end="61079" title="State nickname" label="State nickname"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357912" start="61147" end="61158" title="List of U.S. state and territory mottos" label="State motto"/>
<link wikidata="Q783790" start="61182" end="61192" title="State song" label="State song"/>
<link wikidata="Q7090816" start="61200" end="61214" title="On, Wisconsin!" label="On, Wisconsin!"/>
<link wikidata="Q13517610" start="61223" end="61233" title="List of U.S. state birds" label="State bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q460967" start="61235" end="61249" title="American robin" label="American robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244241" start="61252" end="61264" title="List of U.S. state mammals" label="State animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q232129" start="61266" end="61281" title="American badger" label="American badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244241" start="61284" end="61305" title="List of U.S. state mammals" label="State domestic animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="61307" end="61316" title="Cattle" label="dairy cow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244241" start="61319" end="61340" title="List of U.S. state mammals" label="State wildlife animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q215887" start="61342" end="61359" title="white-tailed deer" label="white-tailed deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q491045" start="61362" end="61372" title="List of U.S. state fish" label="State fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q917705" start="61374" end="61385" title="muskellunge" label="muskellunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478371" start="61388" end="61400" title="List of U.S. state insects" label="State insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q30034" start="61402" end="61419" title="Western honey bee" label="Western honey bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423562" start="61422" end="61431" title="List of U.S. state dogs" label="State dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q37856" start="61433" end="61455" title="American Water Spaniel" label="American Water Spaniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q166108" start="61458" end="61477" title="List of U.S. state foods" label="State dairy product"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="61479" end="61485" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q166108" start="61488" end="61499" title="List of U.S. state foods" label="State fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q13181" start="61501" end="61510" title="cranberry" label="cranberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851582" start="61513" end="61524" title="List of U.S. state grasses" label="State grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="61526" end="61530" title="corn" label="corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q166108" start="61533" end="61545" title="List of U.S. state foods" label="State pastry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098139" start="61547" end="61554" title="kringle" label="kringle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932979" start="61557" end="61571" title="List of U.S. state beverages" label="State beverage"/>
<link wikidata="Q8495" start="61573" end="61577" title="milk" label="milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q134768" start="61586" end="61594" title="cocktail" label="cocktail"/>
<link wikidata="Q497448" start="61596" end="61616" title="Old fashioned (cocktail)" label="brandy old fashioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852098" start="61619" end="61630" title="List of U.S. state dances" label="State dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q153071" start="61632" end="61637" title="polka" label="polka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044076" start="61640" end="61652" title="State fossil" label="State fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q17170" start="61654" end="61663" title="trilobite" label="trilobite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851570" start="61666" end="61678" title="List of U.S. state flowers" label="State flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077055" start="61680" end="61691" title="Viola sororia" label="wood violet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474110" start="61694" end="61704" title="List of U.S. state trees" label="State tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q214733" start="61706" end="61717" title="Acer saccharum" label="sugar maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891002" start="61720" end="61730" title="List of U.S. state minerals, rocks, stones and gemstones" label="State rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="61732" end="61739" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891002" start="61742" end="61755" title="List of U.S. state minerals, rocks, stones and gemstones" label="State mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q37559" start="61757" end="61763" title="galena" label="galena"/>
<link wikidata="Q529878" start="61766" end="61779" title="50 State Quarters" label="State quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851564" start="61905" end="61915" title="List of U.S. state soils" label="State soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774746" start="61917" end="61923" title="Antigo (soil)" label="Antigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6018732" start="61942" end="61977" title="Index of Wisconsin-related articles" label="Index of Wisconsin-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q11796141" start="61980" end="62009" title="List of people from Wisconsin" label="List of people from Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112527" start="62012" end="62032" title="Outline of Wisconsin" label="Outline of Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q122810775" start="62035" end="62059" title="Impeachment in Wisconsin" label="Impeachment in Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11288054" start="62466" end="62486" title="History of Wisconsin" label="History of Wisconsin"/>
</links>
</doc>
