<doc id="28898" wikidata="Q240390" url="?curid=28898" title="Special Operations Executive">
<text>Special Operations Executive (SOE) was a British organisation formed in 1940 to conduct espionage, sabotage and reconnaissance in German-occupied Europe and to aid local resistance movements during World War II.

SOE personnel operated in all territories occupied or attacked by the Axis powers, except where demarcation lines were agreed upon with Britain&#x27;s principal Allies, the United States and the Soviet Union. SOE made use of neutral territory on occasion, or made plans and preparations in case neutral countries were attacked by the Axis. The organisation directly employed or controlled more than 13,000 people, of whom 3,200 were women. Both men and women served as agents in Axis-occupied countries.

The organisation was dissolved in 1946. A memorial to those who served in SOE was unveiled in 1996 on the wall of the west cloister of Westminster Abbey by the Queen Mother, and in 2009 on the Albert Embankment in London, depicting Violette Szabo. The Valençay SOE Memorial honours 91 male and 13 female SOE agents who lost their lives while working in France. The Tempsford Memorial was unveiled in 2013 by the Prince of Wales in Church End, Tempsford, Bedfordshire, close to the site of the former RAF Tempsford.

==History==

===Origins===
The organisation was formed from the merger of three existing secret departments, which had been formed shortly before the outbreak of the Second World War. Immediately after Germany annexed Austria (the &quot;Anschluss&quot;) in March 1938, the Foreign Office created a propaganda organisation known as Department EH (after Electra House, its headquarters), run by Canadian newspaper magnate Sir Campbell Stuart. Later that month, the Secret Intelligence Service (SIS, also known as MI6) formed a section known as Section D (the &quot;D&quot; apparently standing for &quot;Destruction&quot;) under Major Lawrence Grand, to investigate the use of sabotage, propaganda, and other irregular means to weaken an enemy. In the autumn of the same year, the War Office expanded an existing research department known as GS (R) and appointed Major J. C. Holland as its head to conduct research into guerrilla warfare. GS (R) was renamed Military Intelligence (Research) (MI(R)) in early 1939.

These three departments worked with few resources until the outbreak of war. There was much overlap between their activities. Section D and EH duplicated much of each other&#x27;s work. On the other hand, the heads of Section D and MI(R) knew each other and shared information. They agreed to a rough division of their activities; MI(R) researched irregular operations that could be undertaken by regular uniformed troops, while Section D dealt with truly undercover work.

During the early months of the war, Section D was based first at St Ermin&#x27;s Hotel in Westminster and then the Metropole Hotel near Trafalgar Square. The Section attempted unsuccessfully to sabotage deliveries of vital strategic materials to Germany from neutral countries by mining the Iron Gate on the River Danube. MI(R) meanwhile produced pamphlets and technical handbooks for guerrilla leaders. MI(R) was also involved in the formation of the Independent Companies, autonomous units intended to carry out sabotage and guerrilla operations behind enemy lines in the Norwegian Campaign, and the Auxiliary Units, stay-behind commando units based on the Home Guard which would act in the event of an Axis invasion of Britain, as seemed possible in the early years of the war.

===Formation===
On 13 June 1940, at the instigation of newly appointed Prime Minister Winston Churchill, Lord Hankey (who held the Cabinet post of Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster) persuaded Section D and MI(R) that their operations should be coordinated. On 1 July, a Cabinet level meeting arranged the formation of a single sabotage organisation. On 16 July, Hugh Dalton, the Minister of Economic Warfare, was appointed to take political responsibility for the new organisation, which was formally created on 22 July 1940. Dalton recorded in his diary that on that day the War Cabinet agreed to his new duties and that Churchill had told him, &quot;And now go and set Europe ablaze.&quot; Dalton used the Irish Republican Army (IRA) during the Irish War of Independence as a model for the organisation.

Sir Frank Nelson was nominated by SIS to be director of the new organisation, and a senior civil servant, Gladwyn Jebb, transferred from the Foreign Office to it, with the title of Chief Executive Officer. Campbell Stuart left the organisation, and the flamboyant Major Grand was returned to the regular army. At his own request, Major Holland also left to take up a regular appointment in the Royal Engineers. (Both Grand and Holland eventually attained the rank of major-general.) However, Holland&#x27;s former deputy at MI(R), Brigadier Colin Gubbins, returned from command of the Auxiliary Units to be Director of Operations of SOE.

One department of MI(R), MI R(C), which was involved in the development of weapons for irregular warfare, was not formally integrated into SOE but became an independent body codenamed MD1. Directed by Major (later Lieutenant Colonel) Millis Jefferis, it was located at The Firs in Whitchurch, Buckinghamshire and nicknamed &quot;Churchill&#x27;s Toyshop&quot; from the Prime Minister&#x27;s close interest in it and his enthusiastic support.

===Leadership===
The director of SOE was usually referred to by the initials &quot;CD&quot;. Nelson, the first director to be appointed, was a former head of a trading firm in India, a back bench Conservative Member of Parliament and Consul in Basel, Switzerland, where he had also been engaged in undercover intelligence work.

In February 1942 Dalton was removed as the political head of SOE (possibly because he was using SOE&#x27;s phone tapping facility to listen to conversations of fellow Labour ministers, or possibly because he was viewed as too &quot;communistically inclined&quot; and a threat to SIS). He became President of the Board of Trade and was replaced as Minister of Economic Warfare by Lord Selborne. Selborne in turn retired Nelson, who had suffered ill health as a result of his hard work, and appointed Sir Charles Hambro, head of Hambros Bank, to replace him. He also transferred Jebb back to the Foreign Office.

Hambro had been a close friend of Churchill before the war and had won the Military Cross in the First World War. He retained several other interests, for example remaining chairman of Hambros and a director of the Great Western Railway. Some of his subordinates and associates expressed reservations that these interests distracted him from his duties as director. Selborne and Hambro nevertheless cooperated closely until August 1943, when they fell out over the question of whether SOE should remain a separate body or coordinate its operations with those of the British Army in several theatres of war. Hambro felt that any loss of autonomy would cause a number of problems for SOE in the future. At the same time, Hambro was found to have failed to pass on vital information to Selborne. He was dismissed as director, and became head of a raw materials purchasing commission in Washington, D.C., which was involved in the exchange of nuclear information.

As part of the subsequent closer ties between the Imperial General Staff and SOE (although SOE had no representation on the Chiefs of Staff Committee), Hambro&#x27;s replacement as director from September 1943 was Gubbins, who had been promoted to Major-general. Gubbins had wide experience of commando and clandestine operations and had played a major part in MI(R)&#x27;s and SOE&#x27;s early operations. He also put into practice many of the lessons he learned from the IRA during the Irish War of Independence.

===Organisation===
====Headquarters====
The organisation of SOE continually evolved and changed during the war. Initially, it consisted of three broad departments: SO1 (formerly Department EH, which dealt with propaganda); SO2 (formerly Section D, operations); and SO3 (formerly MI R, research). SO3 was quickly overloaded with paperwork and was merged into SO2. In August 1941, following quarrels between the Ministry of Economic Warfare and the Ministry of Information over their relative responsibilities, SO1 was removed from SOE and became an independent organisation, the Political Warfare Executive.

Thereafter, a single, broad &quot;Operations&quot; department controlled the Sections operating into enemy and sometimes neutral territory, and the selection and training of agents. Sections, usually referred to by code letters or groups of letters, were assigned to a single country. Some enemy-occupied countries had two or more sections assigned to deal with politically disparate resistance movements. (France had no less than six). For security purposes, each section had its own headquarters and training establishments. This strict compartmentalisation was so effective that in mid-1942 five governments in exile jointly suggested that a single sabotage organisation be created, and were startled to learn that SOE had been in existence for two years.

Four departments and some smaller groups were controlled by the director of scientific research, Professor Dudley Maurice Newitt, and were concerned with the development or acquisition and production of special equipment. A few other sections were involved with finance, security, economic research and administration, although SOE had no central registry or filing system. When Gubbins was appointed director, he formalised some of the administrative practices which had grown in an &quot;ad hoc&quot; fashion and appointed an establishment officer to oversee the manpower and other requirements of the various departments.

The main controlling body of SOE was its council, consisting of around fifteen heads of departments or sections. About half of the council were from the armed forces (although some were specialists who were only commissioned after the outbreak of war), the rest were various civil servants, lawyers, or business or industrial experts. Most of the members of the council, and the senior officers and functionaries of SOE generally, were recruited by word of mouth among public school alumni and Oxbridge graduates, although this did not notably affect SOE&#x27;s political complexion.

====Subsidiary branches====
Several subsidiary SOE stations were set up to manage operations that were too distant for London to control directly. 

SOE&#x27;s operations in the Middle East and Balkans were controlled from a headquarters in Cairo, which became notorious for poor security, infighting and conflicts with other agencies. It was eventually named, in April 1944, &quot;Special Operations (Mediterranean),&quot; or SO(M). Shortly after the Allied landings in North Africa, a station code named &quot;Massingham&quot; was established near Algiers in late 1942, which operated into Southern France. Following the Allied invasion of Italy, personnel from Massingham established forward stations in Brindisi and near Naples. A subsidiary headquarters, initially known as &quot;Force 133,&quot; was later set up in Bari in Southern Italy, under the Cairo headquarters, to control operations in the Balkans, including Greece, and Northern Italy.

An SOE station, first called the &quot;India Mission,&quot; and subsequently known as &quot;GS I(k),&quot; was set up in India late in 1940. It subsequently moved to Ceylon so as to be closer to the headquarters of the Allied South East Asia Command and became known as &quot;Force 136.&quot; 

A &quot;Singapore Mission&quot; was set up at the same time as the India Mission but was unable to overcome official opposition to its attempts to form resistance movements in Malaya before the Japanese overran Singapore. Force 136 took over its surviving staff and operations.

New York City also had a branch office, formally titled &quot;British Security Coordination,&quot; and headed by Canadian businessman Sir William Stephenson. Their office, located at Room 3603, 630 Fifth Avenue, Rockefeller Center, coordinated the work of SOE, SIS, and MI5 with the American FBI and the Office of Strategic Services.

===Aims===
As with its leadership and organisation, the aims and objectives of SOE changed throughout the war, although they revolved around sabotaging and subverting the Axis war machines through indirect methods. SOE occasionally carried out operations with direct military objectives, such as Operation Harling, originally designed to cut one of the Axis supply lines to their troops fighting in North Africa. They also carried out some high-profile operations aimed mainly at the morale both of the Axis and occupied nations, such as Operation Anthropoid, the assassination in Prague of Reinhard Heydrich. In general also, SOE&#x27;s objectives were to foment mutual hatred between the population of Axis-occupied countries and the occupiers, and to force the Axis to expend manpower and resources on maintaining their control of subjugated populations.

Dalton&#x27;s initial statement about outline of methods to be used by SOE&#x27;s was &quot;industrial and military sabotage, labor agitation and strikes, continuous propaganda, terrorist attacks against traitors and German leaders, boycotts and riots.&quot; Dalton&#x27;s early enthusiasm for fomenting widespread strikes, civil disobedience and sabotage in Axis-occupied areas had to be curbed. Thereafter, there were two main aims, often mutually incompatible; sabotage of the Axis war effort, and the creation of secret armies which would rise up to assist the liberation of their countries when Allied troops arrived or were about to do so. It was recognised that acts of sabotage would bring about reprisals and increased Axis security measures which would hamper the creation of underground armies. As the tide of war turned in the Allies&#x27; favour, these underground armies became more important.

===Relationships===
At the government level, SOE&#x27;s relationships with the Foreign Office were often difficult. On several occasions, various governments in exile protested at operations taking place without their knowledge or approval, provoking Axis reprisals against civilian populations, or complained about SOE&#x27;s support for movements opposed to the exiled governments. SOE&#x27;s activities also threatened relationships with neutral countries. SOE nevertheless generally adhered to the rule, &quot;No bangs without Foreign Office approval.&quot;

Early attempts at bureaucratic control of Jefferis&#x27;s MIR(c) by the Ministry of Supply were eventually foiled by Churchill&#x27;s intervention. Thereafter, the Ministry co-operated, though at arm&#x27;s length, with Dudley Newitt&#x27;s various supply and development departments. The Treasury were accommodating from the start and were often prepared to turn a blind eye to some of SOE&#x27;s questionable activities.

With other military headquarters and commands, SOE cooperated fairly well with Combined Operations Headquarters during the middle years of the war, usually on technical matters as SOE&#x27;s equipment was readily adopted by commandos and other raiders. This support was lost when Vice Admiral Louis Mountbatten left Combined Operations, though by this time SOE had its own transport and had no need to rely on Combined Operations for resources. On the other hand, the Admiralty objected to SOE developing its own underwater vessels, and the duplication of effort this involved. The Royal Air Force, and in particular RAF Bomber Command under &quot;Bomber&quot; Harris were usually reluctant to allocate aircraft to SOE.

Towards the end of the war, as Allied forces began to liberate territories occupied by the Axis and in which SOE had established resistance forces, SOE also liaised with and to some extent came under the control of the Allied theatre commands. Relationships with Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force in north-west Europe (whose commander was General Dwight D. Eisenhower) and South East Asia Command (whose commander was Admiral Louis Mountbatten, already well known to SOE) were generally excellent. However, there were difficulties with the Commanders in Chief in the Mediterranean, partly because of the complaints over impropriety at SOE&#x27;s Cairo headquarters during 1941 and partly because both the supreme command in the Mediterranean and SOE&#x27;s establishments were split in 1942 and 1943, leading to divisions of responsibility and authority.

There was tension between SOE and SIS, which the Foreign Office controlled. Stewart Menzies, the chief of SIS, was aggrieved to lose control of Section D. Where SIS preferred placid conditions in which it could gather intelligence and work through influential persons or authorities, SOE was intended to create unrest and turbulence, and often backed anti-establishment organisations, such as the Communists, in several countries. At one stage, SIS actively hindered SOE&#x27;s attempts to infiltrate agents into enemy-occupied France.

Even before the United States joined the war, the head of the newly formed Office of the Coordinator of Information (COI), William J. Donovan, had received technical information from SOE and had arranged for some members of his organisation to undergo training at a camp run by SOE in Oshawa in Canada. In early 1942, Donovan&#x27;s organisation became the Office of Strategic Services. SOE and OSS worked out respective areas of operation: OSS&#x27;s exclusive sphere included China (including Manchuria), Korea and Australia, the Atlantic islands and Finland. SOE retained India, the Middle East and East Africa, and the Balkans. While the two services both worked in Western Europe, it was expected that SOE would be the leading partner.

In the middle of the war, the relations between SOE and OSS were not often smooth. They established a joint headquarters in Algiers but the officers of the two organisations working there refused to share information with each other. In the Balkans, and Yugoslavia especially, SOE and OSS several times worked at cross-purposes, reflecting their governments&#x27; differing (and changing) attitudes to the Partisans and Chetniks. However, in 1944 SOE and OSS successfully pooled their personnel and resources to mount Operation Jedburgh, providing large scale support to the French Resistance following the Normandy landings.

SOE had some nominal contact with the Soviet NKVD, but this was limited to a single liaison officer at each other&#x27;s headquarters.

==Locations==

===Baker Street===


After working from temporary offices in Central London, the headquarters of SOE was moved on 31 October 1940 into 64 Baker Street (hence the nickname &quot;the Baker Street Irregulars&quot;). Ultimately, SOE occupied much of the western side of Baker Street. &quot;Baker Street&quot; became the euphemistic synecdoche of referring to SOE. The precise nature of the buildings remained concealed; it had no entry in the telephone directories, and correspondence to external bodies bore service addresses; MO1 (SP) (a War Office branch), NID(Q) (Admiralty), AI10 (Air Ministry), or other fictitious bodies or civilian companies.

SOE maintained a large number of training, research and development or administrative centres. It was a joke that &quot;SOE&quot; stood for &quot;Stately &#x27;omes of England&quot;, after the large number of country houses and estates it requisitioned and used.

===Production and trials===
The establishments connected with experimentation and production of equipment were mainly concentrated in and around Hertfordshire and were designated by roman numbers. The main weapons and devices research establishments were The Firs, the home of MD1, formerly MIR(C), near Aylesbury in Buckinghamshire (although this was not formally part of SOE), and Station IX at The Frythe, a country house (and former private hotel) outside Welwyn Garden City where, under the cover name of ISRB (Inter Services Research Bureau), SOE developed radios, weapons, explosive devices and booby traps.

Section D originally had a research station at Bletchley Park, which also held the Government Code and Cipher School, until in November 1940 it was decided that it was unwise to conduct codebreaking and explosives experiments on the same site. The establishment moved to Aston House near Stevenage in Hertfordshire and was renamed Station XII. It originally conducted research and development but from 1941 it became a production, storage and distribution centre for devices already developed.

Station XV, at the Thatched Barn near Borehamwood, was devoted to camouflage, which usually meant equipping agents with authentic local clothing and personal effects. Various sub-stations in London were also involved in this task. Station XV and other camouflage sections also devised methods of hiding weapons, explosives or radios in innocuous-seeming items.

Agents also needed identity papers, ration cards, currency and so on. Station XIV, at Briggens House near Roydon in Essex, was originally the home of STS38, a training facility for Polish saboteurs, who set up their own forgery section. As the work expanded, it became the central forgery department for SOE and the Poles eventually moved out on 1 April 1942. The technicians at Station XIV included a number of ex-convicts.

===Training and operations===
The training establishments, and properties used by country sections, were designated by Arabic numbers and were widely distributed. The initial training centres of SOE were at country houses such as Wanborough Manor, Guildford. Agents destined to serve in the field underwent commando training at Arisaig in Scotland, where they were taught armed and unarmed combat skills by William E. Fairbairn and Eric A. Sykes, former Inspectors in the Shanghai Municipal Police. Those who passed this course received parachute training by STS 51 and 51a situated near Altrincham, Cheshire with the assistance of No.1 Parachute Training School RAF, at RAF Ringway (which later became Manchester Airport). They then attended courses in security and Tradecraft at Group B schools around Beaulieu in Hampshire. Finally, depending on their intended role, they received specialist training in skills such as demolition techniques or Morse code telegraphy at various country houses in England.

SOE&#x27;s Cairo branch established a commando and parachute training school numbered STS 102 at Ramat David near Haifa. This school trained agents who joined SOE from among the armed forces stationed in the Middle East, and also members of the Special Air Service and Greek Sacred Squadron.

A commando training centre similar to Arisaig and run by Fairbairn was later set up at Oshawa, for Canadian members of SOE and members of the newly created American organisation, the Office of Strategic Services.

==Agents==

A variety of people from all classes and pre-war occupations served SOE in the field. The backgrounds of agents in F Section, for example, ranged from aristocrats such as Polish-born Countess Krystyna Skarbek, and Noor Inayat Khan, the daughter of an Indian Sufi leader, to working-class people such as Violette Szabo and Michael Trotobas, with some even reputedly from the criminal underworld. Some of them were recruited by word of mouth among the acquaintances of SOE&#x27;s officers, others responded to routine trawls of the armed forces for people with unusual languages or other specialised skills.

In most cases, the primary quality required of an agent was a deep knowledge of the country in which he or she was to operate, and especially its language, if the agent was to pass as a native of the country. Dual nationality was often a prized attribute. This was particularly so of France. In other cases, especially in the Balkans, a lesser degree of fluency was required as the resistance groups concerned were already in open rebellion and a clandestine existence was unnecessary. A flair for diplomacy combined with a taste for rough soldiering was more necessary. Some regular army officers proved adept as envoys, and others (such as the former diplomat Fitzroy Maclean or the classicist Christopher Woodhouse) were commissioned only during wartime.

Several of SOE&#x27;s agents were from the Jewish Parachutists of Mandate Palestine, some of whom were émigrés from countries in Europe. Thirty-two of them served as agents in the field, seven of whom were captured and executed.

Exiled or escaped members of the armed forces of some occupied countries were obvious sources of agents. This was particularly true of Norway and the Netherlands. In other cases (such as Frenchmen owing loyalty to Charles de Gaulle and especially the Poles), the agents&#x27; first loyalty was to their leaders or governments in exile, and they treated SOE only as a means to an end. This could occasionally lead to mistrust and strained relations in Britain.

The organisation was prepared to ignore almost any contemporary social convention in its fight against the Axis. It employed known homosexuals, people with criminal records (some of whom taught skills such as picking locks), those with bad conduct records in the armed forces, Communists, and anti-British nationalists. Some of them might have been considered a security risk, but no known case exists of an SOE agent wholeheartedly going over to the enemy. The Frenchman, Henri Déricourt, is widely regarded as a traitor, but he was exonerated by a war crimes court, and some have claimed he was acting under secret orders from SOE or MI6.

SOE was also far ahead of contemporary attitudes in its use of women in armed combat. Although women were first considered only as couriers in the field, or as wireless operators or administrative staff in Britain, those sent into the field were trained in the use of weapons and in unarmed combat. Most were commissioned into either the First Aid Nursing Yeomanry (FANY) or the Women&#x27;s Auxiliary Air Force. Women often assumed leadership roles in the field. Pearl Witherington became the organiser (leader) of a highly successful resistance network in France. Early in the war, American Virginia Hall functioned as the unofficial nerve center of several SOE networks in Vichy France. Many women agents such as Odette Hallowes or Violette Szabo were decorated for bravery, posthumously in Szabo&#x27;s case. Of SOE&#x27;s 41 (or 39 in some estimates) female agents serving in Section F (France) sixteen did not survive with twelve killed or executed in Nazi concentration camps.

==Communications==

===Radio===
Most of the resistance networks which SOE formed or liaised with were controlled by radio directly from Britain or one of SOE&#x27;s subsidiary headquarters. All resistance circuits contained at least one wireless operator, and all drops or landings were arranged by radio, except for some early exploratory missions sent &quot;blind&quot; into enemy-occupied territory. SOE wireless operators were also known as &quot;The Pianists&quot;.

At first, SOE&#x27;s radio traffic went through the SIS-controlled radio station at Bletchley Park. From 1 June 1942, SOE used its own transmitting and receiving stations at Grendon Underwood in Buckinghamshire and Poundon nearby, as the location and topography were suitable. Teleprinters linked the radio stations with SOE&#x27;s HQ in Baker Street. Operators in the Balkans worked to radio stations in Cairo.

SOE was highly dependent upon the security of radio transmissions, involving three factors: the physical qualities and capabilities of the radio sets, the security of the transmission procedures and the provision of proper ciphers.

SOE&#x27;s first radios were supplied by SIS. They were large and clumsy, and required large amounts of power. SOE acquired a few, much more suitable, sets from the Poles in exile, but eventually designed and manufactured their own, such as the Paraset, under the direction of Lieutenant Colonel F. W. Nicholls of the Royal Corps of Signals, who had served with Gubbins between the wars. The A Mk III, with its batteries and accessories, weighed only , and could fit into a small attache case, although the B Mk II, otherwise known as the B2, which weighed , was required to work over ranges greater than about .

Operating procedures were insecure at first. Operators were forced to transmit verbose messages on fixed frequencies and at fixed times and intervals. This allowed German direction finding teams time to triangulate their positions. After several operators were captured or killed, procedures were made more flexible and secure.

As with their first radio sets, SOE&#x27;s first ciphers were inherited from SIS. Leo Marks, SOE&#x27;s chief cryptographer, was responsible for the development of better codes to replace the insecure poem codes. Eventually, SOE settled on single use ciphers, printed on silk. Unlike paper, which would be given away by rustling, silk would not be detected by a casual search if it was concealed in the lining of clothing.

===BBC===
The BBC also played its part in communications with agents or groups in the field. During the war, it broadcast to almost all Axis-occupied countries, and was avidly listened to, even at risk of arrest. The BBC included various &quot;personal messages&quot; in its broadcasts, which could include lines of poetry or apparently nonsensical items. They could be used to announce the safe arrival of an agent or message in London for example, or could be instructions to carry out operations on a given date. They were used, for example, to mobilise the resistance groups in the hours before Operation Overlord.

===Other methods===
In the field, agents could sometimes make use of the postal services, though these were slow, not always reliable and letters were almost certain to be opened and read by the Axis security services. In training, agents were taught to use a variety of easily available substances to make invisible ink, though most of these could be detected by a cursory examination, or to hide coded messages in apparently innocent letters. The telephone services were even more certain to be intercepted and listened to by the enemy, and could be used only with great care.

The most secure method of communication in the field was by courier. In the earlier part of the war, most women sent as agents in the field were employed as couriers, on the assumption that they would be less likely to be suspected of illicit activities.

==Equipment==

===Weapons===
Although SOE used some suppressed weapons such as the De Lisle carbine and the Welrod (specifically developed for SOE at Station IX), it took the view that weapons issued to resisters should not require extensive training in their use, or need careful maintenance. The crude and cheap Sten was a favourite. For issue to large forces such as the Yugoslav Partisans, SOE used captured German or Italian weapons. These were available in large quantities after the Tunisian and Sicilian campaigns and the surrender of Italy, and the partisans could acquire ammunition for these weapons (and the Sten) from enemy sources.

SOE also adhered to the principle that resistance fighters would be handicapped rather than helped by heavy equipment such as mortars or anti-tank guns. These were awkward to transport, almost impossible to conceal and required skilled and highly trained operators. Later in the war however, when resistance groups staged open rebellions against enemy occupation, some heavy weapons were dispatched, for example to the Maquis du Vercors. Weapons such as the British Army&#x27;s standard Bren light machine gun were also supplied in such cases.

Most SOE agents received training on captured enemy weapons before being sent into enemy-occupied territory. Ordinary SOE agents were also armed with handguns acquired abroad, such as, from 1941, a variety of US pistols, and a large quantity of the Spanish Llama .38 ACP in 1944. Such was SOE&#x27;s demand for weapons, a consignment of 8,000 Ballester–Molina .45 calibre weapons was purchased from Argentina, apparently with the mediation of the US.

SOE agents were issued with the Fairbairn–Sykes fighting knife also issued to Commandos. For specialised operations or use in extreme circumstances, SOE issued small fighting knives which could be concealed in the heel of a hard leather shoe or behind a coat lapel. Given the likely fate of agents captured by the Gestapo, SOE also disguised suicide pills as coat buttons.

===Sabotage===
SOE developed a wide range of explosive devices for sabotage, such as limpet mines, shaped charges and time fuses, which were also widely used by commando units. Most of these devices were designed and produced at The Firs. The Time Pencil, invented by Commander A.J.G. Langley, the first commandant of Station XII at Aston was used to give a saboteur time to escape after setting a charge and was far simpler to carry and use than lighted fuses or electrical detonators. It relied on crushing an internal vial of acid which then corroded a retaining wire, which sometimes made it inaccurate in cold or hot conditions. Later the L-Delay, which instead allowed a lead retaining wire to &quot;creep&quot; until it broke and was less affected by the temperature, was introduced.

SOE pioneered the use of plastic explosive. (The term &quot;plastique&quot; comes from plastic explosive packaged by SOE and originally destined for France but taken to the United States instead.) Plastic explosive could be shaped and cut to perform almost any demolition task. It was also inert and required a powerful detonator to cause it to explode, and was therefore safe to transport and store. It was used in everything from car bombs, to exploding rats designed to destroy coal-fired boilers.

Other, more subtle sabotage methods included lubricants laced with grinding materials, intended for introduction into vehicle oil systems, railway wagon axle boxes, etc., incendiaries disguised as innocuous objects, explosive material concealed in coal piles to destroy locomotives, and land mines disguised as cow or elephant dung. On the other hand, some sabotage methods were extremely simple but effective, such as using sledgehammers to crack cast-iron mountings for machinery.

===Submarines===
Station IX developed several miniature submersible craft. The Welman submarine and &quot;Sleeping Beauty&quot; were offensive weapons, intended to place explosive charges on or adjacent to enemy vessels at anchor. The Welman was used once or twice in action, but without success. The Welfreighter was intended to deliver stores to beaches or inlets, but it too was unsuccessful.

A sea trials unit was set up in West Wales at Goodwick, by Fishguard (station IXa) where these craft were tested. In late 1944 craft were dispatched to Australia to the Allied Intelligence Bureau (SRD), for tropical testing.

===Other===
SOE also revived some medieval devices, such as the caltrop, which could be used to burst the tyres of vehicles or injure foot soldiers and crossbows powered by multiple rubber bands to shoot incendiary bolts. There were two types, known as &quot;Big Joe&quot; and &quot;Li″l Joe&quot; respectively. They had tubular alloy skeleton stocks and were designed to be collapsible for ease of concealment.

An important section of SOE was Operational Research, which worked mostly from Station IX but also called on the facilities of Station XII and HQ. It operated through the User Trials Section and later the Air Supply Research Section and was formally established in August 1943. The section had the responsibility both for issuing formal requirements and specifications to the relevant development and production sections, and for testing prototypes of the devices under field conditions. It ensured that operational requirements were properly assessed, trials conducted, and quality monitored. Over the period from 1 November 1943 to 1 November 1944, the section tested 78 devices. Some of these were weapons such as the Sleeve gun or fuses or adhesion devices to be used in sabotage, others were utility objects such as waterproof containers for stores to be dropped by parachute, or night glasses (lightweight binoculars with plastic lenses). Of the devices tested, 47% were accepted for use with little or no modification, 31% were accepted only after considerable modification and the remaining 22% were rejected.

Before SOE&#x27;s research and development procedures were formalised in 1943, a variety of more or less useful devices were developed. Some of the more imaginative devices invented by SOE included exploding pens with enough explosive power to blast a hole in the bearer&#x27;s body, or guns concealed in tobacco pipes, though there is no record of any of these being used in action. Station IX developed a miniature folding motorbike (the &quot;Welbike&quot;) for use by parachutists, though this was noisy and conspicuous, used scarce petrol and was of little use on rough ground.

==Transport==
The continent of Europe was largely closed to normal travel. Although it was possible in some cases to cross frontiers from neutral countries such as Spain or Sweden, it was slow and there were problems over violating these countries&#x27; neutrality. SOE had to rely largely on its own air or sea transport for movement of people, arms and equipment.

===Air===
SOE had mostly to rely on the RAF for its planes. It was engaged in disputes with the RAF from its early days. In January 1941, an intended ambush (Operation Savanna) against the aircrew of a German &quot;pathfinder&quot; air group near Vannes in Brittany was thwarted when Air Vice Marshal Charles Portal, the Chief of the Air Staff, objected on moral grounds to parachuting what he regarded as assassins, although Portal&#x27;s objections were later overcome and &quot;Savanna&quot; was mounted, unsuccessfully. From 1942, when Air Marshal Arthur Harris (&quot;Bomber Harris&quot;) became the Commander-in-Chief of RAF Bomber Command, he consistently resisted the diversion of the most capable types of bombers to SOE purposes.

SOE&#x27;s first aircraft were two Armstrong Whitworth Whitleys belonging to 419 Flight RAF, which was formed in September 1940. In 1941, the flight was expanded to become No. 138 Squadron RAF. In February 1942, they were joined by No. 161 Squadron RAF. 161 Squadron flew agent insertions and pick-ups, while 138 Squadron delivered arms and stores by parachute. &quot;C&quot; flight from No. 138 Squadron later became No. 1368 Flight of the Polish Air Force, which joined No. 624 Squadron flying Halifaxes in the Mediterranean. By the later stages of the war several United States Army Air Forces squadrons were operating Douglas C-47 Skytrains in the Mediterranean, although by this time their operations had passed from SOE proper to the &quot;Balkan Air Terminal Service&quot;. Three Special Duties squadrons operated in the Far East using a variety of aircraft, including the very long-range Consolidated B-24 Liberator.

====RAF Tempsford====
Nos. 161 and 138 Squadrons were based at RAF Tempsford in Bedfordshire though No. 161 Squadron often moved forward to RAF Tangmere, close to the coast in West Sussex, to shorten their flights. The airfield at Tempsford became the RAF&#x27;s most secret base. (Tempsford had been rejected for Bomber Command&#x27;s purposes by Harris in March 1942, as it frequently became waterlogged.) RAF Tempsford was designed to look like an ordinary working farm. SOE used Tangmere Cottage, opposite the main entrance to the base. SOE agents were lodged in a local hotel before being ferried to farm buildings, the &quot;Gibraltar Farm&quot; within the airfield&#x27;s perimeter track. After final briefings and checks at the farm, the agents were issued firearms in the barn, and then boarded a waiting aircraft.

The squadrons&#x27; first task was to take agents to France who could select suitable fields for their aircraft. Most of these agents were French expatriates, some of whom had been pilots in the French Armée de l&#x27;Air. Once the agent was in place and had selected a number of potential fields, 161 Squadron delivered SOE agents, wireless equipment and operators and weapons, and flew French political leaders, resistance leaders or their family members, and downed allied airmen to Britain. Between them, the two squadrons transported 101 agents to, and recovered 128 agents, diplomats and airmen from occupied France.

====161 Squadron operations====
The principal aircraft of 161 Squadron was the Westland Lysander. It handled very well at low speed and could land from touch down to turn around in only . It had a range of and could carry one to three passengers in the rear cockpit and stores in a pannier underneath the fuselage. It was flown by a single pilot, who also had to navigate, so missions had to be flown on clear nights with a full or near full moon. Bad weather often thwarted missions, German night fighters were also a hazard, and pilots could never know when landing whether they would be greeted by the resistance or the Gestapo.

The procedure once a Lysander reached its destination in France was described by Squadron Leader Hugh Verity. Once the aircraft reached the airfield the agent on the ground would signal the aircraft by flashing a prearranged code letter in Morse. The aircraft would respond by blinking back the appropriate code response letter. The agent and his men would then mark the field by lighting the three landing lights, which were flashlights attached to poles. The &quot;A&quot; lamp was at the base of the landing ground. 150 metres beyond it and into the wind was the &quot;B&quot; light, and 50 metres to the right of &quot;B&quot; was the &quot;C&quot; light. The three lights formed an inverted &quot;L&quot;, with the &quot;B&quot; and &quot;C&quot; lights upwind from &quot;A&quot;. With the code passed the pilot would land the aircraft. He then would taxi back to the &quot;A&quot; lamp, where the passengers would clamber down the fixed ladder to the ground, often while the pilot was making a slow U-turn. Before leaving the last passenger would hand off the luggage and then take aboard the outgoing luggage before climbing down the ladder as well. Then the outgoing passengers would climb aboard and the aircraft would take off. The whole exchange might take as little as 3 minutes.

The Lockheed Hudson had a range or greater, and could carry more passengers (ten or more), but required landing strips more than double the length of those needed for the Lysander - vs. ). It carried a navigator, to ease the load on the pilot, and could also be fitted with navigational equipment, such as the &quot;Rebecca&quot; homing transceiver of the Rebecca/Eureka transponding radar system. The Hudson&#x27;s use with 161 Squadron was developed by Charles Pickard and Hugh Verity. Pickard determined that the Hudson&#x27;s stall speed was actually some slower than its manual stated. Before it was first used on 13 January 1943, 161 Squadron had to send two Lysander aircraft, in what they termed &quot;a double&quot;, if larger parties needed to be picked up.

====138 Squadron and other Special Duties units operations====
No. 138 Squadron&#x27;s primary mission was the delivery of equipment, and occasionally agents, by parachute. It flew a variety of bomber-type aircraft, often modified with extra fuel tanks and flame-suppressing exhaust shrouds: the Armstrong Whitworth Whitley until November 1942, the Handley Page Halifax and later the Short Stirling. The Stirling could carry a very large load (18 containers) but the aircraft with the longest range was the Halifax, which when based in Italy could reach drop zones as far away as eastern Poland.

Stores were usually parachuted in cylindrical containers. The &quot;C&quot; type was long, and when fully loaded could weigh up to . The &quot;H&quot; type was the same size overall but could be broken down into five smaller sections. This made it easier to carry and conceal but it could not be loaded with longer loads such as rifles. Some inert stores such as boots and blankets were &quot;free-dropped&quot; i.e. simply thrown out of the aircraft bundled together without a parachute, often to the hazard of any receiving committee on the ground.

====Locating and homing equipment====
Some devices used by SOE were designed specifically to guide aircraft to landing strips and dropping zones. Such sites could be marked by an agent on the ground with bonfires or bicycle lamps, but this required good visibility, as the pilot or navigator of a plane had not only to spot the ground signals, but also to navigate by visible landmarks to correct dead reckoning. Many landings or drops were thwarted by bad weather. To overcome these problems, SOE and Allied airborne forces used the Rebecca/Eureka transponding radar, which enabled a Hudson or larger aircraft to home in on a point on the ground even in thick weather. It was however difficult for agents or resistance fighters to carry or conceal the ground-based &quot;Eureka&quot; transponder equipment.

SOE also developed the S-Phone, which allowed a pilot or radio operator aboard an aircraft to communicate by voice with the &quot;reception committee&quot;. Sound quality was good enough for voices to be recognisable, so that a mission could be aborted in case of any doubts of an agent&#x27;s identity.

===Sea===
SOE also experienced difficulties with the Royal Navy, who were usually unwilling to allow SOE to use its submarines or motor torpedo boats to deliver agents or equipment. Submarines were regarded as too valuable to risk within range of enemy coastal defences. They could also carry only small numbers of agents, in great discomfort, and could disembark stores only in small dinghies or canoes, which made it difficult to land large quantities of equipment. SOE nevertheless used them in the Indian Ocean where the distances made it impracticable to use any smaller craft.

The vessels used by SOE during the early part of the war were clandestine craft such as fishing boats or caiques. They could pass muster as innocent local craft and carry large quantities of stores. They also had the advantage of being largely outside Admiralty control. However, SOE&#x27;s first small craft organisation, which was set up in the Helford estuary in Cornwall, suffered from obstruction from SIS, which had a similar private navy nearby. Eventually, in spring 1943, the Admiralty created a Deputy Director of Operations (Irregular), to superintend all such private navies. This officer turned out to be the former commander of SIS&#x27;s craft in the Helford estuary, but his successor in charge of SIS&#x27;s Helford base cooperated much better with SOE&#x27;s flotilla. While SIS and SOE (and MI9) landed and embarked several dozen agents, refugees and Allied aircrew, it was impossible to transport large quantities of arms and equipment inland from beaches in heavily patrolled coastal areas, until France was almost liberated.

SOE also had use of HMS &quot;Fidelity&quot;, a disguised armed merchant ship operated by an independent group of displaced Frenchmen, led by Lt. Cdr Jack Langlais. Together with Belgian agent Albert Guérisse, founder of the Pat O&#x27;Leary escape route, &quot;Fidelity&quot; undertook several clandestine missions in the western Mediterranean in 1941.

After the German occupation of Norway, many Norwegian merchant seamen and fishermen made their way to Britain. SOE recruited several to maintain communications to Norway, using fishing boats from a base in the Shetland Islands. The service became so reliable that it became known as the Shetland Bus. One of its boats and crews launched a daring but unsuccessful attack (&quot;Operation Title&quot;) against the German battleship Tirpitz. A similar organisation ran missions to occupied Denmark (and neutral Sweden) from the east coast of Britain. The &quot;Shetland Bus&quot; was unable to operate only during the very long hours of daylight in the Arctic summer, because of the risk that the slow fishing boats would be attacked by patrolling German aircraft. Late in the war, the unit acquired three fast Submarine chasers for such missions. About the same time, SOE also acquired MTBs and Motor Gun Boats for the Helford flotilla.

SOE also used feluccas to maintain communications between Algiers, and southern France and Corsica, and some caïques in the Aegean.

==Operations==

===France===

In France, most agents were directed by two London-based country sections. F Section was under SOE control, while RF Section was linked to Charles de Gaulle&#x27;s Free French Government in exile. Most native French agents served in RF. Two smaller sections also existed: EU/P Section, which dealt with the Polish community in France, and the DF Section which was responsible for establishing escape routes. During the latter part of 1942 another section known as AMF was established in Algiers, to operate into Southern France.

On 5 May 1941 Georges Bégué (1911–1993), a radio operator, became the first SOE agent parachuted into German-occupied France. The American, Virginia Hall, who arrived by boat in August 1941, was the first woman to serve for a lengthy period in France. Andrée Borrel (1919–1944) and Lise de Baissac (1905–2004) became the first women parachuted into France on 24 September 1942. A typical team of a network consisted of an organiser (leader), a radio operator, and a courier. Agents performed a variety of functions including arms and sabotage instructors, couriers, liaison officers and radio operators. Between Bégué&#x27;s first drop in May 1941 and August 1944, more than 400 F Section agents were sent into occupied France. One hundred and four F section agents lost their lives, mostly by being captured and executed by the Germans. RF sent about the same number of agents; AMF sent 600 (although not all of these belonged to SOE). EU/P and DF sent a few dozen agents each.

Some networks were compromised, with the loss of many agents. In particular agents continued to be sent to the &quot;Prosper&quot; network headed by Francis Suttill for months after it was controlled by the Germans and most of its agents had been captured. The head of F Section, Maurice Buckmaster was blamed by many as he failed to see signs that the network was compromised.

To support the Allied invasion of France on D Day in June 1944, SOE and OSS supplemented their agents by air-dropping three-man parties of uniformed military personnel into France as part of Operation Jedburgh. They were to work with the French Resistance to co-ordinate widespread overt (as opposed to clandestine) acts of resistance. 100 men were eventually dropped, with 6,000 tons of military stores (4,000 tons had been dropped during the years before D-Day). At the same time, all the various sections operating in France (except EU/P) were nominally placed under a London-based HQ titled État-major des Forces Françaises de l&#x27;Intérieur (EMFFI).

It took many weeks for a full assessment of the contributions of SOE and the Jedburgh teams to the Allied landings in Normandy, but when it came it vindicated Gubbins&#x27; belief that carefully planned sabotage could cripple a modern army. General Eisenhower&#x27;s staff at the Supreme Headquarters of the Allied Expeditionary Force said that the Jedburghs had &quot;succeeded in imposing more or less serious delays on all the divisions moved to Normandy&quot;. This had prevented Hitler from striking back in the crucial opening hours of Operation Overlord. The most &quot;outstanding example was the delay to the 2nd SS Panzer Division&quot;, Eisenhower&#x27;s staff said, and added a very personal endorsement, agreeing that the work carried out under Gubbins&#x27; leadership played a &quot;very considerable part in our complete and final victory&quot;.

Many agents were captured, killed in action, executed, or died in German concentration camps. More than one-third of 41 female agents of Section F did not survive the war; the death toll for more than 400 male agents was one-fourth and the toll of thousands of French people helping SOE agents and networks was about one-fifth. Of 119 SOE agents captured by the Germans and deported to concentration camps in Germany, only 23 men and three women survived.

===Poland===
SOE did not need to instigate Polish resistance, because unlike the Vichy French the Poles overwhelmingly refused to collaborate with the Nazis. Early in the war the Poles established the Home Army, led by a clandestine resistance government known as the Polish Secret State. Nevertheless, many members of SOE were Polish and the Polish resistance cooperated with them extensively.

SOE assisted the Polish government in exile with training facilities and logistical support for its 605 special forces operatives known as the Cichociemni, or &quot;The Dark and Silent&quot;. Members of the unit, which was based in Audley End House, Essex, were rigorously trained before being parachuted into occupied Poland. Because of the distance involved in air travel to Poland, customised aircraft with extra fuel capacity were used in Polish operations such as Operation Wildhorn III. Sue Ryder, a war-time member of the First Aid Nursing Yeomanry, who worked with the Poles in Britain, later chose the title Baroness Ryder of Warsaw in honour of these operations.

Secret Intelligence Service member Krystyna Skarbek (&quot;nom de guerre&quot; Christine Granville) ran several operations in Poland, and Hungary (with Andrzej Kowerski), from 1939-1941, in Egypt 1941-1944, and France with SOE F (for French) Section in 1944. Having served in the Polish resistance Home Army since 1939, Elżbieta Zawacka reached Britain in May 1943, and became the only female member of the Polish elite Special Forces, the Cichociemni or &#x27;Silent Unseen&#x27;, therefore also the only woman in SOE P (for Polish) Section. Zawacka, like Jan Nowak-Jezioranski reached Britain through Gibraltar on an established courier route out of occupied Europe. Maciej Kalenkiewicz was parachuted into occupied Poland, only to be killed by the Soviets. A Polish agent was integral to SOE&#x27;s Operation Foxley, the plan to assassinate Hitler.

Thanks to co-operation between SOE and the Home Army, the Poles were able to deliver the first Allied intelligence on the Holocaust to London in June 1942. Witold Pilecki of the Polish Home Army designed a joint operation with SOE to liberate Auschwitz, but the British rejected it as infeasible. Joint Anglo-Polish operations provided London with vital intelligence on the V-2 rocket, German troops movements on the Eastern Front, and the Soviet repressions of Polish citizens.

RAF &#x27;Special Duties Flights&#x27; were sent to Poland to assist the Warsaw uprising against the Nazis. The rebellion was defeated with a loss of 200,000 casualties (mostly German executions of Polish civilians) after the nearby Red Army refused military assistance to the Polish Home Army. RAF Special Duties Flights were refused landing rights at Soviet-held airfields near Warsaw, even when requiring emergency landings after battle damage. These flights were also attacked by Soviet fighters, despite the USSR&#x27;s officially Allied status.

===Germany===
Due to the dangers and lack of friendly population few operations were conducted in Germany itself. The German and Austrian section of SOE was run by Lieutenant Colonel Ronald Thornley for most of the war, and was mainly involved with black propaganda and administrative sabotage in collaboration with the German section of the Political Warfare Executive. After D-Day, the section was re-organised and enlarged with Major General Gerald Templer heading the Directorate, with Thornley as his deputy.

Several major operations were planned, including Operation Foxley, a plan to assassinate Hitler, and Operation Periwig, an ingenious plan to simulate the existence of a large-scale anti-Nazi resistance movement within Germany. &quot;Foxley&quot; was never carried out but &quot;Periwig&quot; went ahead despite restrictions placed on it by SIS and SHAEF. Several German prisoners of war were trained as agents, briefed to make contact with the anti-Nazi resistance and to conduct sabotage. They were then parachuted into Germany in the hope that they would either hand themselves in to the &quot;Gestapo&quot; or be captured by them, and reveal their supposed mission. Fake coded wireless transmissions were broadcast to Germany and various pieces of agent paraphernalia such as code books and wireless receivers were allowed to fall into the hands of the German authorities.

In Austria a resistance group formed around Kaplan Heinrich Maier. The Maier group was informed very early about the mass murder of Jews through its contacts with the Semperit factory near Auschwitz. SOE was in contact with this resistance group through its colleague G. E. R. Gedye in 1943, but was not convinced of the reliability of the contact and did not cooperate due to security concerns.

===The Netherlands===
Section N of SOE ran operations in the Netherlands. They committed some of SOE&#x27;s worst blunders in security, which allowed the Germans to capture many agents and much sabotage material, in what the Germans called the &#x27;Englandspiel&#x27;. SOE ignored the absence of security checks in radio transmissions, and other warnings that the Germans were running the supposed resistance networks. A total of 50 agents were caught by the Germans and brought to Camp Haaren in the South of the Netherlands. Five captured men managed to escape from the camp. Two of them, Pieter Dourlein and Ben Ubbink, escaped on 29 August 1943 and found their way to Switzerland. There, the Netherlands Embassy sent messages over their controlled sets to England that SOE Netherlands was compromised. SOE set up new elaborate networks, which continued to operate until the Netherlands were liberated at the end of the war. In September 1944, as allied military forces were advancing into the Netherlands, the remaining captured SOE agents were taken by the Germans from Camp Haaren to Mauthausen concentration camp and executed.

From September 1944 to April 1945, eight Jedburgh teams were also active in the Netherlands. The first team, code named &quot;Dudley&quot; was parachuted into the east of the Netherlands one week before Operation Market Garden. The next four teams were attached to the Airborne forces that carried out Market Garden. After the failure of Market Garden, one Jedburgh team trained (former) resistance men in the liberated South of the Netherlands. In April 1945 the last two Dutch Jedburgh teams became operational. One team code named &quot;Gambling&quot;, was a combined Jedburgh/Special Air Service (SAS) group that was dropped into the centre of the Netherlands to assist the Allied advance. The last team was parachuted into the Northern Netherlands as part of SAS operation &quot;Amherst&quot;. Despite the fact that operating in the flat and densely populated Netherlands was very difficult for the Jedburghs, the teams were quite successful.

===Belgium===
Section T established some effective networks in Belgium, in part orchestrated by fashion designer Hardy Amies, who rose to the rank of lieutenant colonel. Amies adapted names of fashion accessories for use as code words, while managing some of the most murderous and ruthless agents in the field. The rapid liberation of the country by Allied forces in September 1944 provided the resistance with little time to stage an uprising. They did assist the Allies to bypass German rearguards, and enabled the Allies to capture the vital Port of Antwerp intact.

After Brussels was liberated, Amies outraged his superiors by setting up a &quot;Vogue&quot; photo-shoot in Belgium. In 1946, he was knighted in Belgium for his service with SOE, being named an officer of the Order of the Crown.

===Italy===
As both an enemy country, and supposedly a monolithic fascist state with no organised opposition which SOE could use, SOE made little effort in Italy before mid-1943, when Mussolini&#x27;s government collapsed and Allied forces already occupied Sicily.

Two years earlier, in April 1941, in a mission codenamed &quot;Yak&quot;, Peter Fleming had attempted to recruit agents from among the many thousands of Italian prisoners of war captured in the Western Desert Campaign. He recruited none. Attempts to search among Italian immigrants in the United States, Britain and Canada for agents to be sent to Italy had similarly poor results.

During the first three years of war, the most important &quot;episode&quot; of the collaboration between SOE and Italian anti-fascism was a project of an anti-fascist uprising in Sardinia, which SOE supported at some stage but did not receive approval from the Foreign Office.

In the aftermath of the Italian collapse, SOE (in Italy renamed No. 1 Special Force) helped build a large resistance organisation in the cities of Northern Italy, and in the Alps. Italian partisans harassed German forces in Italy throughout the autumn and winter of 1944, and in the Spring 1945 offensive in Italy they captured Genoa and other cities unaided by Allied forces. SOE helped the Italian Resistance send British missions to the partisan formations and supply war material to the bands of patriots, a supply made without political prejudices, and which also helped the Communist formations (Brigate Garibaldi).

Late in 1943, SOE established a base at Bari in Southern Italy, from which they operated their networks and agents in the Balkans. This organisation had the codename &quot;Force 133&quot;. This later became &quot;Force 266&quot;, reserving 133 for operations run from Cairo rather than the heel of Italy. Flights from Brindisi were run to the Balkans and Poland, particularly once control had been wrested from SOE&#x27;s Cairo headquarters and was exercised directly by Gubbins. SOE established a new packing station for the parachute containers close to Brindisi Air base, along the lines of those created at Saffron Walden. This was ME 54, a factory employing hundreds, the American (OSS) side of which was known as &quot;Paradise Camp&quot;.

===Yugoslavia===
1941, SOE helped considerably in anti-Axis propaganda and in preparing the Yugoslav coup d&#x27;état which overthrew the pro-Axis regent, Prince Paul. After the pro-British coup succeeded, the Axis Invasion of Yugoslavia ensued. In the aftermath of the German invasion and the Yugoslav capitulation, the Kingdom of Yugoslavia fragmented. Croatia had a substantial pro-Axis movement, the Ustaše. In Croatia and the remainder of Yugoslavia, two resistance movements formed: the royalist Chetniks under Draža Mihailović, and the Communist Partisans under Josip Broz Tito.

Mihailović was the first to attempt to contact the Allies, and SOE despatched a party on 20 September 1941 under Major &quot;Marko&quot; Hudson. Hudson also encountered Tito&#x27;s forces. Notable members of this party included actor Christopher Lee. Through the royalist government in exile, SOE at first supported the Chetniks. Eventually, however, due to reports that the Chetniks were less effective and even collaborating with German and Italian forces on occasion, British support was redirected to the Partisans, even before the Tehran Conference in 1943.

Although relations were often touchy throughout the war, it can be argued that SOE&#x27;s unstinting support was a factor in Yugoslavia&#x27;s maintaining a neutral stance during the Cold War. However, accounts vary dramatically between all historical works on the &quot;Chetnik controversy&quot;.

===Hungary===
SOE was unable to establish links or contacts in Hungary before the regime of Miklós Horthy aligned itself with the Axis Powers. Distance and lack of such contacts prevented any effort being made by SOE until the Hungarians themselves dispatched a diplomat (László Veress) in a clandestine attempt to contact the Western Allies. SOE facilitated his return, with some radio sets. Before the Allied governments could agree terms, Hungary was placed under German military occupation and Veress was forced to flee the country.

Two missions subsequently dropped &quot;blind&quot; i.e. without prior arrangement for a reception party, failed. So too did an attempt by Basil Davidson to incite a partisan movement in Hungary, after he made his way there from northeastern Yugoslavia.

===Greece===
Greece was eventually overrun by the Axis after a decisive win over the Italians and a significant defence lasting several months which also caused a major diversion of German forces, subsequently delaying the invasion of Russia. This was the first serious setback suffered by the Axis forces and resulted in Churchill saying that &quot;from now on we will say heroes fight like Greeks!&quot;. In the aftermath, SIS and another intelligence organisation, SIME, discouraged attempts at sabotage or resistance as this might imperil relations with Turkey, although SOE maintained contacts with resistance groups in Crete. 

In late 1942, at the army&#x27;s instigation, SOE mounted its first operation, codenamed Operation Harling, into Greece in an attempt to disrupt the railway which was being used to move materials to the German Panzer Army Africa. A party under Colonel (later Brigadier) Eddie Myers, assisted by Christopher Woodhouse, was parachuted into Greece and discovered two guerrilla groups operating in the mountains: the pro-Communist ELAS and the republican EDES. On 25 November 1942, Myers&#x27;s party blew up one of the spans of the railway viaduct at Gorgopotamos, supported by 150 Greek partisans from these two organisations who engaged Italians guarding the viaduct. This cut the railway linking Thessaloniki with Athens and Piraeus.

Relations between the resistance groups and the British soured. When the British needed once again to disrupt the railway across Greece as part of the deception operations preceding Operation Husky, the Allied invasion of Sicily, the resistance groups refused to take part, rightly fearing German reprisals against civilians. Instead, a six-man commando party from the British and New Zealand armies, led by New Zealander Lieutenant Colonel Cecil Edward Barnes, a civil engineer, carried out the destruction of the Asopos viaduct on 21 June 1943. Two attempts by Mike Cumberlege to make the Corinth Canal unnavigable ended in failure.

EDES received most aid from SOE, but ELAS secured many weapons when Italy collapsed and Italian military forces in Greece dissolved. ELAS and EDES fought a vicious civil war in 1943 until SOE brokered an uneasy armistice (the Plaka agreement).

A lesser known, but important function of SOE in Greece was to inform the Cairo headquarters of the movement of the German military aircraft that were serviced and repaired at the two former Greek military aircraft facilities in and around Athens.

Eventually, the British Army occupied Athens and Piraeus in the aftermath of the German withdrawal, and fought a street-by-street battle to drive ELAS from these cities and impose an interim government under Archbishop Damaskinos. SOE&#x27;s last act was to evacuate several hundred disarmed EDES fighters to Corfu, preventing their massacre by ELAS.

Several resistance groups and Allied stay-behind parties operated in Crete after the Germans occupied the island in the Battle of Crete. SOE&#x27;s operations involved figures such as Patrick Leigh Fermor, John Lewis, Harry Rudolph Fox Burr, Tom Dunbabin, Sandy Rendel, John Houseman, Xan Fielding and Bill Stanley Moss. Some of the most famous moments included the abduction of General Heinrich Kreipe led by Leigh Fermor and Moss – subsequently portrayed in the film &quot;Ill Met by Moonlight&quot;, and the sabotage of Damasta led by Moss.

===Albania===
Albania had been under Italian influence since 1923, and was occupied by the Italian Army in 1939. In 1943, a small liaison party entered Albania from northwestern Greece. SOE agents who entered Albania then or later included Julian Amery, Anthony Quayle, David Smiley and Neil &quot;Billy&quot; McLean. They discovered another internecine war between the Communist partisans under Enver Hoxha, and the republican Balli Kombëtar. As the latter had collaborated with the Italian occupiers, Hoxha gained Allied support.

SOE&#x27;s envoy to Albania, Brigadier Edmund &quot;Trotsky&quot; Davies, was captured by the Germans early in 1944. Some SOE officers warned that Hoxha&#x27;s aim was primacy after the war, rather than fighting Germans. They were ignored, but Albania was never a major factor in the effort against the Germans.

===Czechoslovakia===

SOE sent many missions into the Czech areas of the so-called Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia, and later into Slovakia. The most famous mission was Operation Anthropoid, the assassination of SS-Obergruppenführer Reinhard Heydrich in Prague. From 1942 to 1943 the Czechoslovaks had their own Special Training School (STS) at Chicheley Hall in Buckinghamshire. In 1944, SOE sent men to support the Slovak National uprising.

===Norway===
In March 1941 a group performing commando raids in Norway, Norwegian Independent Company 1 (NOR.I.C.1) was organised under leadership of Captain Martin Linge. Their initial raid in 1941 was Operation Archery, the best known raid was probably the Norwegian heavy water sabotage. Communication lines with London were gradually improved so that by 1945, 64 radio operators were spread throughout Norway.

===Denmark===
The Danish resistance assisted SOE in its activities in neutral Sweden. For example, SOE was able to obtain several shiploads of vital ball-bearings which had been interned in Swedish ports. The Danes also pioneered several secure communications methods; for example, a burst transmitter/receiver which transcribed Morse code onto or from a paper tape faster than a human operator could handle.

===Romania===
Shortly after the establishment of the SOE, the &quot;Romania section of SOE&quot; was formed with the mission of sabotaging oil shipments from Romania to Germany and attempting to form a resistance movement mainly by keeping close contact with the pro-British political actors. An SOE network in Romania was set up by engineer Valeriu &quot;Rică&quot; Georgescu (code-named &quot;Jockey&quot;) in February 1941. The role of this network was to gather military and economic intelligence and to maintain contact between Iuliu Maniu and the British Government. Until its discovery and fall in August 1941, the network proved an invaluable asset by supplying the British with information gathered from the German High Command in Bucharest, such as the German plans to invade the USSR.

Although arrested by the Romanian authorities, Georgescu maintained his contacts with the SOE. To better establish connections with Maniu and the opposition, a first SOE mission, code-named &quot;Ranji&quot;, was sent to Romania in June 1943. The mission, led by Captain Thomas Russell, was dropped into Yugoslavia and made its way to Romania where it continued to operate until Russell was killed in September of the same year. The mission did succeed in delivering a radio set and a radioman to Maniu&#x27;s supporters.

In December 1943, another SOE delegation under the code name Operation Autonomous was parachuted into Romania. The delegation, including Colonel Gardyne de Chastelain, Captain Silviu Mețianu and Ivor Porter, was captured by the Romanian Gendarmerie and held until the night of King Michael&#x27;s Coup on 23 August 1944. The task of Autonomous was to attempt again to establish direct contact with Maniu and establish the details of an eventual coup against Antonescu, and in case of capture to inform Antonescu of the British government&#x27;s attitude towards Romania and to advise him in sending emissaries to discuss the Allied armistice terms.

===Abyssinia===
Abyssinia was the scene of some of SOE&#x27;s earliest and most successful efforts. SOE organised a force of Ethiopian irregulars under Orde Charles Wingate in support of the exiled Emperor Haile Selassie. This force (named Gideon Force by Wingate) caused heavy casualties to the Italian occupation forces, and contributed to the successful British campaign there. Wingate was to use his experience to create the Chindits in Burma.

===West Africa===
The neutral Spanish island of Fernando Po was the scene of Operation Postmaster, one of SOE&#x27;s most successful exploits. The large Italian merchant vessel &quot;Duchessa d&#x27;Aosta&quot; and the German tug &quot;Likomba&quot; had taken refuge in the harbour of Santa Isabel. On 14 January 1942, while the ships&#x27; officers were attending a party ashore thrown by an SOE agent, commandos and SOE personnel led by Gus March-Phillipps boarded the two vessels, cut the anchor cables and towed them out to sea, where they later rendezvoused with Royal Navy ships. Several neutral authorities and observers were impressed by the British display of ruthlessness.

===Southeast Asia===

As early as 1940, SOE was preparing plans for operations in Southeast Asia. As in Europe, after initial Allied military disasters, SOE built up indigenous resistance organisations and guerrilla armies in enemy (Japanese) occupied territory. SOE also launched &quot;Operation Remorse&quot; (1944–45), which was ultimately aimed at protecting the economic and political status of Hong Kong. Force 136 engaged in covert trading of goods and currencies in China. Its agents proved remarkably successful, raising £77m through their activities, which were used to provide assistance for Allied prisoners of war and, more controversially, to buy influence locally to facilitate a smooth return to pre-war conditions.

==Dissolution==
In late 1944, as it became clear that the war would soon be over, Lord Selborne advocated keeping SOE or a similar body in being, and that it would report to the Ministry of Defence. Anthony Eden, the Foreign Secretary, insisted that his ministry, already responsible for the SIS, should control SOE or its successors. The Joint Intelligence Committee, which had a broad co-ordinating role over Britain&#x27;s intelligence services and operations, took the view that SOE was a more effective organisation than the SIS but that it was unwise to split the responsibility for espionage and more direct action between separate ministries, or to perform special operations outside the ultimate control of the Chiefs of Staff. The debate continued for several months until on 22 May 1945, Selborne wrote:

Churchill took no immediate decision, and after he lost the general election on 5 July 1945, the matter was dealt with by the Labour Prime Minister, Clement Attlee. Selborne told Attlee that SOE still possessed a worldwide network of clandestine radio networks and sympathisers. Attlee replied that he had no wish to own a British Comintern, and closed Selborne&#x27;s network down at 48 hours&#x27; notice.

SOE was dissolved officially on 15 January 1946. Some of its senior staff moved easily into financial services in the City of London, although some of them had not lost their undercover mentality and did little for the City&#x27;s name. Most of SOE&#x27;s other personnel reverted to their peacetime occupations or regular service in the armed forces, but 280 of them were taken into the &quot;Special Operations Branch&quot; of MI6. Some of these had served as agents in the field, but MI6 was most interested in SOE&#x27;s training and research staff. Sir Stewart Menzies, the head of MI6 (who was generally known simply as &quot;C&quot;) soon decided that a separate Special Operations branch was unsound, and merged it into the general body of MI6.

Gubbins, the last director, was not given further employment by the Army, but he later founded the Special Forces Club for former members of SOE and similar organisations.

==Wartime commentaries on SOE==
Although the wartime British government considered the activities of SOE to be lawful, the German invaders, as in World War I and the War of 1870, argued that those engaging in resistance (local resistance fighters and the agents of foreign governments who supported them) were &quot;bandits&quot; and &quot;terrorists&quot;, maintaining that all &quot;Francs-tireurs&quot; (and said agents) were engaging in an illegal form of warfare, and, as such, had no legal rights. A view expressed by Fritz Sauckel, the General Plenipotentiary for Labour Deployment, making him the man in charge of bringing workers to the factories in Germany for forced labour, who demanded the flight of young French men to the countryside be stopped and called the &quot;maquis&quot; &quot;terrorists&quot;, &quot;bandits&quot; and &quot;criminals&quot; for their opposition to lawful authority.

==Later analysis and commentaries==
The mode of warfare encouraged and promoted by SOE is considered by several modern commentators to have established the modern model that many alleged terrorist organisations emulate. Two opposed views were quoted by Tony Geraghty in &quot;The Irish War: The Hidden Conflict Between the IRA and British Intelligence&quot;. M. R. D. Foot, who wrote several official histories of SOE wrote,

The British military historian John Keegan wrote,

Keegan also questioned the effectiveness of SOE. He wrote,

Another, later view, on the moral contribution of SOE, was expressed by the writer Max Hastings,

==In popular culture==
Since the end of the war, SOE has appeared in many films, comics, books, and television.

In the Marvel Cinematic Universe, Peggy Carter was recommended to SOE by her brother Michael, where she starts her career as a field agent.

British science-fiction author Charles Stross&#x27; book series &quot;The Laundry Files&quot; takes place within the Q-division of SOE (known as the eponymous Laundry) which has remained in operation since WWII, due to their mission to save the world from occult threats.

Portraying a heavily fictionalized version of Operation Postmaster, a Guy Ritchie-directed film called &quot;The Ministry of Ungentlemanly Warfare&quot; starring Henry Cavill as Gus March-Phillipps and Alan Ritchson as Anders Lassen, was released on 19 April 2024.

SOE appears first in &quot;Call of Duty: United Offensive&quot; after the protagonist is shot down over The Netherlands, joining SOE after blowing up a train. SOE appears again in &quot;Call of Duty: WWII&quot; when the protagonist teams up with the British to destroy a Nazi train, then again to liberate Paris.

==See also==

* Bureau Central de Renseignements et d&#x27;Action
* &quot;Churchill&#x27;s Secret Agents: The New Recruits&quot;
* CIA&#x27;s Special Activities Division
* Cichociemni
* Edmund Charaszkiewicz
* Escape and evasion lines (World War II)
* Jewish Parachutists of Mandate Palestine
* John Dolphin CBE
* MI5
* Operation Braddock
* Resistance during World War II
* Special Allied Airborne Reconnaissance Force
* Timeline of SOE&#x27;s Prosper Network
* Z Special Unit

==Notes==
==References==
Official publications / academic histories
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Herrington, Ian. &quot;Special Operations in Norway: SOE and Resistance in World War II&quot; (Bloomsbury Academic, 2019) online review 
* online book review]
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
First-hand accounts by those who served with SOE
* 
* 
* 
* 

* Sir Patrick Leigh Fermor. &quot;The 11th Day&quot;. Archangel Films, 2006. 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
Biographies / popular books by outsiders
* : &quot;Gives tangential account of SOE&#x27;s operations in the Mediterranean and its quarrels with other intelligence agencies&quot;
* 
* 
* 
* : Tells the story of John Renshaw Starr
* 
* 
* 
* Reissued by The History Press, 2012.
: &quot;In association with a three part BBC TV series, Ray Mears followed the route taken in 1943 along with some present day members of the Royal Marines and the Norwegian Army.&quot;
* 
: &quot;Tells the story of Violette Szabo (a film of the same name was based on the book).&quot;
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*Thompson, E. P (1947). Taylor, J. R. P (2024). There is A Spirit in Europe: A Memoir of Frank Thompson. Imprint Lulu. E. P. Thompson&#x27;s first book in memory of his SOE brother executed by fascists: Bulgaria 1944. Re-released Brittunculi Records &amp; Books: ISBN 9781304479525.


Commentaries
* 
* &quot;Notes on S.O.E., 1941 to 1943&quot;, written by a member of the Belgian Section, Major G.T.R. Thompson, in 1963
* Interview with secret agent Francis Cammaerts in the Leicester Mercury
* Profiles of Special Operations Executive Agents in France at Nigel Perrin&#x27;s site
* Colin Gubbins, Leo Marks and SOE 
* Dudley Maurice Newitt. Director of Scientific Research. SOE. 
==External links==

* The Violette Szabo Museum
* The Special Operations Executive - British Foreign &amp; Commonwealth Office
* Imperial War Museum (London)
* Special_Operations_Executive - Imperial War Museum
* &quot;Mission Scapula&quot; Special Operations Executive in the Far East.
* Target near Glasnacardoch Lodge STS22a
* World War II Canadian Secret Agents
* SOE near Milton Keynes
* The 11th Day film about SOE &amp; Crete Resistance, and Patrick Leigh Fermor
* Para-Military Training in Arisaig, Scotland During World War 2 Land, Sea &amp; Islands Centre
* SOE: An Amateur Outfit?
* Secret Army Exhibition at Beaulieu</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q240390" start="0" end="28" title="Special Operations Executive" label="Special Operations Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q240390" start="30" end="33" title="Special Operations Executive" label="SOE"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="88" end="97" title="espionage" label="espionage"/>
<link wikidata="Q193518" start="99" end="107" title="sabotage" label="sabotage"/>
<link wikidata="Q251741" start="112" end="126" title="reconnaissance" label="reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320053" start="130" end="152" title="German-occupied Europe" label="German-occupied Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094191" start="170" end="190" title="Resistance during World War II" label="resistance movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="198" end="210" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="283" end="294" title="Axis powers" label="Axis powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="374" end="380" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="386" end="399" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="408" end="420" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="853" end="870" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q10633" start="878" end="890" title="Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother" label="Queen Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831157" start="911" end="928" title="Albert Embankment" label="Albert Embankment"/>
<link wikidata="Q255016" start="950" end="964" title="Violette Szabo" label="Violette Szabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333137" start="970" end="991" title="Valençay SOE Memorial" label="Valençay SOE Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q20926239" start="1083" end="1101" title="Tempsford Memorial" label="Tempsford Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="1130" end="1145" title="Charles III of the United Kingdom" label="Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q23143" start="1172" end="1184" title="Bedfordshire" label="Bedfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275623" start="1218" end="1231" title="RAF Tempsford" label="RAF Tempsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q154681" start="1471" end="1480" title="Anschluss" label="Anschluss"/>
<link wikidata="Q358834" start="1507" end="1521" title="Foreign Office" label="Foreign Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q16963298" start="1565" end="1578" title="Department EH" label="Department EH"/>
<link wikidata="Q15216419" start="1586" end="1599" title="Electra House" label="Electra House"/>
<link wikidata="Q903810" start="1646" end="1653" title="magnate" label="magnate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030526" start="1658" end="1673" title="Campbell Stuart" label="Campbell Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q184560" start="1697" end="1724" title="Secret Intelligence Service" label="Secret Intelligence Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="2012" end="2022" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="2151" end="2168" title="guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7593037" start="2785" end="2806" title="St Ermin&amp;#x27;s Hotel" label="St Ermin&amp;#x27;s Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170679" start="2835" end="2850" title="Metropole Hotel, London" label="Metropole Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q129143" start="2856" end="2872" title="Trafalgar Square" label="Trafalgar Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q17093970" start="2943" end="2961" title="strategic material" label="strategic material"/>
<link wikidata="Q207376" start="3011" end="3020" title="Iron Gate (Danube)" label="Iron Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="3028" end="3040" title="River Danube" label="River Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q6016500" start="3172" end="3193" title="Independent Company" label="Independent Companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084679" start="3294" end="3312" title="Norwegian Campaign" label="Norwegian Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400296" start="3322" end="3337" title="Auxiliary Units" label="Auxiliary Units"/>
<link wikidata="Q919431" start="3379" end="3389" title="Home Guard (United Kingdom)" label="Home Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="3425" end="3429" title="Axis Powers" label="Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="3588" end="3605" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q335480" start="3607" end="3618" title="Maurice Hankey, 1st Baron Hankey" label="Lord Hankey"/>
<link wikidata="Q162754" start="3649" end="3685" title="Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster" label="Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q26207" start="3867" end="3878" title="Hugh Dalton" label="Hugh Dalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037850" start="3884" end="3912" title="Minister of Economic Warfare" label="Minister of Economic Warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084968" start="4213" end="4234" title="Irish Republican Army (1917–22)" label="Irish Republican Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q208297" start="4252" end="4277" title="Irish War of Independence" label="Irish War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5488633" start="4312" end="4328" title="Frank Nelson (British politician)" label="Sir Frank Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11771944" start="4403" end="4416" title="civil service" label="civil servant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275" start="4418" end="4430" title="Gladwyn Jebb" label="Gladwyn Jebb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098650" start="4706" end="4721" title="Royal Engineers" label="Royal Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q287709" start="4779" end="4792" title="Major-general (United Kingdom)" label="major-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739613" start="4853" end="4866" title="Colin Gubbins" label="Colin Gubbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6715109" start="5135" end="5138" title="MD1" label="MD1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438337" start="5185" end="5200" title="Millis Jefferis" label="Millis Jefferis"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456023" start="5220" end="5228" title="The Firs, Whitchurch" label="The Firs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866628" start="5232" end="5259" title="Whitchurch, Buckinghamshire" label="Whitchurch, Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q731591" start="5579" end="5589" title="Backbencher" label="back bench"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="5590" end="5602" title="Conservative Party (United Kingdom)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q207978" start="5628" end="5634" title="Consul (representative)" label="Consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="5638" end="5643" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="5890" end="5896" title="Labour Party (United Kingdom)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q27037814" start="6018" end="6049" title="President of the Board of Trade" label="President of the Board of Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443398" start="6102" end="6115" title="Roundell Palmer, 3rd Earl of Selborne" label="Lord Selborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5079515" start="6226" end="6240" title="Charles Jocelyn Hambro" label="Charles Hambro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126360" start="6250" end="6262" title="Hambros Bank" label="Hambros Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335064" start="6409" end="6423" title="Military Cross" label="Military Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="6431" end="6446" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q843251" start="6549" end="6570" title="Great Western Railway" label="Great Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="6900" end="6912" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q192355" start="7178" end="7190" title="raw material" label="raw material"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="7217" end="7233" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1568142" start="7345" end="7367" title="Chief of the Imperial General Staff" label="Imperial General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077288" start="7419" end="7444" title="Chiefs of Staff Committee" label="Chiefs of Staff Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q287709" start="7543" end="7556" title="Major-general (United Kingdom)" label="Major-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780133" start="7589" end="7597" title="commando" label="commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354903" start="7602" end="7623" title="clandestine operation" label="clandestine operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q175284" start="7768" end="7771" title="Irish Republican Army" label="IRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q208297" start="7783" end="7808" title="Irish War of Independence" label="Irish War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q821726" start="8258" end="8281" title="Ministry of Information (United Kingdom)" label="Ministry of Information"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101420" start="8389" end="8416" title="Political Warfare Executive" label="Political Warfare Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303286" start="9286" end="9307" title="Dudley Maurice Newitt" label="Dudley Maurice Newitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974879" start="10080" end="10094" title="Civil Service (United Kingdom)" label="civil servants"/>
<link wikidata="Q642576" start="10299" end="10307" title="Oxbridge" label="Oxbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="10584" end="10591" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="10631" end="10636" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q194132" start="10842" end="10873" title="Allied landings in North Africa" label="Allied landings in North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561" start="10940" end="10947" title="Algiers" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237299" start="10982" end="10997" title="Southern France" label="Southern France"/>
<link wikidata="Q714777" start="11013" end="11037" title="Allied invasion of Italy" label="Allied invasion of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13496" start="11097" end="11105" title="Brindisi" label="Brindisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="11115" end="11121" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519" start="11212" end="11216" title="Bari" label="Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q207989" start="11220" end="11234" title="Southern Italy" label="Southern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q703550" start="11314" end="11320" title="Axis occupation of Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345530" start="11326" end="11340" title="Northern Italy" label="Northern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385925" start="11464" end="11469" title="British India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="11509" end="11515" title="Sri Lanka" label="Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431442" start="11569" end="11592" title="South East Asia Command" label="South East Asia Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750809" start="11619" end="11628" title="Force 136" label="Force 136"/>
<link wikidata="Q871091" start="11814" end="11820" title="British Malaya" label="Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q276535" start="11832" end="11840" title="Imperial Japanese Army" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q296754" start="11849" end="11858" title="Battle of Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="11917" end="11930" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q920097" start="11979" end="12008" title="British Security Coordination" label="British Security Coordination"/>
<link wikidata="Q620577" start="12055" end="12073" title="William Stephenson" label="William Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q109858" start="12115" end="12127" title="Fifth Avenue" label="Fifth Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q11277" start="12129" end="12147" title="Rockefeller Center" label="Rockefeller Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="12209" end="12212" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q658626" start="12221" end="12249" title="Office of Strategic Services" label="Office of Strategic Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q192252" start="12548" end="12565" title="Operation Harling" label="Operation Harling"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858950" start="12790" end="12810" title="Operation Anthropoid" label="Operation Anthropoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q60039" start="12843" end="12860" title="Reinhard Heydrich" label="Reinhard Heydrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q358834" start="14099" end="14113" title="Foreign Office" label="Foreign Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365756" start="14276" end="14284" title="reprisal" label="reprisal"/>
<link wikidata="Q965321" start="14655" end="14673" title="Ministry of Supply" label="Ministry of Supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q578269" start="14872" end="14880" title="HM Treasury" label="Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919106" start="15086" end="15118" title="Combined Operations Headquarters" label="Combined Operations Headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q214443" start="15287" end="15299" title="Vice Admiral" label="Vice Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q157068" start="15300" end="15317" title="Louis Mountbatten, 1st Earl Mountbatten of Burma" label="Louis Mountbatten"/>
<link wikidata="Q396266" start="15475" end="15484" title="British Admiralty" label="Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235891" start="15624" end="15642" title="RAF Bomber Command" label="RAF Bomber Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q372052" start="15649" end="15674" title="Arthur Harris" label="&amp;quot;Bomber&amp;quot; Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q647033" start="15991" end="16038" title="Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force" label="Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="16089" end="16109" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431442" start="16115" end="16138" title="South East Asia Command" label="South East Asia Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811920" start="16674" end="16689" title="Stewart Menzies" label="Stewart Menzies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="16995" end="17004" title="Communist" label="Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748708" start="17111" end="17132" title="German occupation of France during World War II" label="enemy-occupied France"/>
<link wikidata="Q541981" start="17258" end="17276" title="William J. Donovan" label="William J. Donovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18369770" start="17401" end="17405" title="Camp X" label="camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q658626" start="17492" end="17520" title="Office of Strategic Services" label="Office of Strategic Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="17630" end="17639" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="17642" end="17647" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561" start="18001" end="18008" title="Algiers" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="18131" end="18141" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q155198" start="18283" end="18292" title="Yugoslav Partisans" label="Partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q872672" start="18297" end="18305" title="Chetniks" label="Chetniks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628983" start="18395" end="18413" title="Operation Jedburgh" label="Operation Jedburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="18484" end="18501" title="Normandy landings" label="Normandy landings"/>
<link wikidata="Q182449" start="18549" end="18553" title="NKVD" label="NKVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4642035" start="18790" end="18805" title="64 Baker Street" label="64 Baker Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q3154573" start="18836" end="18859" title="Baker Street Irregulars" label="Baker Street Irregulars"/>
<link wikidata="Q190068" start="18983" end="18993" title="synecdoche" label="synecdoche"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410" start="19712" end="19725" title="Hertfordshire" label="Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456023" start="19822" end="19830" title="The Firs, Whitchurch" label="The Firs"/>
<link wikidata="Q213474" start="19871" end="19880" title="Aylesbury" label="Aylesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333786" start="19950" end="19960" title="Station IX" label="Station IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735402" start="19964" end="19974" title="The Frythe" label="The Frythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q19789" start="20027" end="20045" title="Welwyn Garden City" label="Welwyn Garden City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568202" start="20169" end="20179" title="booby trap" label="booby trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q155921" start="20230" end="20244" title="Bletchley Park" label="Bletchley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q220798" start="20266" end="20299" title="Government Communications Headquarters" label="Government Code and Cipher School"/>
<link wikidata="Q19795" start="20471" end="20480" title="Stevenage" label="Stevenage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20514" end="20525" title="Station XII" label="Station XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q7711341" start="20697" end="20710" title="Thatched Barn" label="Thatched Barn"/>
<link wikidata="Q19773" start="20716" end="20727" title="Borehamwood" label="Borehamwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q196113" start="20744" end="20754" title="camouflage" label="camouflage"/>
<link wikidata="Q26594622" start="21126" end="21140" title="Briggens House" label="Briggens House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151264" start="21146" end="21152" title="Roydon, Essex" label="Roydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7967077" start="21696" end="21712" title="Wanborough Manor" label="Wanborough Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q213465" start="21714" end="21723" title="Guildford" label="Guildford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780133" start="21773" end="21781" title="commando" label="commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q2206041" start="21794" end="21801" title="Arisaig" label="Arisaig"/>
<link wikidata="Q5723458" start="21873" end="21893" title="William E. Fairbairn" label="William E. Fairbairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5385981" start="21898" end="21911" title="Eric A. Sykes" label="Eric A. Sykes"/>
<link wikidata="Q987821" start="21938" end="21963" title="Shanghai Municipal Police" label="Shanghai Municipal Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q482816" start="22003" end="22012" title="parachute" label="parachute"/>
<link wikidata="Q445058" start="22054" end="22064" title="Altrincham" label="Altrincham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275544" start="22137" end="22148" title="RAF Ringway" label="RAF Ringway"/>
<link wikidata="Q8694" start="22169" end="22187" title="Manchester Airport" label="Manchester Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832118" start="22233" end="22243" title="Tradecraft" label="Tradecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q186954" start="22270" end="22278" title="Beaulieu, Hampshire" label="Beaulieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q331483" start="22388" end="22398" title="demolition" label="demolition"/>
<link wikidata="Q79897" start="22413" end="22423" title="Morse code" label="Morse code"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="22424" end="22434" title="telegraphy" label="telegraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q924984" start="22571" end="22582" title="Ramat David" label="Ramat David"/>
<link wikidata="Q41621" start="22588" end="22593" title="Haifa" label="Haifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q222883" start="22719" end="22738" title="Special Air Service" label="Special Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234727" start="22749" end="22764" title="Sacred Band (World War II)" label="Sacred Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q18369770" start="22769" end="22793" title="Camp X" label="commando training centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q211867" start="22854" end="22860" title="Oshawa" label="Oshawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q658626" start="22950" end="22978" title="Office of Strategic Services" label="Office of Strategic Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q717294" start="23185" end="23201" title="Krystyna Skarbek" label="Krystyna Skarbek"/>
<link wikidata="Q464957" start="23207" end="23223" title="Noor Inayat Khan" label="Noor Inayat Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q255016" start="23296" end="23310" title="Violette Szabo" label="Violette Szabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308562" start="23315" end="23331" title="Michael Trotobas" label="Michael Trotobas"/>
<link wikidata="Q756296" start="23809" end="23825" title="Dual nationality" label="Dual nationality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263302" start="24262" end="24277" title="Sir Fitzroy Maclean, 1st Baronet" label="Fitzroy Maclean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086853" start="24296" end="24317" title="Montague Woodhouse, 5th Baron Terrington" label="Christopher Woodhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909180" start="24402" end="24442" title="Jewish Parachutists of Mandate Palestine" label="Jewish Parachutists of Mandate Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4989857" start="24462" end="24468" title="émigré" label="émigré"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="24803" end="24820" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070100" start="25206" end="25221" title="criminal record" label="criminal record"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131039" start="25523" end="25538" title="Henri Déricourt" label="Henri Déricourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072926" start="26030" end="26056" title="First Aid Nursing Yeomanry" label="First Aid Nursing Yeomanry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914968" start="26071" end="26103" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Auxiliary Air Force" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Auxiliary Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q704744" start="26156" end="26174" title="Pearl Witherington" label="Pearl Witherington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2198070" start="26285" end="26298" title="Virginia Hall" label="Virginia Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="26368" end="26380" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy France"/>
<link wikidata="Q289892" start="26408" end="26423" title="Odette Hallowes" label="Odette Hallowes"/>
<link wikidata="Q255016" start="26427" end="26441" title="Violette Szabo" label="Violette Szabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q155921" start="27233" end="27247" title="Bletchley Park" label="Bletchley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2592734" start="27323" end="27340" title="Grendon Underwood" label="Grendon Underwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q23229" start="27344" end="27359" title="Buckinghamshire" label="Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1873562" start="27364" end="27371" title="Poundon" label="Poundon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681865" start="27785" end="27791" title="cipher" label="cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653019" start="28040" end="28047" title="Paraset" label="Paraset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322747" start="28113" end="28135" title="Royal Corps of Signals" label="Royal Corps of Signals"/>
<link wikidata="Q915026" start="28275" end="28287" title="attache case" label="attache case"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367488" start="28580" end="28597" title="direction finding" label="direction finding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229576" start="28820" end="28829" title="Leo Marks" label="Leo Marks"/>
<link wikidata="Q8789" start="28848" end="28861" title="cryptographer" label="cryptographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q224990" start="28939" end="28948" title="poem code" label="poem code"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="29176" end="29179" title="British Broadcasting Corporation" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="29761" end="29779" title="Operation Overlord" label="Operation Overlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q580680" start="30701" end="30717" title="De Lisle carbine" label="De Lisle carbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935356" start="30726" end="30732" title="Welrod" label="Welrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q211782" start="30932" end="30936" title="Sten" label="Sten"/>
<link wikidata="Q155198" start="30992" end="31010" title="Yugoslav Partisans" label="Yugoslav Partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q852365" start="31108" end="31116" title="Tunisian campaign" label="Tunisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q217981" start="31121" end="31129" title="Allied invasion of Sicily" label="Sicilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905205" start="31391" end="31398" title="Mortar (weapon)" label="mortars"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31402" end="31416" title="Anti-tank warfare#Anti-tank guns" label="anti-tank guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287307" start="31684" end="31701" title="Maquis du Vercors" label="Maquis du Vercors"/>
<link wikidata="Q482428" start="31752" end="31774" title="Bren light machine gun" label="Bren light machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825413" start="32067" end="32072" title="Llama firearms" label="Llama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660322" start="32073" end="32080" title=".38 ACP" label=".38 ACP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354045" start="32153" end="32169" title="Ballester–Molina" label="Ballester–Molina"/>
<link wikidata="Q196261" start="32294" end="32324" title="Fairbairn–Sykes fighting knife" label="Fairbairn–Sykes fighting knife"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="32576" end="32583" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518556" start="32604" end="32616" title="suicide pill" label="suicide pill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811267" start="32721" end="32732" title="limpet mine" label="limpet mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993955" start="32879" end="32890" title="Pencil detonator" label="Time Pencil"/>
<link wikidata="Q898359" start="33453" end="33470" title="plastic explosive" label="plastic explosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q11244" start="33860" end="33868" title="car bomb" label="car bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q323840" start="33975" end="33984" title="lubricant" label="lubricant"/>
<link wikidata="Q208502" start="34069" end="34082" title="railway wagon" label="railway wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19581061" start="34083" end="34091" title="axle box" label="axle box"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137840" start="34146" end="34188" title="Coal torpedo" label="explosive material concealed in coal piles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690788" start="34493" end="34509" title="Welman submarine" label="Welman submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4304880" start="34520" end="34535" title="Motorised Submersible Canoe" label="Sleeping Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7980983" start="34715" end="34727" title="Welfreighter" label="Welfreighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094812" start="34843" end="34853" title="West Wales" label="West Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770495" start="34857" end="34865" title="Goodwick" label="Goodwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018730" start="34870" end="34879" title="Fishguard" label="Fishguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678556" start="34980" end="35006" title="Allied Intelligence Bureau" label="Allied Intelligence Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q736050" start="35101" end="35108" title="caltrop" label="caltrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540008" start="36171" end="36181" title="Sleeve gun" label="Sleeve gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q34493" start="36994" end="37003" title="motorbike" label="motorbike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319673" start="37015" end="37022" title="Welbike" label="Welbike"/>
<link wikidata="Q2375373" start="37678" end="37695" title="Operation Savanna" label="Operation Savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593" start="37767" end="37773" title="Vannes" label="Vannes"/>
<link wikidata="Q663070" start="37821" end="37835" title="Charles Portal, 1st Viscount Portal of Hungerford" label="Charles Portal"/>
<link wikidata="Q776938" start="37841" end="37863" title="Chief of the Air Staff (United Kingdom)" label="Chief of the Air Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q372052" start="38072" end="38085" title="Arthur Harris" label="Arthur Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235891" start="38147" end="38165" title="RAF Bomber Command" label="RAF Bomber Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q689463" start="38296" end="38323" title="Armstrong Whitworth Whitley" label="Armstrong Whitworth Whitley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494417" start="38433" end="38453" title="No. 138 Squadron RAF" label="No. 138 Squadron RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375540" start="38493" end="38513" title="No. 161 Squadron RAF" label="No. 161 Squadron RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209859" start="38702" end="38718" title="Polish Air Forces in France and Great Britain" label="Polish Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="38828" end="38857" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="United States Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q714326" start="38883" end="38904" title="Douglas C-47 Skytrain" label="Douglas C-47 Skytrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q220759" start="39157" end="39184" title="Consolidated B-24 Liberator" label="Consolidated B-24 Liberator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275623" start="39250" end="39263" title="RAF Tempsford" label="RAF Tempsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q23143" start="39267" end="39279" title="Bedfordshire" label="Bedfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3515123" start="39327" end="39339" title="RAF Tangmere" label="RAF Tangmere"/>
<link wikidata="Q23287" start="39363" end="39374" title="West Sussex" label="West Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q117464905" start="40214" end="40233" title="Armée de l&amp;#x27;Air" label="Armée de l&amp;#x27;Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373850" start="40715" end="40732" title="Westland Lysander" label="Westland Lysander"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142321" start="41366" end="41377" title="Hugh Verity" label="Hugh Verity"/>
<link wikidata="Q79897" start="41509" end="41514" title="Morse code" label="Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328822" start="42566" end="42581" title="Lockheed Hudson" label="Lockheed Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301640" start="42918" end="42951" title="Rebecca/Eureka transponding radar" label="Rebecca/Eureka transponding radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167277" start="43017" end="43032" title="Percy Charles Pickard" label="Charles Pickard"/>
<link wikidata="Q502034" start="43680" end="43700" title="Handley Page Halifax" label="Handley Page Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q875139" start="43715" end="43729" title="Short Stirling" label="Short Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7387075" start="45312" end="45319" title="S-Phone" label="S-Phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="45647" end="45657" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630695" start="45724" end="45742" title="motor torpedo boat" label="motor torpedo boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q171529" start="45991" end="45996" title="canoe" label="canoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="46096" end="46108" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420024" start="46266" end="46278" title="fishing boat" label="fishing boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478172" start="46283" end="46290" title="caïque" label="caiques"/>
<link wikidata="Q9287496" start="46525" end="46532" title="Helford River" label="Helford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570501" start="46988" end="46991" title="MI9" label="MI9"/>
<link wikidata="Q5632416" start="47246" end="47270" title="HMS Fidelity (D57)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Fidelity&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q120728784" start="47376" end="47389" title="Jack Langlais" label="Jack Langlais"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744035" start="47419" end="47434" title="Albert Guérisse" label="Albert Guérisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q13567104" start="47451" end="47480" title="Pat O&amp;#x27;Leary Line" label="Pat O&amp;#x27;Leary escape route"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="47791" end="47807" title="Shetland Islands" label="Shetland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427618" start="47868" end="47880" title="Shetland Bus" label="Shetland Bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11993921" start="47958" end="47973" title="Operation Title" label="Operation Title"/>
<link wikidata="Q153370" start="47993" end="48018" title="German battleship Tirpitz" label="German battleship Tirpitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q744967" start="48389" end="48405" title="Submarine chaser" label="Submarine chaser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403637" start="48474" end="48488" title="Motor Gun Boat" label="Motor Gun Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q914260" start="48531" end="48538" title="felucca" label="felucca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561" start="48575" end="48582" title="Algiers" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q14112" start="48608" end="48615" title="Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478172" start="48626" end="48632" title="caïque" label="caïque"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="48641" end="48647" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="48819" end="48836" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q152582" start="48844" end="48855" title="Free French" label="Free French"/>
<link wikidata="Q678116" start="48856" end="48875" title="Government in exile" label="Government in exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561" start="49167" end="49174" title="Algiers" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237299" start="49192" end="49207" title="Southern France" label="Southern France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3102408" start="49224" end="49237" title="Georges Bégué" label="Georges Bégué"/>
<link wikidata="Q2198070" start="49350" end="49363" title="Virginia Hall" label="Virginia Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q772504" start="49462" end="49475" title="Andrée Borrel" label="Andrée Borrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q435640" start="49492" end="49507" title="Lise de Baissac" label="Lise de Baissac"/>
<link wikidata="Q111973438" start="50301" end="50320" title="Timeline of the Prosper Network" label="&amp;quot;Prosper&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3081693" start="50339" end="50354" title="Francis Suttill" label="Francis Suttill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763603" start="50470" end="50488" title="Maurice Buckmaster" label="Maurice Buckmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="50613" end="50618" title="D Day" label="D Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628983" start="50760" end="50778" title="Operation Jedburgh" label="Operation Jedburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q186595" start="51164" end="51224" title="French Forces of the Interior" label="État-major des Forces Françaises de l&amp;#x27;Intérieur (EMFFI)"/>
<link wikidata="Q160133" start="51845" end="51867" title="2nd SS Panzer Division Das Reich" label="2nd SS Panzer Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="52628" end="52640" title="Vichy French" label="Vichy French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145523" start="52677" end="52688" title="collaborate" label="collaborate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="52698" end="52702" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q152529" start="52748" end="52757" title="Home Army" label="Home Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q116080" start="52815" end="52834" title="Polish Secret State" label="Polish Secret State"/>
<link wikidata="Q210846" start="52960" end="52986" title="Polish government in exile" label="Polish government in exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q324781" start="53086" end="53097" title="Cichociemni" label="Cichociemni"/>
<link wikidata="Q758949" start="53175" end="53191" title="Audley End House" label="Audley End House"/>
<link wikidata="Q700120" start="53253" end="53268" title="occupied Poland" label="occupied Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097306" start="53412" end="53434" title="Operation Wildhorn III" label="Operation Wildhorn III"/>
<link wikidata="Q678371" start="53436" end="53445" title="Sue Ryder" label="Sue Ryder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072926" start="53472" end="53498" title="First Aid Nursing Yeomanry" label="First Aid Nursing Yeomanry"/>
<link wikidata="Q678371" start="53560" end="53584" title="Baroness Ryder of Warsaw" label="Baroness Ryder of Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q184560" start="53617" end="53644" title="Secret Intelligence Service" label="Secret Intelligence Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q717294" start="53652" end="53668" title="Krystyna Skarbek" label="Krystyna Skarbek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846991" start="53769" end="53785" title="Andrzej Kowerski" label="Andrzej Kowerski"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="53807" end="53812" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q152529" start="53915" end="53924" title="Home Army" label="Home Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q293035" start="53937" end="53953" title="Elżbieta Zawacka" label="Elżbieta Zawacka"/>
<link wikidata="Q324781" start="54057" end="54068" title="Cichociemni" label="Cichociemni"/>
<link wikidata="Q835577" start="54174" end="54195" title="Jan Nowak-Jezioranski" label="Jan Nowak-Jezioranski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="54220" end="54229" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320053" start="54269" end="54284" title="occupied Europe" label="occupied Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274550" start="54286" end="54305" title="Maciej Kalenkiewicz" label="Maciej Kalenkiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q700120" start="54326" end="54341" title="occupied Poland" label="occupied Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="54368" end="54375" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviets"/>
<link wikidata="Q703583" start="54419" end="54435" title="Operation Foxley" label="Operation Foxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="54461" end="54467" title="Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q152529" start="54513" end="54522" title="Home Army" label="Home Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="54592" end="54601" title="Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q315691" start="54626" end="54640" title="Witold Pilecki" label="Witold Pilecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="54713" end="54722" title="Auschwitz" label="Auschwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q174640" start="54844" end="54854" title="V-2 rocket" label="V-2 rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="54887" end="54900" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571798" start="54910" end="54947" title="Soviet repressions of Polish citizens" label="Soviet repressions of Polish citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="54950" end="54953" title="RAF" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402078" start="55023" end="55038" title="Warsaw uprising" label="Warsaw uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="55183" end="55191" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q152529" start="55227" end="55243" title="Polish Home Army" label="Polish Home Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="55463" end="55467" title="USSR" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="55486" end="55492" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q981205" start="55751" end="55767" title="black propaganda" label="black propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101420" start="55844" end="55871" title="Political Warfare Executive" label="Political Warfare Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="55879" end="55884" title="D-Day" label="D-Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531866" start="55947" end="55961" title="Gerald Templer" label="Gerald Templer"/>
<link wikidata="Q703583" start="56066" end="56082" title="Operation Foxley" label="Operation Foxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="56106" end="56112" title="Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q65242513" start="56118" end="56135" title="Operation Periwig" label="Operation Periwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q647033" start="56365" end="56370" title="SHAEF" label="SHAEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="56387" end="56403" title="Prisoner of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="56613" end="56620" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q542959" start="56945" end="56959" title="Heinrich Maier" label="Heinrich Maier"/>
<link wikidata="Q469227" start="57541" end="57553" title="Englandspiel" label="Englandspiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q160139" start="58382" end="58411" title="Mauthausen concentration camp" label="Mauthausen concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q189930" start="58630" end="58653" title="Operation Market Garden" label="Operation Market Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q222883" start="59007" end="59026" title="Special Air Service" label="Special Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346492" start="59489" end="59500" title="Edwin Hardy Amies" label="Hardy Amies"/>
<link wikidata="Q19429045" start="59698" end="59723" title="Liberation of Belgium" label="liberation of the country"/>
<link wikidata="Q662529" start="59922" end="59937" title="Port of Antwerp" label="Port of Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q154008" start="60028" end="60033" title="Vogue (magazine)" label="Vogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068636" start="60132" end="60174" title="Order of the Crown (Belgium)" label="named an officer of the Order of the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="60361" end="60370" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="60434" end="60440" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605075" start="60517" end="60530" title="Peter Fleming (writer)" label="Peter Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="60604" end="60620" title="Prisoner of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q625798" start="60637" end="60660" title="Western Desert Campaign" label="Western Desert Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="61005" end="61013" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345530" start="61251" end="61265" title="Northern Italy" label="Northern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="61278" end="61282" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q714196" start="61387" end="61417" title="Spring 1945 offensive in Italy" label="Spring 1945 offensive in Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="61432" end="61437" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925322" start="61706" end="61723" title="Brigate Garibaldi" label="Brigate Garibaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519" start="61767" end="61771" title="Bari" label="Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q207989" start="61775" end="61789" title="Southern Italy" label="Southern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q183329" start="62338" end="62352" title="Saffron Walden" label="Saffron Walden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118311" start="62566" end="62591" title="Yugoslav coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="Yugoslav coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q313128" start="62629" end="62640" title="Prince Paul of Yugoslavia" label="Prince Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q697842" start="62689" end="62711" title="Invasion of Yugoslavia" label="Invasion of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="62795" end="62816" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="62829" end="62836" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q151179" start="62878" end="62884" title="Ustaše" label="Ustaše"/>
<link wikidata="Q872672" start="62976" end="62984" title="Chetniks" label="Chetniks"/>
<link wikidata="Q156122" start="62991" end="63007" title="Draža Mihailović" label="Draža Mihailović"/>
<link wikidata="Q155198" start="63027" end="63036" title="Partisans (Yugoslavia)" label="Partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q9161" start="63043" end="63058" title="Josip Broz Tito" label="Josip Broz Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563116" start="63180" end="63204" title="Bill Hudson (British Army officer)" label="&amp;quot;Marko&amp;quot; Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q180338" start="63295" end="63310" title="Christopher Lee" label="Christopher Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q150974" start="63597" end="63614" title="Tehran Conference" label="Tehran Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="63808" end="63816" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q117144" start="64016" end="64029" title="Miklós Horthy" label="Miklós Horthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="64054" end="64065" title="Axis Powers" label="Axis Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="64251" end="64265" title="Allies of World War II" label="Western Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q810024" start="64601" end="64615" title="Basil Davidson" label="Basil Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q209065" start="64730" end="64736" title="Kingdom of Greece (Glücksburg)" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="65342" end="65347" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q192252" start="65440" end="65457" title="Operation Harling" label="Operation Harling"/>
<link wikidata="Q175346" start="65554" end="65579" title="German Panzer Army Africa" label="German Panzer Army Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336348" start="65621" end="65632" title="E. C. W. &amp;quot;Eddie&amp;quot; Myers" label="Eddie Myers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086853" start="65646" end="65667" title="Montague Woodhouse, 5th Baron Terrington" label="Christopher Woodhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q172648" start="65778" end="65782" title="Greek People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="ELAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q704222" start="65802" end="65806" title="National Republican Greek League" label="EDES"/>
<link wikidata="Q574346" start="65899" end="65911" title="Gorgopotamos" label="Gorgopotamos"/>
<link wikidata="Q217981" start="66268" end="66283" title="Operation Husky" label="Operation Husky"/>
<link wikidata="Q42377800" start="66376" end="66392" title="Bandenbekämpfung" label="German reprisals"/>
<link wikidata="Q734213" start="66601" end="66607" title="Asopos" label="Asopos"/>
<link wikidata="Q22947788" start="66649" end="66664" title="Mike Cumberlege" label="Mike Cumberlege"/>
<link wikidata="Q182873" start="66677" end="66690" title="Corinth Canal" label="Corinth Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q107706" start="66933" end="66942" title="armistice" label="armistice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231816" start="66948" end="66953" title="Plaka" label="Plaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="67232" end="67244" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="67254" end="67260" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q58976" start="67265" end="67272" title="Piraeus" label="Piraeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q31280" start="67424" end="67445" title="Archbishop Damaskinos" label="Archbishop Damaskinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q121378" start="67525" end="67530" title="Corfu" label="Corfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="67637" end="67642" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q153316" start="67688" end="67703" title="Battle of Crete" label="Battle of Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q700616" start="67752" end="67772" title="Patrick Leigh Fermor" label="Patrick Leigh Fermor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789092" start="67810" end="67822" title="Thomas James Dunbabin" label="Tom Dunbabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q27973962" start="67824" end="67836" title="Sandy Rendel" label="Sandy Rendel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3570545" start="67853" end="67865" title="Xan Fielding" label="Xan Fielding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564563" start="67870" end="67887" title="W. Stanley Moss" label="Bill Stanley Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q6404775" start="67955" end="67970" title="Kidnap of General Kreipe" label="Heinrich Kreipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3422374" start="68043" end="68063" title="Ill Met by Moonlight (film)" label="Ill Met by Moonlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212054" start="68079" end="68098" title="Damasta sabotage" label="sabotage of Damasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="68127" end="68134" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q796411" start="68204" end="68216" title="Italian Army" label="Italian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919989" start="68353" end="68365" title="Julian Amery, Baron Amery of Lustleigh" label="Julian Amery"/>
<link wikidata="Q347711" start="68367" end="68381" title="Anthony Quayle" label="Anthony Quayle"/>
<link wikidata="Q507304" start="68383" end="68395" title="David Smiley" label="David Smiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337829" start="68400" end="68429" title="Neil McLean (politician)" label="Neil &amp;quot;Billy&amp;quot; McLean"/>
<link wikidata="Q53783" start="68509" end="68520" title="Enver Hoxha" label="Enver Hoxha"/>
<link wikidata="Q689339" start="68541" end="68555" title="Balli Kombëtar" label="Balli Kombëtar"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="69013" end="69024" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q152750" start="69042" end="69077" title="Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia" label="Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154401" start="69094" end="69102" title="Slovak Republic (1939–1945)" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858950" start="69132" end="69152" title="Operation Anthropoid" label="Operation Anthropoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="69175" end="69177" title="SS" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q154633" start="69178" end="69195" title="Obergruppenführer" label="Obergruppenführer"/>
<link wikidata="Q60039" start="69196" end="69213" title="Reinhard Heydrich" label="Reinhard Heydrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="69247" end="69260" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771522" start="69308" end="69322" title="Chicheley" label="Chicheley Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q163780" start="69380" end="69404" title="Slovak National uprising" label="Slovak National uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780769" start="69479" end="69510" title="Norwegian Independent Company 1" label="Norwegian Independent Company 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048232" start="69565" end="69577" title="Martin Linge" label="Martin Linge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964451" start="69610" end="69627" title="Operation Archery" label="Operation Archery"/>
<link wikidata="Q327048" start="69666" end="69696" title="Norwegian heavy water sabotage" label="Norwegian heavy water sabotage"/>
<link wikidata="Q11432170" start="69971" end="69983" title="ball-bearing" label="ball-bearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q164714" start="70031" end="70036" title="Danish people" label="Danes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000648" start="70106" end="70132" title="burst transmission" label="burst transmitter/receiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q79897" start="70151" end="70161" title="Morse code" label="Morse code"/>
<link wikidata="Q462164" start="70765" end="70776" title="Iuliu Maniu" label="Iuliu Maniu"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="70972" end="70981" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="70995" end="71026" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="German plans to invade the USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096772" start="71613" end="71633" title="Operation Autonomous" label="Operation Autonomous"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722705" start="71689" end="71718" title="Alfred Gardyne de Chastelain" label="Colonel Gardyne de Chastelain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6099479" start="71747" end="71758" title="Ivor Porter" label="Ivor Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428127" start="71780" end="71800" title="Jandarmeria Română" label="Romanian Gendarmerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q575347" start="71829" end="71853" title="King Michael&amp;#x27;s Coup" label="King Michael&amp;#x27;s Coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q207521" start="72218" end="72227" title="Ethiopian Empire" label="Abyssinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q451466" start="72354" end="72374" title="Orde Charles Wingate" label="Orde Charles Wingate"/>
<link wikidata="Q41178" start="72408" end="72422" title="Haile Selassie" label="Haile Selassie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975812" start="72442" end="72454" title="Gideon Force" label="Gideon Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q873549" start="72631" end="72639" title="Chindits" label="Chindits"/>
<link wikidata="Q205022" start="72699" end="72710" title="Bioko" label="Fernando Po"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775224" start="72728" end="72748" title="Operation Postmaster" label="Operation Postmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6569981" start="72834" end="72855" title="Duchessa d&amp;#x27;Aosta" label="Duchessa d&amp;#x27;Aosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3818" start="72936" end="72948" title="Malabo" label="Santa Isabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639951" start="73090" end="73109" title="Gus March-Phillipps" label="Gus March-Phillipps"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="73568" end="73576" title="Imperial Japan" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="73735" end="73744" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143261" start="74246" end="74265" title="Ministry of Defence (United Kingdom)" label="Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q128995" start="74267" end="74279" title="Anthony Eden" label="Anthony Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="74285" end="74302" title="Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs" label="Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059360" start="74407" end="74435" title="Joint Intelligence Committee (United Kingdom)" label="Joint Intelligence Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q918397" start="74944" end="74960" title="1945 United Kingdom general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q129006" start="75033" end="75047" title="Clement Attlee" label="Clement Attlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q163931" start="75215" end="75224" title="Comintern" label="Comintern"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="75411" end="75425" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574568" start="76146" end="76165" title="Special Forces Club" label="Special Forces Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="76366" end="76377" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="76386" end="76397" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="War of 1870"/>
<link wikidata="Q329691" start="76605" end="76619" title="Francs-tireurs" label="Francs-tireurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q77093" start="76744" end="76757" title="Fritz Sauckel" label="Fritz Sauckel"/>
<link wikidata="Q701165" start="77001" end="77007" title="Maquis (World War II)" label="maquis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16092692" start="77380" end="77393" title="Tony Geraghty" label="Tony Geraghty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308472" start="77486" end="77499" title="M. R. D. Foot" label="M. R. D. Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q363722" start="77584" end="77595" title="John Keegan" label="John Keegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q726622" start="77747" end="77759" title="Max Hastings" label="Max Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q642878" start="77882" end="77907" title="Marvel Cinematic Universe" label="Marvel Cinematic Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q24034679" start="77909" end="77921" title="Peggy Carter (Marvel Cinematic Universe)" label="Peggy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q345249" start="78047" end="78061" title="Charles Stross" label="Charles Stross"/>
<link wikidata="Q44196401" start="78086" end="78103" title="The Laundry Files" label="The Laundry Files"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775224" start="78335" end="78355" title="Operation Postmaster" label="Operation Postmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q192990" start="78359" end="78370" title="Guy Ritchie" label="Guy Ritchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q115860236" start="78398" end="78435" title="The Ministry of Ungentlemanly Warfare" label="The Ministry of Ungentlemanly Warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q295498" start="78451" end="78463" title="Henry Cavill" label="Henry Cavill"/>
<link wikidata="Q926963" start="78491" end="78504" title="Alan Ritchson" label="Alan Ritchson"/>
<link wikidata="" start="78582" end="78612" title="Call of Duty: United Offensive" label="Call of Duty: United Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="" start="78741" end="78759" title="Call of Duty: WWII" label="Call of Duty: WWII"/>
<link wikidata="Q564422" start="78885" end="78934" title="Bureau Central de Renseignements et d&amp;#x27;Action" label="Bureau Central de Renseignements et d&amp;#x27;Action"/>
<link wikidata="" start="78943" end="78991" title="Churchill&amp;#x27;s Secret Agents: The New Recruits" label="Churchill&amp;#x27;s Secret Agents: The New Recruits"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="79000" end="79003" title="CIA" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974176" start="79011" end="79038" title="Special Activities Division" label="Special Activities Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q324781" start="79041" end="79052" title="Cichociemni" label="Cichociemni"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339372" start="79055" end="79076" title="Edmund Charaszkiewicz" label="Edmund Charaszkiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q85759610" start="79079" end="79118" title="Escape and evasion lines (World War II)" label="Escape and evasion lines (World War II)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909180" start="79121" end="79161" title="Jewish Parachutists of Mandate Palestine" label="Jewish Parachutists of Mandate Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229680" start="79164" end="79176" title="John Dolphin" label="John Dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q210175" start="79183" end="79186" title="MI5" label="MI5"/>
<link wikidata="Q65242508" start="79189" end="79207" title="Operation Braddock" label="Operation Braddock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094191" start="79210" end="79240" title="Resistance during World War II" label="Resistance during World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574466" start="79243" end="79287" title="Special Allied Airborne Reconnaissance Force" label="Special Allied Airborne Reconnaissance Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q111973438" start="79290" end="79328" title="Timeline of SOE&amp;#x27;s Prosper Network" label="Timeline of SOE&amp;#x27;s Prosper Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q4741860" start="79331" end="79345" title="Z Special Unit" label="Z Special Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q700616" start="79673" end="79697" title="Patrick Leigh Fermor" label="Sir Patrick Leigh Fermor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182510" start="79983" end="80001" title="John Renshaw Starr" label="John Renshaw Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q255016" start="80266" end="80280" title="Violette Szabo" label="Violette Szabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q204234" start="81410" end="81423" title="Milton Keynes" label="Milton Keynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="81460" end="81465" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q700616" start="81482" end="81502" title="Patrick Leigh Fermor" label="Patrick Leigh Fermor"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28899" wikidata="Q1726064" url="?curid=28899" title="System request">
<text>System Request (SysRq or Sys Req) is a key on personal computer keyboards that has no standard use. Introduced by IBM with the PC/AT, it was intended to be available as a special key to directly invoke low-level operating system functions with no possibility of conflicting with any existing software. A special BIOS routine – software interrupt 0x15, subfunction 0x85 – was added to signal the OS when SysRq was pushed or released. Unlike most keys, when it is pressed nothing is stored in the keyboard buffer.

== History ==

The specific low level function intended for the SysRq key was to switch between operating systems. When the original IBM-PC was created in 1980, there were three leading competing operating systems: PC DOS, CP/M-86, and UCSD p-System, while Xenix was added in 1983–1984. The SysRq key was added so that multiple operating systems could be run on the same computer, using the capabilities of the 286 chip in the PC/AT.

A special key was needed because most software of the day operated at a low level, often bypassing the OS entirely, and typically made use of many hotkey combinations. The use of terminate-and-stay-resident (TSR) programs further complicated matters. To implement a task switching or multitasking environment, it was thought that a special, separate key was needed. This is similar to the way &quot;Control-Alt-Delete&quot; is used under Windows NT.

On 84-key keyboards (except the 84-key IBM Model M space saver keyboard), SysRq was a key of its own. On the later 101-key keyboard, it shares a physical key with the Print screen key function. The Alt key must be held down while pressing this dual-function key to invoke SysRq. This continues through modern PC keyboards.

The default BIOS keyboard routines simply ignore SysRq and return without taking action. So did the MS-DOS input routines. The keyboard routines in libraries supplied with many high-level languages followed suit. Although it is still included on most PC keyboards manufactured, and though it is used by some debugging software, the key is of no use for the vast majority of users.

On the Hyundai/Hynix Super-16 computer, pressing will hard boot the system (it will reboot when is unresponsive, and it will invoke startup memory tests that are bypassed on soft-boot).

== Modern uses ==
In Linux, the kernel can be configured to provide functions for system debugging and crash recovery. This use is known as the &quot;magic SysRq key&quot;.

Microsoft has also used SysRq for various OS- and application-level debuggers. In the CodeView debugger, it was sometimes used to break into the debugging during program execution. For the Windows NT remote kernel debugger, it can be used to force the system into the debugger.

On modern Windows and some Linux desktop environments &quot;Alt + Print screen&quot; (which is the shortcut for SysRq on most modern keyboards ) copies an image of the current active window, instead of the entire screen as Print Screen alone would.

== Similar keys ==
IBM 3270-type console keyboards of the IBM System/370 mainframe computer, created in 1970, had an operator interrupt key that was used to cause the operating system such as VM/370 or MVS to allow the console to give input to the operating system.

== See also ==
* Serial console
* Break key
* Scroll Lock

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1726064" start="0" end="14" title="System request" label="System Request"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726064" start="16" end="21" title="System request" label="SysRq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726064" start="25" end="32" title="System request" label="Sys Req"/>
<link wikidata="Q751046" start="46" end="63" title="IBM PC compatible" label="personal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q250" start="64" end="73" title="Computer keyboard" label="keyboards"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="114" end="117" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141670" start="127" end="132" title="IBM Personal Computer/AT" label="PC/AT"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="212" end="228" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q226264" start="312" end="316" title="BIOS" label="BIOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="395" end="397" title="operating system" label="OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q350413" start="495" end="510" title="keyboard buffer" label="keyboard buffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q863568" start="728" end="734" title="PC DOS" label="PC DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706791" start="736" end="743" title="CP/M-86" label="CP/M-86"/>
<link wikidata="Q176984" start="749" end="762" title="UCSD p-System" label="UCSD p-System"/>
<link wikidata="Q589680" start="770" end="775" title="Xenix" label="Xenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q622888" start="924" end="927" title="Intel 80286" label="286"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="986" end="994" title="software" label="software"/>
<link wikidata="Q118470" start="1095" end="1101" title="hotkey" label="hotkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q908242" start="1127" end="1154" title="terminate-and-stay-resident" label="terminate-and-stay-resident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061424" start="1214" end="1228" title="Context switch" label="task switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q192969" start="1232" end="1244" title="Computer multitasking" label="multitasking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057220" start="1347" end="1365" title="Control-Alt-Delete" label="Control-Alt-Delete"/>
<link wikidata="Q486487" start="1386" end="1396" title="Windows NT" label="Windows NT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066298" start="1566" end="1578" title="Print screen" label="Print screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q148742" start="1597" end="1604" title="Alt key" label="Alt key"/>
<link wikidata="Q47604" start="1823" end="1829" title="MS-DOS" label="MS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q188860" start="1871" end="1880" title="Library (software)" label="libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q370719" start="2112" end="2125" title="Hynix" label="Hyundai/Hynix"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="2313" end="2318" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q9662" start="2324" end="2330" title="Kernel (operating system)" label="kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q845566" start="2381" end="2390" title="debugging" label="debugging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789408" start="2442" end="2457" title="magic SysRq key" label="magic SysRq key"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="2466" end="2475" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="2508" end="2510" title="Operating system" label="OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q166142" start="2516" end="2527" title="Application software" label="application"/>
<link wikidata="Q193231" start="2534" end="2542" title="debugger" label="debugger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081953" start="2552" end="2569" title="CodeView" label="CodeView debugger"/>
<link wikidata="Q486487" start="2655" end="2665" title="Windows NT" label="Windows NT"/>
<link wikidata="Q148742" start="2805" end="2808" title="Alt key" label="Alt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066298" start="2811" end="2823" title="Print screen" label="Print screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q386610" start="3014" end="3022" title="IBM 3270" label="IBM 3270"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586139" start="3057" end="3067" title="System/370" label="System/370"/>
<link wikidata="Q177234" start="3068" end="3086" title="mainframe computer" label="mainframe computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013572" start="3187" end="3193" title="VM/370" label="VM/370"/>
<link wikidata="Q781443" start="3197" end="3200" title="MVS" label="MVS"/>
<link wikidata="Q216640" start="3279" end="3293" title="Serial console" label="Serial console"/>
<link wikidata="Q588105" start="3296" end="3305" title="Break key" label="Break key"/>
<link wikidata="Q859033" start="3308" end="3319" title="Scroll Lock" label="Scroll Lock"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28900" wikidata="Q1460703" url="?curid=28900" title="Split infinitive">
<text>A split infinitive is a grammatical construction specific to English in which an adverb or adverbial phrase separates the &quot;to&quot; and &quot;infinitive&quot; constituents of what was traditionally called the &quot;full infinitive&quot;, but is more commonly known in modern linguistics as the to-infinitive (e.g., &quot;to go&quot;). In the history of English language aesthetics, the split infinitive was often deprecated, despite its prevalence in colloquial speech. The opening sequence of the &quot;Star Trek&quot; television series contains a well-known example, &quot;[[Split infinitive|to &quot;boldly&quot; go]] where no man has gone before&quot;, wherein the adverb &quot;boldly&quot; was said to split the full infinitive, &quot;to go&quot;. 
Multiple words may split a to-infinitive, such as: &quot;The population is expected to &quot;more than&quot; double in the next ten years.&quot;

In the 19th century, some linguistic prescriptivists sought to disallow the split infinitive, and the resulting conflict had considerable cultural importance. The construction still renders disagreement, but modern English usage guides have largely dropped the objection to it.

The &quot;split infinitive&quot; terminology is not widely used in modern linguistics. Some linguists question whether a to-infinitive phrase can meaningfully be called a &quot;full infinitive&quot; and, consequently, whether an infinitive can be &quot;split&quot; at all.

== History of the construction ==
=== Old and Middle English ===
In Old English, infinitives were single words ending in &quot;-n&quot; or &quot;-an&quot; (comparable to modern Dutch and German &quot;-n&quot;, &quot;-en&quot;). Gerunds were formed using &quot;to&quot; followed by a verbal noun in the dative case, which ended in &quot;-anne&quot; or &quot;-enne&quot; (e.g., &quot;tō cumenne&quot; = &quot;coming, to come&quot;). In Middle English, the bare infinitive and the gerund coalesced into the same form ending in &quot;-(e)n&quot; (e.g., &quot;comen&quot; &quot;come&quot;; &quot;to comen&quot; &quot;to come&quot;). The &quot;to&quot; infinitive was not split in Old or Early Middle English.

The first known example of a split infinitive in English, in which a pronoun rather than an adverb splits the infinitive, is in Layamon&#x27;s &quot;Brut&quot; (early 13th century):

:&quot;and he cleopede him to; alle his wise cnihtes.&quot;
:for to him reade;
::And he called to him all his wise knights / to him advise.

This may be a poetic inversion for the sake of meter, and therefore says little about whether Layamon would have felt the construction to be syntactically natural. However, no such reservation applies to the following prose example from John Wycliffe (14th century), who often split infinitives:
:&quot;For this was gret unkyndenesse, to this manere treten there brother.&quot;
::For this was great unkindness, to in this manner treat their brother.

=== Modern English ===
After its rise in Middle English, the construction became rare in the 15th and 16th centuries. William Shakespeare used it at least once. The uncontroversial example appears to be a syntactical inversion for the sake of meter:
:&quot;Root pity in thy heart, that when it grows&quot;
:&quot;Thy pity may deserve to pitied be&quot; (Sonnet 142).
Edmund Spenser, John Dryden, Alexander Pope, and the King James Version of the Bible used none, and they are very rare in the writing of Samuel Johnson. John Donne used them several times, though, and Samuel Pepys also used at least one. No reason for the near disappearance of the split infinitive is known; in particular, no prohibition is recorded.

Split infinitives reappeared in the 18th century and became more common in the 19th.
Daniel Defoe, Benjamin Franklin, William Wordsworth, Abraham Lincoln, George Eliot, Henry James, and Willa Cather are among the writers who used them. Examples in the poems of Robert Burns attest its presence also in 18th-century Scots:
:&quot;Who dared to nobly stem tyrannic pride.&quot; (&quot;The Cottar&#x27;s Saturday Night&quot;)

In colloquial speech, the construction came to enjoy widespread use. Today, according to the &quot;American Heritage Book of English Usage&quot;, &quot;people split infinitives all the time without giving it a thought.&quot; In corpora of contemporary spoken English, some adverbs such as &quot;always&quot; and &quot;completely&quot; appear more often in the split position than the unsplit.

=== Theories of origins ===
Although it is difficult to say why the construction developed in Middle English, or why it revived so powerfully in Modern English, a number of theories have been postulated.

==== Analogy ====
Traditional grammarians have suggested that the construction appeared because people frequently place adverbs before finite verbs. George Curme writes: &quot;If the adverb should immediately precede the finite verb, we feel that it should immediately precede also the infinitive…&quot; Thus, if one says:
:&quot;She gradually got rid of her stutter.&quot; and
:&quot;She will gradually get rid of her stutter.&quot;
one may, by analogy, wish to say:
:&quot;She&quot; wants &quot;to gradually get rid of her stutter.&quot;
This is supported by the fact that split infinitives are often used as echoes, as in the following exchange, in which the riposte parodies the slightly odd collocation in the original sentence:
:Child: &quot;I accidentally forgot to feed the hamster.&quot;
:Parent: &quot;Well, you&#x27;ll have to try harder not&quot; to &quot;accidentally forget&quot;, &quot;won&#x27;t you?&quot;
This is an example of an adverb being transferred into split infinitive position from a parallel position in a different construction.

==== Transformational grammar ====
Transformational grammarians have attributed the construction to a re-analysis of the role of &quot;to&quot;.

=== Types ===
In the modern language, splitting usually involves a single adverb coming between the verb and its marker. Very frequently, this is an emphatic adverb, for example:
:&quot;I need you all to really pull your weight.&quot;
:&quot;I&#x27;m gonna (=going to) totally pulverise him.&quot;

Sometimes it is a negation, as in the self-referential joke:

:&quot;Writers should learn to not split infinitives&quot;.

However, in modern colloquial English, almost any adverb may be found in this syntactic position, especially when the adverb and the verb form a close syntactic unit (really-pull, not-split).

Compound split infinitives, i.e., infinitives split by more than one word, usually involve a pair of adverbs or a multi-word adverbial:
:&quot;We are determined to completely and utterly eradicate the disease&quot;.
:&quot;He is thought to almost never have made such a gesture before&quot;.
:&quot;This is a great opportunity to once again communicate our basic message&quot;.

Examples of non-adverbial elements participating in the split-infinitive construction seem rarer in Modern English than in Middle English. The pronoun &quot;all&quot; commonly appears in this position:
:&quot;It was their nature to all hurt one another&quot;.
and may even be combined with an adverb:
:&quot;I need you to all really pull your weight.&quot;
However an object pronoun, as in the Layamon example above, would be unusual in modern English, perhaps because this might cause a listener to misunderstand the &quot;to&quot; as a preposition:
: *&quot;And he called to him all his wise knights to him advise&quot;.

While, structurally, acceptable as poetic formulation, this would result in a garden path sentence, particularly evident if the indirect object is omitted:

Other parts of speech would be very unusual in this position. However, in verse, poetic inversion for the sake of meter or of bringing a rhyme word to the end of a line often results in abnormal syntax, as with Shakespeare&#x27;s split infinitive (&quot;to pitied be&quot;, cited above), in fact an inverted passive construction in which the infinitive is split by a past participle. Presumably, this would not have occurred in a prose text by the same author.

When multiple infinitives are linked by a conjunction, the particle &quot;to&quot; tends to be used only once at the beginning of the sequence: &quot;to eat, drink, and be merry&quot;. In this case, the conjunction and any other words that fall between the &quot;to&quot; and the final infinitive have seldom been deemed to create a split infinitive, and almost always have been considered uncontroversial. Examples include &quot;We pray you to proceed / And justly and religiously unfold...&quot; (Shakespeare, &quot;Henry V&quot;, Act II, scene 9) and &quot;...she is determined to be independent, and not live with aunt Pullet&quot; (George Eliot, &quot;The Mill on the Floss&quot;, volume VI, chapter I).

== History of the term ==
It was not until the very end of the 19th century that terminology emerged to describe the construction. The earliest use of the term &quot;split infinitive&quot; on record dates from 1890. The now rare &quot;cleft infinitive&quot; is almost as old, attested from 1893; in the 1890s it was briefly the more common term but almost disappeared after 1905. &quot;Splitting the infinitive&quot; is slightly older, going back to 1887. According to the main etymological dictionaries, &quot;infinitive-splitting&quot; and &quot;infinitive-splitter&quot; followed in 1926 and 1927, respectively. The term &quot;compound split infinitive&quot;, referring to a split infinitive with more than one word between the particle and the infinitive, is not found in these dictionaries and appears to be very recent.

This terminology implies analysing the full infinitive as a two-word infinitive, which not all grammarians accept. As one who used &quot;infinitive&quot; to mean the single-word verb, Otto Jespersen challenged the epithet: &quot;&#x27;To&#x27; is no more an essential part of an infinitive than the definite article is an essential part of a nominative, and no one would think of calling &#x27;the good man&#x27; a split nominative.&quot; However, no alternative terminology has been proposed.

== History of the controversy ==
Although it is sometimes reported that a prohibition on split infinitives goes back to Renaissance times, and frequently the 18th century scholar Robert Lowth is cited as the originator of the prescriptive rule, such a rule is not to be found in Lowth&#x27;s writing, and is not known to appear in any text before the 19th century.

Possibly the earliest comment against split infinitives was by the American John Comly in 1803.

An adverb should not be placed between the verb of the infinitive mood and the preposition &quot;to&quot;, which governs it; as &quot;Patiently&quot; to wait—not To &quot;patiently&quot; wait.

Another early prohibition came from an anonymous American in 1834:

The practice of separating the prefix of the infinitive mode from the verb, by the intervention of an adverb, is not unfrequent among uneducated persons … I am not conscious, that any rule has been heretofore given in relation to this point … The practice, however, of not separating the particle from its verb, is so general and uniform among good authors, and the exceptions are so rare, that the rule which I am about to propose will, I believe, prove to be as accurate as most rules, and may be found beneficial to inexperienced writers. It is this :—&quot;The particle, &quot;TO&quot;, which comes before the verb in the infinitive mode, must not be separated from it by the intervention of an adverb or any other word or phrase; but the adverb should immediately precede the particle, or immediately follow the verb.&quot;

In 1840, Richard Taylor also condemned split infinitives as a &quot;disagreeable affectation&quot;, and in 1859, Solomon Barrett, Jr., called them &quot;a common fault.&quot; However, the issue seems not to have attracted wider public attention until Henry Alford addressed it in his &quot;Plea for the Queen&#x27;s English&quot; in 1864:
A correspondent states as his own usage, and defends, the insertion of an adverb between the sign of the infinitive mood and the verb. He gives as an instance, &quot;to scientifically illustrate.&quot; But surely this is a practice entirely unknown to English speakers and writers. It seems to me, that we ever regard the &quot;to&quot; of the infinitive as inseparable from its verb. And, when we have already a choice between two forms of expression, &quot;scientifically to illustrate&quot; and &quot;to illustrate scientifically,&quot; there seems no good reason for flying in the face of common usage.

Others followed, among them Bache, 1869 (&quot;The &quot;to&quot; of the infinitive mood is inseparable from the verb&quot;); William B. Hodgson, 1889; and Raub, 1897 (&quot;The sign &quot;to&quot; must not be separated from the remaining part of the infinitive by an intervening word&quot;).

Even as these authorities were condemning the split infinitive, others were endorsing it: Brown, 1851 (saying some grammarians had criticized it and it was less elegant than other adverb placements but sometimes clearer); Hall, 1882; Onions, 1904; Jespersen, 1905; and Fowler and Fowler, 1906. Despite the defence by some grammarians, by the beginning of the 20th century the prohibition was firmly established in the press. In the 1907 edition of &quot;The King&#x27;s English&quot;, the Fowler brothers wrote:

The &#x27;split&#x27; infinitive has taken such hold upon the consciences of journalists that, instead of warning the novice against splitting his infinitives, we must warn him against the curious superstition that the splitting or not splitting makes the difference between a good and a bad writer.

In large parts of the school system, the construction was opposed with ruthless vigour. A correspondent to the BBC on a programme about English grammar in 1983 remarked:

One reason why the older generation feel so strongly about English grammar is that we were severely punished if we didn&#x27;t obey the rules! One split infinitive, one whack; two split infinitives, two whacks; and so on.

As a result, the debate took on a degree of passion that the bare facts of the matter never warranted. There was frequent skirmishing between the splitters and anti-splitters until the 1960s. George Bernard Shaw wrote letters to newspapers supporting writers who used the split infinitive and Raymond Chandler complained to the editor of &quot;The Atlantic&quot; about a proofreader who interfered with Chandler&#x27;s split infinitives:

By the way, would you convey my compliments to the purist who reads your proofs and tell him or her that I write in a sort of broken-down patois which is something like the way a Swiss-waiter talks, and that when I split an infinitive, God damn it, I split it so it will remain split, and when I interrupt the velvety smoothness of my more or less literate syntax with a few sudden words of barroom vernacular, this is done with the eyes wide open and the mind relaxed and attentive. The method may not be perfect, but it is all I have.

Follett, in &quot;Modern American Usage&quot; (1966) writes: &quot;The split infinitive has its place in good composition. It should be used when it is expressive and well led up to.&quot; Fowler (Gowers&#x27; revised second edition, 1965) offers the following example of the consequences of refusal to split infinitives: &quot;The greatest difficulty about assessing the economic achievements of the Soviet Union is that its spokesmen try &quot;absurdly to exaggerate&quot; them; in consequence the visitor may tend &quot;badly to underrate&quot; them&quot; (italics added). This question results: &quot;Has dread of the split infinitive led the writer to attach the adverbs [&#x27;absurdly&#x27; and &#x27;badly&#x27;] to the wrong verbs, and would he not have done better &quot;to boldly split&quot; both infinitives, since he cannot put the adverbs after them without spoiling his rhythm&quot; (italics added)? Bernstein (1985) argues that, although infinitives should not always be split, they should be split where doing so improves the sentence: &quot;The natural position for a modifier is before the word it modifies. Thus the natural position for an adverb modifying an infinitive should be just … &quot;after&quot; the to&quot; (italics added). Bernstein continues: &quot;Curme&#x27;s contention that the split infinitive is often an improvement … cannot be disputed.&quot; Heffernan and Lincoln, in their modern English composition textbook, agree with the above authors. Some sentences, they write, &quot;are weakened by … cumbersome splitting,&quot; but in other sentences &quot;an infinitive may be split by a one-word modifier that would be awkward in any other position.&quot;

== Principal objections to the split infinitive ==
Objections to the split infinitive fall into three categories, of which only the first is accorded any credence by linguists.

=== The descriptivist objection ===
One of the earliest arguments against the split infinitive, expressed by an anonymous contributor to the &quot;New-England Magazine&quot; in 1834, was based on the impression that it was not an observable feature of English as used by &quot;good authors.&quot;
Henry Alford, in his &quot;Plea for the Queen&#x27;s English&quot; in 1864 went further, stating that use of the &quot;split infinitive&quot; was &quot;a practice entirely unknown to English speakers and writers.&quot;
In principle there is a consensus that language teachers should advise on usage on the basis of what is observed to be current practice in the language. If the early critics of the construction did not observe it to be usual in (the prestige variety of) English as they knew it, their advice was legitimate. However it would be difficult to argue that way today, as the split infinitive has become very common.

=== The argument from the full infinitive ===
A second argument is summed up by Alford&#x27;s statement &quot;It seems to me that we ever regard the &quot;to&quot; of the infinitive as inseparable from its verb.&quot;

The &quot;to&quot; in the infinitive construction, which is found throughout the Germanic languages, is originally a preposition before the dative of a verbal noun, but in the modern languages it is widely regarded as a particle that serves as a marker of the infinitive. In German and Dutch, this marker (&quot;zu&quot; and &quot;te&quot; respectively) sometimes precedes the infinitive, but is not regarded as part of it. In English, on the other hand, it is traditional to speak of the &quot;bare infinitive&quot; without &quot;to&quot; and the &quot;full infinitive&quot; with it, and to conceive of &quot;to&quot; as part of the full infinitive. (In the sentence &quot;I had my daughter clean her room,&quot; &quot;clean&quot; is a bare infinitive; in &quot;I told my daughter to clean her room,&quot; &quot;to clean&quot; is a full infinitive.) Possibly this is because the absence of an &quot;inflected&quot; infinitive form made it useful to include the particle in the citation form of the verb, and in some nominal constructions in which other Germanic languages would omit it (e.g., &quot;to know her is to love her&quot;). The concept of a two-word infinitive can reinforce an intuitive sense that the two words belong together. For instance, the rhetorician John Duncan Quackenbos said, &quot;&quot;To have&quot; is as much one thing, and as inseparable by modifiers, as the original form &quot;habban&quot;, or the Latin &quot;habere&quot;.&quot; The usage writer John Opdycke based a similar argument on the closest French, German, and Latin translations.

However, the two-part infinitive is disputed, and some linguists argue that the infinitive in English is a single-word verb form, which may or may not be preceded by the particle &quot;to&quot;. Some modern generative analysts classify &quot;to&quot; as a &quot;peculiar&quot; auxiliary verb; other analysts, as the infinitival subordinator.

Besides, even if the concept of the full infinitive is accepted, it does not necessarily follow that any two words that belong together grammatically need be adjacent to each other. They usually are, but counter-examples are easily found, such as an adverb splitting a two-word finite verb (&quot;will not do&quot;, &quot;has not done&quot;).

=== The argument from classical languages ===
A frequent argument of those who tolerate split infinitives is that the split-infinitive prohibition is based solely on a misguided comparison with Latin. However, the argument from the classical languages may be a straw man argument, as the most important critics of the split infinitive never used it. Although many writers who support the split infinitive suggest that this argument motivated the early opponents of the construction, there is little primary source evidence for this; indeed, Richard Bailey has noted that, despite the lack of evidence, this theory has simply become &quot;part of the folklore of linguistics&quot;.

An infinitive in Latin or Greek is never used with a marker equivalent to English &quot;to&quot;, and a Latin infinitive cannot be split. The argument would be that the construction should be avoided because it is not found in the classics. The claim that those who dislike split infinitives are applying rules of Latin grammar to English is asserted by many authorities who accept the split infinitive. One example is in the &quot;American Heritage Book of English Usage&quot;: &quot;The only rationale for condemning the construction is based on a false analogy with Latin.&quot; The assertion is also made in the &quot;Oxford Guide to Plain English&quot;, &quot;Compact Oxford English Dictionary&quot;, and Steven Pinker&#x27;s &quot;The Language Instinct&quot;, among others.

The argument implies an adherence to the humanist idea of the greater purity of the classics, which, particularly in Renaissance times, led people to regard as inferior aspects of English that differed from Latin. Today no linguist would accept an argument that judges the usage of one language by the grammar of another. Besides, if Latin has no equivalent of the marker &quot;to&quot;, it provides no model for the question of where to put it, and therefore supports neither splitting nor not-splitting. As Richard Lederer puts it: &quot;there is no precedent in these languages for condemning the split infinitive because in Greek and Latin (and all the other romance languages) the infinitive is a single word that is impossible to sever.&quot;

== Current views ==
Present style and usage manuals deem simple split infinitives unobjectionable. For example, Curme&#x27;s &quot;Grammar of the English Language&quot; (1931) says that not only is the split infinitive correct, but it &quot;should be furthered rather than censured, for it makes for clearer expression.&quot; &quot;The Columbia Guide to Standard American English&quot; notes that the split infinitive &quot;eliminates all possibility of ambiguity,&quot; in contrast to the &quot;potential for confusion&quot; in an unsplit construction. &quot;Merriam–Webster&#x27;s Dictionary of English Usage&quot; says: &quot;the objection to the split infinitive has never had a rational basis.&quot; According to Mignon Fogarty, &quot;today almost everyone agrees that it is OK to split infinitives.&quot;

Nevertheless, many teachers of English still admonish students against using split infinitives in writing. Because the prohibition has become so widely known, the &quot;Columbia Guide&quot; recommends that writers &quot;follow the conservative path [of avoiding split infinitives when they are not necessary], especially when you&#x27;re uncertain of your readers&#x27; expectations and sensitivities in this matter.&quot; Likewise, the Oxford dictionaries do not regard the split infinitive as ungrammatical, but on balance consider it likely to produce a weak style and advise against its use for formal correspondence. R. W. Burchfield&#x27;s revision of Fowler&#x27;s &quot;Modern English Usage&quot; goes farther (quoting Burchfield&#x27;s own 1981 book &quot;The Spoken Word&quot;): &quot;Avoid splitting infinitives whenever possible, but do not suffer undue remorse if a split infinitive is unavoidable for the completion of a sentence already begun.&quot; Still more strongly, older editions of &quot;The Economist&quot; Style Guide said, &quot;Happy the man who has never been told that it is wrong to split an infinitive: the ban is pointless. Unfortunately, to see it broken is so annoying to so many people that you should observe it&quot; (but added &quot;To never split an infinitive is quite easy.&quot;). This recommendation, however, is weakened in the 12th edition. After stating that the ban is pointless, &quot;The Economist Style Guide&quot; now says &quot;To see a split infinitive nevertheless annoys some readers, so try to avoid placing a modifier between &quot;to&quot; and the verb in an infinitive. But if moving the modifier would ruin the rhythm, change the meaning or even just put the emphasis in the wrong place, splitting the infinitive is the best option.&quot;

As well as varying according to register, tolerance of split infinitives varies according to type. While most authorities accept split infinitives in general, it is not hard to construct an example that any native speaker would reject. Wycliff&#x27;s Middle English compound split would, if transferred to modern English, be regarded by most people as un-English:
:&quot;It was most unkind to in this manner treat their brother.&quot;
Attempts to define the boundaries of normality are controversial. In 1996, the usage panel of &quot;The American Heritage Book&quot; was evenly divided for and against such sentences as,
:&quot;I expect him to completely and utterly fail&quot;
but more than three-quarters of the panel rejected
:&quot;We are seeking a plan to gradually, systematically, and economically relieve the burden.&quot;
Here the problem appears to be the breaking up of the verbal phrase &quot;to be seeking a plan to relieve&quot;: a segment of the head verbal phrase is so far removed from the remainder that the listener or reader must expend greater effort to understand the sentence. By contrast, 87 percent of the panel deemed acceptable the multi-word adverbial in
:&quot;We expect our output to more than double in a year&quot;
not surprisingly perhaps, because here there is no other place to put the words &quot;more than&quot; without substantially recasting the sentence.

A special case is the splitting of an infinitive by the negation in sentences like
:&quot;I soon learned to not provoke her.&quot;
:&quot;I want to not see you any more.&quot;
Here traditional idiom, placing the negation before the marker (&quot;I soon learned not to provoke her&quot;) or with verbs of desire, negating the finite verb (&quot;I don&#x27;t want to see you anymore&quot;) remains easy and natural, and is still overwhelmingly the more common construction. Some argue that the two forms have different meanings, while others see a grammatical difference, but most speakers do not make such a distinction.
In an example drawn from 3121 sampled usages by the British National Corpus, the use of &quot;to not be&quot; (versus &quot;not to be&quot;) is only 0.35%.

== Avoiding split infinitives ==
Writers who avoid splitting infinitives either place the splitting element elsewhere in the sentence or reformulate the sentence, perhaps rephrasing it without an infinitive and thus avoiding the issue. However, a sentence such as &quot;to more than double&quot; must be completely rewritten to avoid the split infinitive; it is ungrammatical to put the words &quot;more than&quot; anywhere else in the sentence. While split infinitives can be avoided, a writer must be careful not to produce an awkward or ambiguous sentence. Fowler (1926) stressed that, if a sentence is to be rewritten to remove a split infinitive, this must be done without compromising the language:

It is of no avail merely to fling oneself desperately out of temptation; one must so do it that no traces of the struggle remain; that is, sentences must be thoroughly remodeled instead of having a word lifted from its original place &amp; dumped elsewhere …
In some cases, moving the adverbial creates an ungrammatical sentence or changes the meaning. R. L. Trask uses this example:

:*&quot;She decided to gradually get rid of the teddy bears she had collected.&quot;

::&quot;Gradually&quot; splits the infinitive &quot;to get.&quot; However, if the adverb were moved, where could it go?

:*&quot;She decided gradually to get rid of the teddy bears she had collected.&quot;

::This might imply that the decision was gradual.

:*&quot;She decided to get rid of the teddy bears she had collected gradually.&quot;

::This implies that the collecting process was gradual.

:*&quot;She decided to get gradually rid of the teddy bears she had collected.&quot;

::This sounds awkward, as it splits the phrase &quot;get rid of.&quot;

:*&quot;She decided to get rid gradually of the teddy bears she had collected.&quot;

::Trask considers this almost as unwieldy as its immediate predecessor.

:*&quot;Gradually, she decided to get rid of the teddy bears she had collected.&quot;

::This might imply that her decision or the fact that she will get rid of her teddy bears is gradual.

The sentence can be rewritten to maintain its meaning, however, by using a noun or a different grammatical aspect of the verb, or by avoiding the informal &quot;get rid&quot;:

:*&quot;She decided to get rid of her teddy bear collection gradually.&quot;
:*&quot;She decided she would gradually get rid of the teddy bears she had collected.&quot;
:*&quot;She decided to rid herself gradually of the teddy bears she had collected.&quot;

Fowler notes that the option of rewriting is always available but questions whether it is always worth the trouble.

== See also ==
* Common English usage misconceptions

== Notes ==
== References ==
* 

== Further reading ==
* AUE: The alt.usage.english Home Page FAQ entry on split infinitives.
* Huddleston, Rodney D. and Pullum, Geoffrey K. (2002). &quot;The Cambridge Grammar of the English Language&quot;, Cambridge University Press. . (&quot;See especially pp. 581–582.&quot;)
* &quot;The Columbia Guide to Standard American English&quot;

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1460703" start="2" end="18" title="Split infinitive" label="split infinitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474213" start="24" end="48" title="grammatical construction" label="grammatical construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q380057" start="81" end="87" title="adverb" label="adverb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3734650" start="91" end="107" title="adverbial phrase" label="adverbial phrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q179230" start="147" end="157" title="infinitive" label="infinitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786828" start="164" end="176" title="Constituent (linguistics)" label="constituents"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="280" end="291" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q901711" start="456" end="473" title="Colloquialism" label="colloquial speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q441606" start="479" end="495" title="Title sequence" label="opening sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092" start="509" end="518" title="Star Trek" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993413" start="580" end="654" title="Where no man has gone before" label="[[Split infinitive|to &amp;quot;boldly&amp;quot; go]] where no man has gone before"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460703" start="843" end="874" title="Split infinitive" label="to &amp;quot;more than&amp;quot; double"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321978" start="931" end="957" title="linguistic prescriptivists" label="linguistic prescriptivists"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="1526" end="1537" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="1635" end="1640" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="1645" end="1651" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923028" start="1686" end="1692" title="Gerund" label="Gerund"/>
<link wikidata="Q145599" start="1760" end="1771" title="dative case" label="dative case"/>
<link wikidata="Q36395" start="1892" end="1906" title="Middle English" label="Middle English"/>
<link wikidata="Q713727" start="2291" end="2298" title="Layamon" label="Layamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505454" start="2312" end="2316" title="Brut (Layamon)" label="Brut"/>
<link wikidata="Q173893" start="2724" end="2737" title="John Wycliffe" label="John Wycliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q36395" start="2979" end="2993" title="Middle English" label="Middle English"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="3056" end="3075" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490544" start="3292" end="3302" title="Sonnet 142" label="Sonnet 142"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352055" start="3305" end="3319" title="Edmund Spenser" label="Edmund Spenser"/>
<link wikidata="Q213355" start="3321" end="3332" title="John Dryden" label="John Dryden"/>
<link wikidata="Q164047" start="3334" end="3348" title="Alexander Pope" label="Alexander Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q623398" start="3358" end="3389" title="King James Version of the Bible" label="King James Version of the Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q183266" start="3442" end="3456" title="Samuel Johnson" label="Samuel Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q140412" start="3458" end="3468" title="John Donne" label="John Donne"/>
<link wikidata="Q106143" start="3506" end="3518" title="Samuel Pepys" label="Samuel Pepys"/>
<link wikidata="Q40946" start="3743" end="3755" title="Daniel Defoe" label="Daniel Defoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="3757" end="3774" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q45546" start="3776" end="3794" title="William Wordsworth" label="William Wordsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="3796" end="3811" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q131333" start="3813" end="3825" title="George Eliot" label="George Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q170509" start="3827" end="3838" title="Henry James" label="Henry James"/>
<link wikidata="Q229480" start="3844" end="3856" title="Willa Cather" label="Willa Cather"/>
<link wikidata="Q81960" start="3919" end="3931" title="Robert Burns" label="Robert Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543031" start="4829" end="4841" title="George Oliver Curme" label="George Curme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411840" start="5774" end="5798" title="Transformational grammar" label="Transformational grammar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7273" end="7288" title="#Old and Middle English" label="Layamon example"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441734" start="7581" end="7601" title="garden path sentence" label="garden path sentence"/>
<link wikidata="Q814722" start="8027" end="8042" title="past participle" label="past participle"/>
<link wikidata="Q131333" start="8759" end="8771" title="George Eliot" label="George Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215018" start="8779" end="8800" title="The Mill on the Floss" label="The Mill on the Floss"/>
<link wikidata="Q521983" start="9310" end="9335" title="Etymological dictionary" label="etymological dictionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q23870" start="9843" end="9857" title="Otto Jespersen" label="Otto Jespersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q131105" start="10001" end="10011" title="nominative" label="nominative"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="10274" end="10285" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q739953" start="10333" end="10345" title="Robert Lowth" label="Robert Lowth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698623" start="11960" end="11972" title="Henry Alford (theologian)" label="Henry Alford"/>
<link wikidata="Q640096" start="13439" end="13445" title="Henry Watson Fowler" label="Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="13875" end="13878" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q19185" start="14350" end="14369" title="George Bernard Shaw" label="George Bernard Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q180377" start="14451" end="14467" title="Raymond Chandler" label="Raymond Chandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="14502" end="14514" title="The Atlantic" label="The Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q834191" start="14529" end="14540" title="proofreading" label="proofreader"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698623" start="17305" end="17317" title="Henry Alford (theologian)" label="Henry Alford"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18650" end="18665" title="Infinitive#Uses of the bare infinitive" label="bare infinitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="19584" end="19589" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q36108" start="19934" end="19944" title="generative grammar" label="generative"/>
<link wikidata="Q465800" start="20004" end="20018" title="auxiliary verb" label="auxiliary verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031017" start="20055" end="20067" title="Subordination (linguistics)" label="subordinator"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="20608" end="20613" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q912820" start="20675" end="20684" title="straw man" label="straw man"/>
<link wikidata="Q212730" start="21806" end="21819" title="Steven Pinker" label="Steven Pinker"/>
<link wikidata="Q470501" start="21833" end="21854" title="The Language Instinct" label="The Language Instinct"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22540" end="22557" title="Romance verbs#Modern languages" label="romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q198614" start="22655" end="22678" title="Style manual" label="style and usage manuals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543031" start="22739" end="22744" title="George Oliver Curme" label="Curme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140419" start="23081" end="23090" title="ambiguity" label="ambiguity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820064" start="23187" end="23237" title="Merriam–Webster&amp;#x27;s Dictionary of English Usage" label="Merriam–Webster&amp;#x27;s Dictionary of English Usage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6844266" start="23345" end="23359" title="Mignon Fogarty" label="Mignon Fogarty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342501" start="24061" end="24077" title="R. W. Burchfield" label="R. W. Burchfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="24449" end="24462" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q236935" start="27307" end="27330" title="British National Corpus" label="British National Corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499834" start="28471" end="28482" title="Larry Trask" label="R. L. Trask"/>
<link wikidata="Q208084" start="29592" end="29610" title="grammatical aspect" label="grammatical aspect"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30067" end="30102" title="Common English usage misconceptions#Grammar" label="Common English usage misconceptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356948" start="30232" end="30253" title="Rodney Huddleston" label="Huddleston, Rodney D."/>
<link wikidata="Q1503035" start="30258" end="30277" title="Geoffrey Pullum" label="Pullum, Geoffrey K."/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="30345" end="30371" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28901" wikidata="Q849512" url="?curid=28901" title="Symmetric group">
<text>In abstract algebra, the symmetric group defined over any set is the group whose elements are all the bijections from the set to itself, and whose group operation is the composition of functions. In particular, the finite symmetric group formula_1 defined over a finite set of formula_2 symbols consists of the permutations that can be performed on the formula_2 symbols. Since there are formula_4 (formula_2 factorial) such permutation operations, the order (number of elements) of the symmetric group formula_1 is formula_4.

Although symmetric groups can be defined on infinite sets, this article focuses on the finite symmetric groups: their applications, their elements, their conjugacy classes, a finite presentation, their subgroups, their automorphism groups, and their representation theory. For the remainder of this article, &quot;symmetric group&quot; will mean a symmetric group on a finite set.

The symmetric group is important to diverse areas of mathematics such as Galois theory, invariant theory, the representation theory of Lie groups, and combinatorics. Cayley&#x27;s theorem states that every group formula_8 is isomorphic to a subgroup of the symmetric group on (the underlying set of) formula_8.

== Definition and first properties ==
The symmetric group on a finite set formula_10 is the group whose elements are all bijective functions from formula_10 to formula_10 and whose group operation is that of function composition. For finite sets, &quot;permutations&quot; and &quot;bijective functions&quot; refer to the same operation, namely rearrangement. The symmetric group of degree formula_2 is the symmetric group on the set formula_14.

The symmetric group on a set formula_10 is denoted in various ways, including formula_16, formula_17, formula_18, formula_19, and formula_20. If formula_10 is the set formula_22 then the name may be abbreviated to formula_1, formula_24, formula_25, or formula_26.

Symmetric groups on infinite sets behave quite differently from symmetric groups on finite sets, and are discussed in , , and .

The symmetric group on a set of formula_2 elements has order formula_4 (the factorial of formula_2). It is abelian if and only if formula_2 is less than or equal to 2. For formula_31 and formula_32 (the empty set and the singleton set), the symmetric groups are trivial (they have order formula_33). The group S&quot;n&quot; is solvable if and only if formula_34. This is an essential part of the proof of the Abel–Ruffini theorem that shows that for every formula_35 there are polynomials of degree formula_2 which are not solvable by radicals, that is, the solutions cannot be expressed by performing a finite number of operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, division and root extraction on the polynomial&#x27;s coefficients.

== Applications ==
The symmetric group on a set of size &quot;n&quot; is the Galois group of the general polynomial of degree &quot;n&quot; and plays an important role in Galois theory. In invariant theory, the symmetric group acts on the variables of a multi-variate function, and the functions left invariant are the so-called symmetric functions. In the representation theory of Lie groups, the representation theory of the symmetric group plays a fundamental role through the ideas of Schur functors. 

In the theory of Coxeter groups, the symmetric group is the Coxeter group of type A&quot;n&quot; and occurs as the Weyl group of the general linear group. In combinatorics, the symmetric groups, their elements (permutations), and their representations provide a rich source of problems involving Young tableaux, plactic monoids, and the Bruhat order. Subgroups of symmetric groups are called permutation groups and are widely studied because of their importance in understanding group actions, homogeneous spaces, and automorphism groups of graphs, such as the Higman–Sims group and the Higman–Sims graph.

== Group properties and special elements ==
The elements of the symmetric group on a set &quot;X&quot; are the permutations of &quot;X&quot;.

=== Multiplication ===
The group operation in a symmetric group is function composition, denoted by the symbol ∘ or by simple juxtaposition. The composition of permutations and , pronounced &quot; of &quot;, maps any element of to . Concretely, let (see permutation for an explanation of notation):
formula_37
formula_38
Applying after maps 1 first to 2 and then 2 to itself; 2 to 5 and then to 4; 3 to 4 and then to 5, and so on. So, composing and gives
formula_39

A cycle of length , taken to the th power, will decompose into cycles of length : For example, (, ),
formula_40

=== Verification of group axioms ===
To check that the symmetric group on a set &quot;X&quot; is indeed a group, it is necessary to verify the group axioms of closure, associativity, identity, and inverses.
# The operation of function composition is closed in the set of permutations of the given set &quot;X&quot;.
# Function composition is always associative.
# The trivial bijection that assigns each element of &quot;X&quot; to itself serves as an identity for the group.
# Every bijection has an inverse function that undoes its action, and thus each element of a symmetric group does have an inverse which is a permutation too.

=== Transpositions, sign, and the alternating group ===

A transposition is a permutation which exchanges two elements and keeps all others fixed; for example (1 3) is a transposition. Every permutation can be written as a product of transpositions; for instance, the permutation &quot;g&quot; from above can be written as &quot;g&quot; = (1 2)(2 5)(3 4). Since &quot;g&quot; can be written as a product of an odd number of transpositions, it is then called an odd permutation, whereas &quot;f&quot; is an even permutation.

The representation of a permutation as a product of transpositions is not unique; however, the number of transpositions needed to represent a given permutation is either always even or always odd. There are several short proofs of the invariance of this parity of a permutation.

The product of two even permutations is even, the product of two odd permutations is even, and the product of one of each is odd. Thus we can define the sign of a permutation:

:formula_41

With this definition,
:formula_42
is a group homomorphism ({+1, −1} is a group under multiplication, where +1 is e, the neutral element). The kernel of this homomorphism, that is, the set of all even permutations, is called the alternating group A&quot;n&quot;. It is a normal subgroup of S&quot;n&quot;, and for it has elements. The group S&quot;n&quot; is the semidirect product of A&quot;n&quot; and any subgroup generated by a single transposition.

Furthermore, every permutation can be written as a product of &quot;adjacent transpositions&quot;, that is, transpositions of the form . For instance, the permutation &quot;g&quot; from above can also be written as . The sorting algorithm bubble sort is an application of this fact. The representation of a permutation as a product of adjacent transpositions is also not unique.

=== Cycles ===
A cycle of &quot;length&quot; &quot;k&quot; is a permutation &quot;f&quot; for which there exists an element &quot;x&quot; in {1, ..., &quot;n&quot;} such that &quot;x&quot;, &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;), &quot;f&quot;2(&quot;x&quot;), ..., &quot;f&quot;&quot;k&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) = &quot;x&quot; are the only elements moved by &quot;f&quot;; it conventionally is required that since with the element &quot;x&quot; itself would not be moved either. The permutation &quot;h&quot; defined by
: formula_43
is a cycle of length three, since , and , leaving 2 and 5 untouched. We denote such a cycle by , but it could equally well be written or by starting at a different point. The order of a cycle is equal to its length. Cycles of length two are transpositions. Two cycles are &quot;disjoint&quot; if they have disjoint subsets of elements. Disjoint cycles commute: for example, in S6 there is the equality . Every element of S&quot;n&quot; can be written as a product of disjoint cycles; this representation is unique up to the order of the factors, and the freedom present in representing each individual cycle by choosing its starting point.

Cycles admit the following conjugation property with any permutation formula_44, this property is often used to obtain its generators and relations.

:formula_45

=== Special elements ===
Certain elements of the symmetric group of {1, 2, ..., &quot;n&quot;} are of particular interest (these can be generalized to the symmetric group of any finite totally ordered set, but not to that of an unordered set).

The is the one given by:
:formula_46
This is the unique maximal element with respect to the Bruhat order and the
longest element in the symmetric group with respect to generating set consisting of the adjacent transpositions , .

This is an involution, and consists of formula_47 (non-adjacent) transpositions
:formula_48
:: formula_49

so it thus has sign:

:formula_50
which is 4-periodic in &quot;n&quot;.

In S2&quot;n&quot;, the &quot;perfect shuffle&quot; is the permutation that splits the set into 2 piles and interleaves them. Its sign is also formula_51

Note that the reverse on &quot;n&quot; elements and perfect shuffle on 2&quot;n&quot; elements have the same sign; these are important to the classification of Clifford algebras, which are 8-periodic.

== Conjugacy classes ==

The conjugacy classes of S&quot;n&quot; correspond to the cycle types of permutations; that is, two elements of S&quot;n&quot; are conjugate in S&quot;n&quot; if and only if they consist of the same number of disjoint cycles of the same lengths. For instance, in S5, (1 2 3)(4 5) and (1 4 3)(2 5) are conjugate; (1 2 3)(4 5) and (1 2)(4 5) are not. A conjugating element of S&quot;n&quot; can be constructed in &quot;two line notation&quot; by placing the &quot;cycle notations&quot; of the two conjugate permutations on top of one another. Continuing the previous example,
formula_52
which can be written as the product of cycles as (2 4).
This permutation then relates (1 2 3)(4 5) and (1 4 3)(2 5) via conjugation, that is,
formula_53
It is clear that such a permutation is not unique.

Conjugacy classes of S&quot;n&quot; correspond to integer partitions of &quot;n&quot;: to the partition with formula_54 and , is associated the set &quot;C&quot;&quot;μ&quot; of permutations with cycles of lengths . Then &quot;C&quot;&quot;μ&quot; is a conjugacy class of S&quot;n&quot;, whose elements are said to be of cycle-type formula_55.

== Low degree groups ==

The low-degree symmetric groups have simpler and exceptional structure, and often must be treated separately.

;S0 and S1: The symmetric groups on the empty set and the singleton set are trivial, which corresponds to . In this case the alternating group agrees with the symmetric group, rather than being an index 2 subgroup, and the sign map is trivial. In the case of S0, its only member is the empty function.

;S2: This group consists of exactly two elements: the identity and the permutation swapping the two points. It is a cyclic group and is thus abelian. In Galois theory, this corresponds to the fact that the quadratic formula gives a direct solution to the general quadratic polynomial after extracting only a single root. In invariant theory, the representation theory of the symmetric group on two points is quite simple and is seen as writing a function of two variables as a sum of its symmetric and anti-symmetric parts: Setting , and , one gets that . This process is known as symmetrization.

;S3: S3 is the first nonabelian symmetric group. This group is isomorphic to the dihedral group of order 6, the group of reflection and rotation symmetries of an equilateral triangle, since these symmetries permute the three vertices of the triangle. Cycles of length two correspond to reflections, and cycles of length three are rotations. In Galois theory, the sign map from S3 to S2 corresponds to the resolving quadratic for a cubic polynomial, as discovered by Gerolamo Cardano, while the A3 kernel corresponds to the use of the discrete Fourier transform of order 3 in the solution, in the form of Lagrange resolvents.

;S4: The group S4 is isomorphic to the group of proper rotations about opposite faces, opposite diagonals and opposite edges, 9, 8 and 6 permutations, of the cube. Beyond the group A4, S4 has a Klein four-group V as a proper normal subgroup, namely the even transpositions with quotient S3. In Galois theory, this map corresponds to the resolving cubic to a quartic polynomial, which allows the quartic to be solved by radicals, as established by Lodovico Ferrari. The Klein group can be understood in terms of the Lagrange resolvents of the quartic. The map from S4 to S3 also yields a 2-dimensional irreducible representation, which is an irreducible representation of a symmetric group of degree &quot;n&quot; of dimension below , which only occurs for .

;S5: S5 is the first non-solvable symmetric group. Along with the special linear group and the icosahedral group , S5 is one of the three non-solvable groups of order 120, up to isomorphism. S5 is the Galois group of the general quintic equation, and the fact that S5 is not a solvable group translates into the non-existence of a general formula to solve quintic polynomials by radicals. There is an exotic inclusion map as a transitive subgroup; the obvious inclusion map fixes a point and thus is not transitive. This yields the outer automorphism of S6, discussed below, and corresponds to the resolvent sextic of a quintic.

;S6: Unlike all other symmetric groups, S6, has an outer automorphism. Using the language of Galois theory, this can also be understood in terms of Lagrange resolvents. The resolvent of a quintic is of degree 6—this corresponds to an exotic inclusion map as a transitive subgroup (the obvious inclusion map fixes a point and thus is not transitive) and, while this map does not make the general quintic solvable, it yields the exotic outer automorphism of S6—see &quot;Automorphisms of the symmetric and alternating groups&quot; for details.

:Note that while A6 and A7 have an exceptional Schur multiplier (a triple cover) and that these extend to triple covers of S6 and S7, these do not correspond to exceptional Schur multipliers of the symmetric group.

=== Maps between symmetric groups ===

Other than the trivial map and the sign map , the most notable homomorphisms between symmetric groups, in order of relative dimension, are:
* corresponding to the exceptional normal subgroup ;
* (or rather, a class of such maps up to inner automorphism) corresponding to the outer automorphism of S6.
* as a transitive subgroup, yielding the outer automorphism of S6 as discussed above.
There are also a host of other homomorphisms where .

== Relation with alternating group ==
For , the alternating group A&quot;n&quot; is simple, and the induced quotient is the sign map: which is split by taking a transposition of two elements. Thus S&quot;n&quot; is the semidirect product , and has no other proper normal subgroups, as they would intersect A&quot;n&quot; in either the identity (and thus themselves be the identity or a 2-element group, which is not normal), or in A&quot;n&quot; (and thus themselves be A&quot;n&quot; or S&quot;n&quot;).

S&quot;n&quot; acts on its subgroup A&quot;n&quot; by conjugation, and for , S&quot;n&quot; is the full automorphism group of A&quot;n&quot;: Aut(A&quot;n&quot;) ≅ S&quot;n&quot;. Conjugation by even elements are inner automorphisms of A&quot;n&quot; while the outer automorphism of A&quot;n&quot; of order 2 corresponds to conjugation by an odd element. For , there is an exceptional outer automorphism of A&quot;n&quot; so S&quot;n&quot; is not the full automorphism group of A&quot;n&quot;.

Conversely, for , S&quot;n&quot; has no outer automorphisms, and for it has no center, so for it is a complete group, as discussed in automorphism group, below.

For , S&quot;n&quot; is an almost simple group, as it lies between the simple group A&quot;n&quot; and its group of automorphisms.

S&quot;n&quot; can be embedded into A&quot;n&quot;+2 by appending the transposition to all odd permutations, while embedding into A&quot;n&quot;+1 is impossible for .

== Generators and relations ==
The symmetric group on letters is generated by the adjacent transpositions formula_56 that swap and . The collection formula_57 generates subject to the following relations:
*formula_58
*formula_59 for formula_60, and
*formula_61
where 1 represents the identity permutation. This representation endows the symmetric group with the structure of a Coxeter group (and so also a reflection group).

Other possible generating sets include the set of transpositions that swap and for , or more generally any set of transpositions that forms a connected graph, and a set containing any -cycle and a -cycle of adjacent elements in the -cycle.

== Subgroup structure ==
A subgroup of a symmetric group is called a permutation group.

=== Normal subgroups ===
The normal subgroups of the finite symmetric groups are well understood. If , S&quot;n&quot; has at most 2 elements, and so has no nontrivial proper subgroups. The alternating group of degree &quot;n&quot; is always a normal subgroup, a proper one for and nontrivial for ; for it is in fact the only nontrivial proper normal subgroup of , except when where there is one additional such normal subgroup, which is isomorphic to the Klein four group.

The symmetric group on an infinite set does not have a subgroup of index 2, as Vitali (1915) proved that each permutation can be written as a product of three squares. (Any squared element must belong to the hypothesized subgroup of index 2, hence so must the product of any number of squares.) However it contains the normal subgroup &quot;S&quot; of permutations that fix all but finitely many elements, which is generated by transpositions. Those elements of &quot;S&quot; that are products of an even number of transpositions form a subgroup of index 2 in &quot;S&quot;, called the alternating subgroup &quot;A&quot;. Since &quot;A&quot; is even a characteristic subgroup of &quot;S&quot;, it is also a normal subgroup of the full symmetric group of the infinite set. The groups &quot;A&quot; and &quot;S&quot; are the only nontrivial proper normal subgroups of the symmetric group on a countably infinite set. This was first proved by Onofri (1929) and independently Schreier–Ulam (1934). For more details see . That result, often called the Schreier-Ulam theorem, is superseded by a stronger one which says that the nontrivial normal subgroups of the symmetric group on a set formula_10 are 1) the even permutations with finite support and 2) for every cardinality formula_63 the group of permutations with support less than formula_64 .

=== Maximal subgroups ===
The maximal subgroups of fall into three classes: the intransitive, the imprimitive, and the primitive. The intransitive maximal subgroups are exactly those of the form for . The imprimitive maximal subgroups are exactly those of the form , where is a proper divisor of &quot;n&quot; and &quot;wr&quot; denotes the wreath product. The primitive maximal subgroups are more difficult to identify, but with the assistance of the O&#x27;Nan–Scott theorem and the classification of finite simple groups, gave a fairly satisfactory description of the maximal subgroups of this type, according to .

=== Sylow subgroups ===
The Sylow subgroups of the symmetric groups are important examples of &quot;p&quot;-groups. They are more easily described in special cases first:

The Sylow &quot;p&quot;-subgroups of the symmetric group of degree &quot;p&quot; are just the cyclic subgroups generated by &quot;p&quot;-cycles. There are such subgroups simply by counting generators. The normalizer therefore has order and is known as a Frobenius group (especially for ), and is the affine general linear group, .

The Sylow &quot;p&quot;-subgroups of the symmetric group of degree &quot;p&quot;2 are the wreath product of two cyclic groups of order &quot;p&quot;. For instance, when , a Sylow 3-subgroup of Sym(9) is generated by and the elements , and every element of the Sylow 3-subgroup has the form for .

The Sylow &quot;p&quot;-subgroups of the symmetric group of degree &quot;p&quot;&quot;n&quot; are sometimes denoted W&quot;p&quot;(&quot;n&quot;), and using this notation one has that is the wreath product of W&quot;p&quot;(&quot;n&quot;) and W&quot;p&quot;(1).

In general, the Sylow &quot;p&quot;-subgroups of the symmetric group of degree &quot;n&quot; are a direct product of &quot;a&quot;&quot;i&quot; copies of W&quot;p&quot;(&quot;i&quot;), where and (the base &quot;p&quot; expansion of &quot;n&quot;).

For instance, , the dihedral group of order 8, and so a Sylow 2-subgroup of the symmetric group of degree 7 is generated by and is isomorphic to .

These calculations are attributed to and described in more detail in . Note however that attributes the result to an 1844 work of Cauchy, and mentions that it is even covered in textbook form in .

=== Transitive subgroups ===
A transitive subgroup of S&quot;n&quot; is a subgroup whose action on {1, 2, ..., &quot;n&quot;} is transitive. For example, the Galois group of a (finite) Galois extension is a transitive subgroup of S&quot;n&quot;, for some &quot;n&quot;.

===Young subgroups===

A subgroup of that is generated by transpositions is called a &quot;Young subgroup&quot;. They are all of the form formula_65 where formula_66 is an integer partition of . These groups may also be characterized as the parabolic subgroups of when it is viewed as a reflection group.

===Cayley&#x27;s theorem===
Cayley&#x27;s theorem states that every group &quot;G&quot; is isomorphic to a subgroup of some symmetric group. In particular, one may take a subgroup of the symmetric group on the elements of &quot;G&quot;, since every group acts on itself faithfully by (left or right) multiplication.

== Cyclic subgroups ==

Cyclic groups are those that are generated by a single permutation. When a permutation is represented in cycle notation, the order of the cyclic subgroup that it generates is the least common multiple of the lengths of its cycles. For example, in S, one cyclic subgroup of order 5 is generated by (13254), whereas the largest cyclic subgroups of S are generated by elements like (123)(45) that have one cycle of length 3 and another cycle of length 2. This rules out many groups as possible subgroups of symmetric groups of a given size. For example, S has no subgroup of order 15 (a divisor of the order of S), because the only group of order 15 is the cyclic group. The largest possible order of a cyclic subgroup (equivalently, the largest possible order of an element in S) is given by Landau&#x27;s function.

== Automorphism group ==
For , S&quot;n&quot; is a complete group: its center and outer automorphism group are both trivial.

For , the automorphism group is trivial, but S2 is not trivial: it is isomorphic to C2, which is abelian, and hence the center is the whole group.

For , it has an outer automorphism of order 2: , and the automorphism group is a semidirect product .

In fact, for any set &quot;X&quot; of cardinality other than 6, every automorphism of the symmetric group on &quot;X&quot; is inner, a result first due to according to .

== Homology ==

The group homology of S&quot;n&quot; is quite regular and stabilizes: the first homology (concretely, the abelianization) is:

:formula_67

The first homology group is the abelianization, and corresponds to the sign map S&quot;n&quot; → S2 which is the abelianization for &quot;n&quot; ≥ 2; for &quot;n&quot; &lt; 2 the symmetric group is trivial. This homology is easily computed as follows: S&quot;n&quot; is generated by involutions (2-cycles, which have order 2), so the only non-trivial maps are to S2 and all involutions are conjugate, hence map to the same element in the abelianization (since conjugation is trivial in abelian groups). Thus the only possible maps send an involution to 1 (the trivial map) or to −1 (the sign map). One must also show that the sign map is well-defined, but assuming that, this gives the first homology of S&quot;n&quot;.

The second homology (concretely, the Schur multiplier) is:
:formula_68
This was computed in , and corresponds to the double cover of the symmetric group, 2 · S&quot;n&quot;.

Note that the exceptional low-dimensional homology of the alternating group (formula_69 corresponding to non-trivial abelianization, and formula_70 due to the exceptional 3-fold cover) does not change the homology of the symmetric group; the alternating group phenomena do yield symmetric group phenomena – the map formula_71 extends to formula_72 and the triple covers of A6 and A7 extend to triple covers of S6 and S7 – but these are not &quot;homological&quot; – the map formula_73 does not change the abelianization of S4, and the triple covers do not correspond to homology either.

The homology &quot;stabilizes&quot; in the sense of stable homotopy theory: there is an inclusion map , and for fixed &quot;k&quot;, the induced map on homology is an isomorphism for sufficiently high &quot;n&quot;. This is analogous to the homology of families Lie groups stabilizing.

The homology of the infinite symmetric group is computed in , with the cohomology algebra forming a Hopf algebra.

== Representation theory ==
The representation theory of the symmetric group is a particular case of the representation theory of finite groups, for which a concrete and detailed theory can be obtained. This has a large area of potential applications, from symmetric function theory to problems of quantum mechanics for a number of identical particles.

The symmetric group S&quot;n&quot; has order &quot;n&quot;!. Its conjugacy classes are labeled by partitions of &quot;n&quot;. Therefore, according to the representation theory of a finite group, the number of inequivalent irreducible representations, over the complex numbers, is equal to the number of partitions of &quot;n&quot;. Unlike the general situation for finite groups, there is in fact a natural way to parametrize irreducible representation by the same set that parametrizes conjugacy classes, namely by partitions of &quot;n&quot; or equivalently Young diagrams of size &quot;n&quot;.

Each such irreducible representation can be realized over the integers (every permutation acting by a matrix with integer coefficients); it can be explicitly constructed by computing the Young symmetrizers acting on a space generated by the Young tableaux of shape given by the Young diagram.

Over other fields the situation can become much more complicated. If the field &quot;K&quot; has characteristic equal to zero or greater than &quot;n&quot; then by Maschke&#x27;s theorem the group algebra &quot;K&quot;S&quot;n&quot; is semisimple. In these cases the irreducible representations defined over the integers give the complete set of irreducible representations (after reduction modulo the characteristic if necessary).

However, the irreducible representations of the symmetric group are not known in arbitrary characteristic. In this context it is more usual to use the language of modules rather than representations. The representation obtained from an irreducible representation defined over the integers by reducing modulo the characteristic will not in general be irreducible. The modules so constructed are called &quot;Specht modules&quot;, and every irreducible does arise inside some such module. There are now fewer irreducibles, and although they can be classified they are very poorly understood. For example, even their dimensions are not known in general.

The determination of the irreducible modules for the symmetric group over an arbitrary field is widely regarded as one of the most important open problems in representation theory.

== See also ==
* Braid group
* History of group theory
* Signed symmetric group and Generalized symmetric group
* Symmetric inverse semigroup
* Symmetric power

== Notes ==
== References ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== External links==
* 
*Marcus du Sautoy: Symmetry, reality&#x27;s riddle (video of a talk)
* OEIS Entries dealing with the Symmetric Group</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q159943" start="3" end="19" title="abstract algebra" label="abstract algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q849512" start="25" end="40" title="Symmetric group" label="symmetric group"/>
<link wikidata="Q36161" start="58" end="61" title="set (mathematics)" label="set"/>
<link wikidata="Q83478" start="69" end="74" title="group (mathematics)" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="Q379825" start="81" end="89" title="Element (mathematics)" label="elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q180907" start="102" end="111" title="bijection" label="bijection"/>
<link wikidata="Q83478" start="147" end="162" title="group operation" label="group operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q244761" start="170" end="194" title="function composition" label="composition of functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q272404" start="263" end="273" title="finite set" label="finite set"/>
<link wikidata="Q161519" start="311" end="322" title="permutation" label="permutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q120976" start="409" end="418" title="factorial" label="factorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q589491" start="453" end="458" title="Order (group theory)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q205140" start="572" end="584" title="infinite set" label="infinite set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353233" start="682" end="697" title="conjugacy class" label="conjugacy class"/>
<link wikidata="Q915906" start="703" end="722" title="finitely presented group" label="finite presentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q466109" start="730" end="738" title="subgroup" label="subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790315" start="747" end="765" title="automorphism group" label="automorphism group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055807" start="778" end="792" title="group representation" label="representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q92552" start="983" end="996" title="Galois theory" label="Galois theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855669" start="998" end="1014" title="invariant theory" label="invariant theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q763735" start="1020" end="1055" title="representation theory of Lie groups" label="representation theory of Lie groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q76592" start="1061" end="1074" title="combinatorics" label="combinatorics"/>
<link wikidata="Q179208" start="1076" end="1097" title="Cayley&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Cayley&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q742064" start="1135" end="1145" title="group isomorphism" label="isomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q466109" start="1151" end="1159" title="subgroup" label="subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205464" start="1191" end="1205" title="underlying set" label="underlying set"/>
<link wikidata="Q244761" start="1430" end="1450" title="function composition" label="function composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q589491" start="2117" end="2122" title="order (group theory)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q120976" start="2138" end="2147" title="factorial" label="factorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q181296" start="2169" end="2176" title="abelian group" label="abelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q226183" start="2265" end="2274" title="empty set" label="empty set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165112" start="2283" end="2296" title="singleton set" label="singleton set"/>
<link wikidata="Q568687" start="2324" end="2331" title="trivial group" label="trivial"/>
<link wikidata="Q759832" start="2390" end="2398" title="solvable group" label="solvable"/>
<link wikidata="Q657482" start="2472" end="2492" title="Abel–Ruffini theorem" label="Abel–Ruffini theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q43260" start="2540" end="2550" title="polynomial" label="polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q730384" start="2883" end="2895" title="Galois group" label="Galois group"/>
<link wikidata="Q43260" start="2911" end="2921" title="polynomial" label="polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q92552" start="2977" end="2990" title="Galois theory" label="Galois theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855669" start="2995" end="3011" title="invariant theory" label="invariant theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q981351" start="3135" end="3153" title="symmetric function" label="symmetric function"/>
<link wikidata="Q763735" start="3163" end="3198" title="representation theory of Lie groups" label="representation theory of Lie groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314231" start="3204" end="3248" title="representation theory of the symmetric group" label="representation theory of the symmetric group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433033" start="3295" end="3308" title="Schur functor" label="Schur functor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874246" start="3330" end="3343" title="Coxeter group" label="Coxeter group"/>
<link wikidata="Q768074" start="3428" end="3438" title="Weyl group" label="Weyl group"/>
<link wikidata="Q524607" start="3446" end="3466" title="general linear group" label="general linear group"/>
<link wikidata="Q76592" start="3471" end="3484" title="combinatorics" label="combinatorics"/>
<link wikidata="Q161519" start="3524" end="3535" title="permutation" label="permutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055807" start="3549" end="3564" title="group representation" label="representations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166280" start="3609" end="3623" title="Young tableaux" label="Young tableaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321291" start="3625" end="3639" title="plactic monoid" label="plactic monoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978697" start="3650" end="3662" title="Bruhat order" label="Bruhat order"/>
<link wikidata="Q466109" start="3664" end="3672" title="Subgroup" label="Subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412905" start="3705" end="3722" title="permutation group" label="permutation group"/>
<link wikidata="Q288465" start="3792" end="3804" title="Group action (mathematics)" label="group action"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324364" start="3807" end="3824" title="homogeneous space" label="homogeneous space"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790315" start="3831" end="3849" title="automorphism group" label="automorphism group"/>
<link wikidata="Q141488" start="3854" end="3859" title="Graph (discrete mathematics)" label="graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117686" start="3874" end="3891" title="Higman–Sims group" label="Higman–Sims group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115511" start="3900" end="3917" title="Higman–Sims graph" label="Higman–Sims graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q161519" start="4031" end="4042" title="permutation" label="permutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q161519" start="4317" end="4328" title="permutation" label="permutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q212130" start="4532" end="4537" title="Cyclic permutation" label="cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q83478" start="4749" end="4754" title="group (mathematics)" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="Q191884" start="5144" end="5160" title="inverse function" label="inverse function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064405" start="5739" end="5754" title="Even and odd permutations" label="odd permutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q868169" start="6312" end="6330" title="group homomorphism" label="group homomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q185813" start="6393" end="6408" title="neutral element" label="neutral element"/>
<link wikidata="Q574844" start="6415" end="6421" title="Kernel (algebra)" label="kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q438814" start="6501" end="6518" title="alternating group" label="alternating group"/>
<link wikidata="Q743179" start="6543" end="6558" title="normal subgroup" label="normal subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q291126" start="6635" end="6653" title="semidirect product" label="semidirect product"/>
<link wikidata="Q212130" start="6795" end="6817" title="adjacent transposition" label="adjacent transposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q60864" start="6966" end="6977" title="bubble sort" label="bubble sort"/>
<link wikidata="Q212130" start="7124" end="7129" title="cyclic permutation" label="cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q165474" start="7979" end="7986" title="Commutative property" label="commute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914964" start="8141" end="8146" title="up to" label="up to"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8391" end="8415" title="Symmetric group#Generators and relations" label="generators and relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978697" start="8768" end="8780" title="Bruhat order" label="Bruhat order"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673739" start="8789" end="8804" title="longest element of a Coxeter group" label="longest element"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436074" start="9116" end="9131" title="Faro shuffle" label="perfect shuffle"/>
<link wikidata="Q674689" start="9401" end="9417" title="Clifford algebra" label="Clifford algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353233" start="9472" end="9487" title="conjugacy class" label="conjugacy class"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9526" end="9537" title="Permutation#Cycle type" label="cycle types"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082910" start="10308" end="10325" title="integer partition" label="integer partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q226183" start="10779" end="10788" title="empty set" label="empty set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165112" start="10797" end="10810" title="singleton set" label="singleton set"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="11025" end="11039" title="empty function" label="empty function"/>
<link wikidata="Q245462" start="11158" end="11170" title="cyclic group" label="cyclic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q181296" start="11183" end="11190" title="abelian group" label="abelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q92552" start="11195" end="11208" title="Galois theory" label="Galois theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q15909572" start="11248" end="11265" title="quadratic formula" label="quadratic formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q50695" start="11305" end="11325" title="quadratic polynomial" label="quadratic polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855669" start="11366" end="11382" title="invariant theory" label="invariant theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507967" start="11623" end="11637" title="symmetrization" label="symmetrization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2204630" start="11721" end="11746" title="dihedral group of order 6" label="dihedral group of order 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q157002" start="11802" end="11822" title="equilateral triangle" label="equilateral triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16667694" start="12071" end="12087" title="cubic polynomial" label="cubic polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q184530" start="12106" end="12122" title="Gerolamo Cardano" label="Gerolamo Cardano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878" start="12174" end="12200" title="discrete Fourier transform" label="discrete Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q4392490" start="12244" end="12262" title="Lagrange resolvent" label="Lagrange resolvent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293666" start="12392" end="12402" title="Rencontres numbers" label="9, 8 and 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q812880" start="12424" end="12428" title="cube" label="cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q438814" start="12447" end="12449" title="Alternating group" label="A4"/>
<link wikidata="Q550593" start="12460" end="12476" title="Klein four-group" label="Klein four-group"/>
<link wikidata="Q743179" start="12491" end="12506" title="normal subgroup" label="normal subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q92552" start="12560" end="12573" title="Galois theory" label="Galois theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11420049" start="12624" end="12642" title="quartic polynomial" label="quartic polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q310783" start="12713" end="12729" title="Lodovico Ferrari" label="Lodovico Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q4392490" start="12781" end="12799" title="Lagrange resolvent" label="Lagrange resolvent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140900" start="13091" end="13111" title="special linear group" label="special linear group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5986738" start="13120" end="13137" title="icosahedral group" label="icosahedral group"/>
<link wikidata="Q730384" start="13226" end="13238" title="Galois group" label="Galois group"/>
<link wikidata="Q33104507" start="13254" end="13270" title="quintic equation" label="quintic equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q759832" start="13302" end="13316" title="solvable group" label="solvable group"/>
<link wikidata="Q33104507" start="13381" end="13399" title="quintic polynomial" label="quintic polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13452" end="13471" title="#Transitive subgroup anchor" label="transitive subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q77980689" start="13706" end="13724" title="outer automorphism" label="outer automorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q92552" start="13748" end="13761" title="Galois theory" label="Galois theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4392490" start="13803" end="13822" title="Lagrange resolvents" label="Lagrange resolvents"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826703" start="14124" end="14177" title="Automorphisms of the symmetric and alternating groups" label="Automorphisms of the symmetric and alternating groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327702" start="14245" end="14261" title="Schur multiplier" label="Schur multiplier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179255" start="14265" end="14277" title="Covering groups of the alternating and symmetric groups" label="triple cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310789" start="14568" end="14586" title="relative dimension" label="relative dimension"/>
<link wikidata="Q438814" start="14942" end="14959" title="alternating group" label="alternating group"/>
<link wikidata="Q571124" start="14978" end="14984" title="Simple group" label="simple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139583" start="15613" end="15631" title="inner automorphism" label="inner automorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q77980689" start="15661" end="15679" title="outer automorphism" label="outer automorphism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15773" end="15803" title="Automorphisms of the symmetric and alternating groups#exceptional outer automorphism" label="exceptional outer automorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q968707" start="15997" end="16011" title="complete group" label="complete group"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16029" end="16047" title="#Automorphism group" label="automorphism group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734006" start="16084" end="16103" title="almost simple group" label="almost simple group"/>
<link wikidata="Q212130" start="16439" end="16461" title="adjacent transposition" label="adjacent transposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874246" start="16734" end="16747" title="Coxeter group" label="Coxeter group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307244" start="16763" end="16779" title="reflection group" label="reflection group"/>
<link wikidata="Q466109" start="17051" end="17059" title="subgroup" label="subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412905" start="17093" end="17110" title="permutation group" label="permutation group"/>
<link wikidata="Q743179" start="17142" end="17157" title="normal subgroup" label="normal subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q438814" start="17302" end="17319" title="alternating group" label="alternating group"/>
<link wikidata="Q550593" start="17568" end="17584" title="Klein four group" label="Klein four group"/>
<link wikidata="Q739969" start="17666" end="17672" title="Giuseppe_Vitali" label="Vitali"/>
<link wikidata="Q747027" start="18239" end="18262" title="characteristic subgroup" label="characteristic subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18527" end="18533" title="Luigi_Onofri" label="Onofri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18559" end="18567" title="J%C3%B3zef_Schreier" label="Schreier"/>
<link wikidata="Q234357" start="18568" end="18572" title="Stanislaw_Ulam" label="Ulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q16908484" start="18962" end="18978" title="maximal subgroup" label="maximal subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786640" start="19273" end="19287" title="wreath product" label="wreath product"/>
<link wikidata="Q17099479" start="19384" end="19408" title="O&amp;#x27;Nan–Scott theorem" label="O&amp;#x27;Nan–Scott theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340623" start="19417" end="19455" title="classification of finite simple groups" label="classification of finite simple groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057919" start="19579" end="19593" title="Sylow subgroup" label="Sylow subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q286972" start="19645" end="19665" title="p-group" label="&amp;quot;p&amp;quot;-groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q915906" start="19913" end="19923" title="Presentation of a group" label="generators"/>
<link wikidata="Q190629" start="19929" end="19939" title="normalizer" label="normalizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457165" start="19978" end="19993" title="Frobenius group" label="Frobenius group"/>
<link wikidata="Q686291" start="20024" end="20051" title="affine general linear group" label="affine general linear group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786640" start="20146" end="20160" title="wreath product" label="wreath product"/>
<link wikidata="Q115556877" start="20885" end="20910" title="dihedral group of order 8" label="dihedral group of order 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q849512" start="20945" end="20960" title="symmetric group" label="symmetric group"/>
<link wikidata="Q8814" start="21143" end="21149" title="Augustin-Louis Cauchy" label="Cauchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q288465" start="21340" end="21350" title="transitive action" label="transitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493864" start="21388" end="21394" title="finite extension" label="finite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020004" start="21396" end="21412" title="Galois extension" label="Galois extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082910" start="21654" end="21671" title="integer partition" label="integer partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q124328767" start="21723" end="21741" title="parabolic subgroup of a reflection group" label="parabolic subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307244" start="21769" end="21785" title="reflection group" label="reflection group"/>
<link wikidata="Q179208" start="21816" end="21837" title="Cayley&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Cayley&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q245462" start="22129" end="22141" title="Cyclic group" label="Cyclic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q102761" start="22308" end="22329" title="least common multiple" label="least common multiple"/>
<link wikidata="Q967147" start="22919" end="22941" title="Landau&amp;#x27;s function" label="Landau&amp;#x27;s function"/>
<link wikidata="Q968707" start="22995" end="23009" title="complete group" label="complete group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195852" start="23015" end="23021" title="center (group theory)" label="center"/>
<link wikidata="Q77980689" start="23026" end="23050" title="outer automorphism group" label="outer automorphism group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408937" start="23512" end="23526" title="group homology" label="group homology"/>
<link wikidata="Q522216" start="23614" end="23628" title="abelianization" label="abelianization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327702" start="24407" end="24423" title="Schur multiplier" label="Schur multiplier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179255" start="24487" end="24522" title="covering groups of the alternating and symmetric groups" label="double cover of the symmetric group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419511" start="24559" end="24570" title="exceptional object" label="exceptional"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595767" start="25185" end="25200" title="stable homotopy" label="stable homotopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q622679" start="25395" end="25405" title="Lie groups" label="Lie groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627597" start="25520" end="25532" title="Hopf algebra" label="Hopf algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314231" start="25567" end="25611" title="representation theory of the symmetric group" label="representation theory of the symmetric group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526854" start="25640" end="25678" title="representation theory of finite groups" label="representation theory of finite groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q981351" start="25792" end="25810" title="symmetric function" label="symmetric function"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="25833" end="25850" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q898351" start="25867" end="25886" title="identical particles" label="identical particles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353233" start="25954" end="25969" title="conjugacy class" label="conjugacy class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082910" start="25987" end="25996" title="integer partition" label="partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q13690522" start="26112" end="26138" title="irreducible representation" label="irreducible representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="26150" end="26164" title="complex number" label="complex number"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166280" start="26450" end="26463" title="Young diagram" label="Young diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058560" start="26676" end="26693" title="Young symmetrizer" label="Young symmetrizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166280" start="26730" end="26743" title="Young tableau" label="Young tableau"/>
<link wikidata="Q190109" start="26794" end="26799" title="Field (mathematics)" label="field"/>
<link wikidata="Q836088" start="26880" end="26894" title="characteristic (algebra)" label="characteristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q656198" start="26947" end="26969" title="Maschke&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Maschke&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602722" start="26974" end="26987" title="group ring" label="group algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q18848" start="27379" end="27385" title="module (mathematics)" label="module"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574439" start="27623" end="27637" title="Specht modules" label="Specht modules"/>
<link wikidata="Q929302" start="27830" end="27839" title="dimension (vector space)" label="dimension"/>
<link wikidata="Q220409" start="28067" end="28078" title="Braid group" label="Braid group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053855" start="28081" end="28104" title="History of group theory" label="History of group theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5958362" start="28107" end="28129" title="Signed symmetric group" label="Signed symmetric group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532515" start="28134" end="28161" title="Generalized symmetric group" label="Generalized symmetric group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661309" start="28164" end="28191" title="Symmetric inverse semigroup" label="Symmetric inverse semigroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643402" start="28194" end="28209" title="Symmetric power" label="Symmetric power"/>
<link wikidata="Q728415" start="28352" end="28356" title="OEIS" label="OEIS"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28902" wikidata="Q225866" url="?curid=28902" title="SMS (disambiguation)">
<text>[[SMS ]] is short message service, a form of text-messaging communication based on phones.

SMS may also refer to:
==Science and technology==
* Smith–Magenis syndrome, a genetic developmental disorder
* SMS (gene), which encodes the spermine synthase enzyme
* Serotonin modulator and stimulator, a type of drug
* Synchronous Meteorological Satellite, a NASA program
* Simultaneous multiple surface, in non-imaging optics
* Stiff-person syndrome (SPS), also known as stiff-man syndrome (SMS)

===Computing===
* Sega Master System, video game console
*Sudden Motion Sensor, on Apple notebook computers
* Spectral modeling synthesis, an acoustic modeling approach
* Super Mario Sunshine, video game

====Hardware====
* Standard Modular System, a packaging standard for IBM second generation (discrete transistor) computers prior to the S/360.

====Software====
* SMS (hydrology software), surface-water modeling software
* Supervisor Monitoring Scheduler, a Unix/Linux job scheduler
* Systems Management Server, later System Center Configuration Manager, by Microsoft
* Data Facility Storage Management Subsystem (MVS), central component of z/OS, optional in some older forms of MVS
* Data Facility Storage Management Subsystem (MVS)#System Managed Storage, a facility in DFSMS/MVS

==Arts and entertainment==
*SMS (band), a Ukrainian pop band
* SMS (illustrator), British comic book illustrator
* &quot;SMS&quot; (&quot;Bangerz&quot;), a song from the Miley Cyrus album &quot;Bangerz&quot;
* S.M.S. portfolios, artists&#x27; portfolios
* Shorty McShorts, the host of &quot;Shorty McShorts&#x27; Shorts&quot;
* S. M. Subbaiah Naidu, an Indian music director
* &quot;:SMS: Sin Miedo a Soñar&quot;, Spanish television series

===Film===
* &quot;Stop Making Sense&quot;, a 1984 concert film by Talking Heads
* &quot;Siva Manasula Sakthi&quot;, a 2009 Tamil film
* &quot;Siva Manasulo Sruthi&quot;, a 2012 Telugu film
* &quot;SMS&quot; (2008 film), a Malayalam-language Indian film

==Organizations==
* Party of Modern Serbia (&quot;Stranka moderne Srbije&quot;), a political party in Serbia
* Youth Party of Slovenia (&quot;Stranka mladih Slovenije&quot;), a Slovenian political party
* Scientific Micro Systems, producer of the SMS300 microcontroller
* SMS Audio, a US headphone manufacturer
* Santa Monica Studio, an American video game developer
* Marine Service Squadron
* The Swedish Mathematical Society

===Education===
* Special Music School, New York City, US
* Saint Mary&#x27;s School (Raleigh, North Carolina), US
* Shawnee Mission South High School, in the Shawnee Mission School District, Kansas

==Transportation==
* Safety management system, in the workplace
* Sainte Marie Airport (IATA code), Madagascar
* &quot;Seiner Majestät Schiff&quot; (His Majesty&#x27;s Ship), ship prefix in the &quot;Kaiserliche Marine&quot; and &quot;K.u.K. Kriegsmarine&quot;
* Scheduled Maintenance System, of New York City Subway rolling stock

==Other uses==
* Sawai Mansingh Stadium, a cricket stadium in India
* Skolt Sami language (ISO 639 alpha-3 language code)
* SMS, nonwoven fabrics with spun and melted layers

==See also==
* SM (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q225866" start="0" end="8" title="SMS (disambiguation)" label="[[SMS ]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q225866" start="92" end="95" title="SMS (disambiguation)" label="SMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295338" start="144" end="166" title="Smith–Magenis syndrome" label="Smith–Magenis syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q18031610" start="203" end="213" title="SMS (gene)" label="SMS (gene)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18357104" start="260" end="294" title="Serotonin modulator and stimulator" label="Serotonin modulator and stimulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7662207" start="313" end="349" title="Synchronous Meteorological Satellite" label="Synchronous Meteorological Satellite"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="402" end="420" title="Nonimaging optics#Simultaneous multiple surface (SMS) design method" label="non-imaging optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235785" start="466" end="484" title="stiff-man syndrome" label="stiff-man syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q209868" start="510" end="528" title="Master System" label="Sega Master System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326361" start="550" end="570" title="Sudden Motion Sensor" label="Sudden Motion Sensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587601" start="602" end="629" title="Spectral modeling synthesis" label="Spectral modeling synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q639955" start="663" end="683" title="Super Mario Sunshine" label="Super Mario Sunshine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16928064" start="716" end="739" title="Standard Modular System" label="Standard Modular System"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391304" start="860" end="884" title="SMS (hydrology software)" label="SMS (hydrology software)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644320" start="920" end="951" title="Supervisor Monitoring Scheduler" label="Supervisor Monitoring Scheduler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061082" start="982" end="1007" title="Systems Management Server" label="Systems Management Server"/>
<link wikidata="Q108085342" start="1067" end="1115" title="Data Facility Storage Management Subsystem (MVS)" label="Data Facility Storage Management Subsystem (MVS)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1182" end="1253" title="Data Facility Storage Management Subsystem (MVS)#System Managed Storage" label="Data Facility Storage Management Subsystem (MVS)#System Managed Storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391302" start="1308" end="1318" title="SMS (band)" label="SMS (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391305" start="1343" end="1360" title="SMS (illustrator)" label="SMS (illustrator)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549385" start="1395" end="1432" title="SMS (Bangerz)" label="&amp;quot;SMS&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Bangerz&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25110374" start="1490" end="1507" title="S.M.S. portfolios" label="S.M.S. portfolios"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502304" start="1571" end="1599" title="Shorty McShorts&amp;#x27; Shorts" label="Shorty McShorts&amp;#x27; Shorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7387668" start="1608" end="1628" title="S. M. Subbaiah Naidu" label="S. M. Subbaiah Naidu"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1663" end="1686" title=":SMS: Sin Miedo a Soñar" label=":SMS: Sin Miedo a Soñar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351784" start="1740" end="1757" title="Stop Making Sense" label="Stop Making Sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q7532272" start="1810" end="1830" title="Siva Manasula Sakthi" label="Siva Manasula Sakthi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7499243" start="1864" end="1884" title="Siva Manasulo Sruthi" label="Siva Manasulo Sruthi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16254344" start="1913" end="1940" title="SMS (2008 film)" label="&amp;quot;SMS&amp;quot; (2008 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q60768911" start="1996" end="2018" title="Party of Modern Serbia" label="Party of Modern Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1590807" start="2087" end="2110" title="Youth Party of Slovenia" label="Youth Party of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5653080" start="2181" end="2205" title="Scientific Micro Systems" label="Scientific Micro Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391308" start="2248" end="2257" title="SMS Audio" label="SMS Audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q656710" start="2289" end="2308" title="Santa Monica Studio" label="Santa Monica Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934079" start="2345" end="2368" title="Marine Service Squadron" label="Marine Service Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558219" start="2375" end="2403" title="Swedish Mathematical Society" label="Swedish Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q14707317" start="2423" end="2443" title="Special Music School" label="Special Music School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7401843" start="2465" end="2515" title="Saint Mary&amp;#x27;s School (Raleigh, North Carolina)" label="Saint Mary&amp;#x27;s School (Raleigh, North Carolina)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7491551" start="2522" end="2555" title="Shawnee Mission South High School" label="Shawnee Mission South High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457629" start="2626" end="2650" title="Safety management system" label="Safety management system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2058359" start="2671" end="2691" title="Sainte Marie Airport" label="Sainte Marie Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q757297" start="2724" end="2746" title="Seiner Majestät Schiff" label="Seiner Majestät Schiff"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2901" end="2935" title="New York City Subway rolling stock#General Overhaul Program" label="New York City Subway rolling stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428548" start="2954" end="2976" title="Sawai Mansingh Stadium" label="Sawai Mansingh Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q13271" start="3007" end="3026" title="Skolt Sami language" label="Skolt Sami language"/>
<link wikidata="Q638703" start="3066" end="3081" title="nonwoven fabric" label="nonwoven fabric"/>
<link wikidata="Q224469" start="3127" end="3146" title="SM (disambiguation)" label="SM (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28903" wikidata="Q92766956" url="?curid=28903" title="SMPP">
<text>SMPP may refer to:

* Short Message Peer-to-Peer, a telecommunications protocol
* Stupino Machine Production Plant, a company based in Stupino, Russia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1886728" start="22" end="48" title="Short Message Peer-to-Peer" label="Short Message Peer-to-Peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16702724" start="82" end="114" title="Stupino Machine Production Plant" label="Stupino Machine Production Plant"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28904" wikidata="Q1886728" url="?curid=28904" title="Short Message Peer-to-Peer">
<text>Short Message Peer-to-Peer (SMPP) in the telecommunications industry is an open, industry standard protocol designed to provide a flexible data communication interface for the transfer of short message data between External Short Messaging Entities (ESMEs), Routing Entities (REs) and SMSC.

SMPP is often used to allow third parties (e.g. value-added service providers like news organizations) to submit messages, often in bulk, but it may be used for SMS peering as well. SMPP is able to carry short messages including EMS, voicemail notifications, Cell Broadcasts, WAP messages including WAP Push messages (used to deliver MMS notifications), USSD messages and others. Because of its versatility and support for non-GSM SMS protocols, like UMTS, IS-95 (CDMA), CDMA2000, ANSI-136 (TDMA) and iDEN, SMPP is the most commonly used protocol for short message exchange outside SS7 networks.

==History==
SMPP (Short Message Peer-to-Peer) was originally designed by Aldiscon, a small Irish company that was later acquired by Logica (since 2016, after a number of changes Mavenir). The protocol was originally created by a developer, Ian J Chambers, to test the functionality of the SMSC without using SS7 test equipment to submit messages.

In 1995 the ETSI included the SMPP protocol into the technical report TR 03.39.

In 1999 Logica formally handed over SMPP to the SMPP Developers Forum, later renamed as The SMS Forum.

The SMS Forum disbanded in 2007, with this announcement: &quot;The SMS Forum, a non-profit organization with a mission to develop, foster and promote SMS (short message service) to the benefit of the global wireless industry will disband by July 27, 2007.&quot; As part of the original handover terms, SMPP ownership returned to Mavenir.

==Operation==

SMPP uses the client–server model of operation, despite &quot;peer-to-peer&quot; in the name. The Short Message Service Center (SMSC) usually acts as a server, awaiting connections from ESMEs. When SMPP is used for SMS peering, the sending MC usually acts as a client.

The protocol is based on pairs of request/response PDUs (protocol data units, or packets) exchanged over OSI layer 4 (TCP session or X.25 SVC3) connections. The well-known port assigned by the IANA for SMPP when operating over TCP is 2775, but multiple arbitrary port numbers are often used in messaging environments.

Before exchanging any messages, a bind command must be sent and acknowledged. The bind command determines in which direction will be possible to send messages; bind_transmitter only allows client to submit messages to the server, bind_receiver means that the client will only receive the messages, and bind_transceiver (introduced in SMPP 3.4) allows message transfer in both directions. In the bind command the ESME identifies itself using system_id, system_type and password; the address_range field designed to contain ESME address is usually left empty. The bind command contains interface_version parameter to specify which version of SMPP protocol will be used.

Message exchange may be synchronous, where each peer waits for a response for each PDU being sent, or asynchronous, where multiple requests can be issued without waiting and acknowledged in a skew order by the other peer; the number of unacknowledged requests is called a &quot;window&quot;; for the best performance both communicating sides must be configured with the same window size.

===Versions===

The SMPP standard has evolved during the time. The most commonly used versions of SMPP are:

* SMPP 3.3 the oldest used version (despite its limitations, it is still widely used); supports GSM only. Generates an immediate response for each message sent.
* SMPP 3.4 adds optional tag–length–value (TLV) parameters, support of non-GSM SMS technologies and the transceiver support (single connections that can send and receive messages). The exchange of SMPP request and response PDUs between an ESME Transmitter and SMSC may occur synchronously or asynchronously.
* SMPP 5.0 is the latest version of SMPP; adds support for cell broadcasting, smart flow control. , it is not widely used.

The applicable version is passed in the interface_version parameter of a bind command.

==PDU format (after version 3.4)==

The SMPP PDUs are binary encoded for efficiency. They start with a header which may be followed by a body:

===PDU header===

Each PDU starts with a header. The header consists of 4 fields, each of length of 4 octets:

;codice_1: Is the overall length of the PDU in octets (including command_length field itself); must be ≥ 16 as each PDU must contain the 16 octet header
;codice_2: Identifies the SMPP operation (or command). If the most significant bit is cleared, this is a request operation. Otherwise it is a response.
;codice_3: Always has a value of 0 in requests; in responses it carries information about the result of the operation
;codice_4: Is used to correlate requests and responses within an SMPP session; allows asynchronous communication (using a sliding window method)

All numeric fields in SMPP use the big endian order, which means that the first octet is the Most Significant Byte (MSB).

==Example==
This is an example of the binary encoding of a 60-octet &quot;submit_sm&quot; PDU. The data is shown in Hex octet values as a single dump and followed by a header and body break-down of that PDU.

This is best compared with the definition of the submit_sm PDU from the SMPP specification in order to understand how the encoding matches the field by field definition.

The value break-downs are shown with decimal in parentheses and Hex values after that. Where you see one or several hex octets appended, this is because the given field size uses 1 or more octets encoding.

Again, reading the definition of the submit_sm PDU from the spec will make all this clearer.

===PDU header===
 &#x27;command_length&#x27;, (60) ... 00 00 00 3C
 &#x27;command_id&#x27;, (4) ... 00 00 00 04
 &#x27;command_status&#x27;, (0) ... 00 00 00 00
 &#x27;sequence_number&#x27;, (5) ... 00 00 00 05

===PDU body===
 &#x27;service_type&#x27;, () ... 00
 &#x27;source_addr_ton&#x27;, (2) ... 02
 &#x27;source_addr_npi&#x27;, (8) ... 08
 &#x27;source_addr&#x27;, (555) ... 35 35 35 00
 &#x27;dest_addr_ton&#x27;, (1) ... 01
 &#x27;dest_addr_npi&#x27;, (1) ... 01
 &#x27;dest_addr&#x27;, (555555555) ... 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 00
 &#x27;esm_class&#x27;, (0) ... 00
 &#x27;protocol_id&#x27;, (0) ... 00
 &#x27;priority_flag&#x27;, (0) ... 00
 &#x27;schedule_delivery_time&#x27;, (0) ... 00
 &#x27;validity_period&#x27;, (0) ... 00
 &#x27;registered_delivery&#x27;, (0) ... 00
 &#x27;replace_if_present_flag&#x27;, (0) ... 00
 &#x27;data_coding&#x27;, (3) ... 03
 &#x27;sm_default_msg_id&#x27;, (0) ... 00
 &#x27;sm_length&#x27;, (15) ... 0F
 &#x27;short_message&#x27;, (Hello Wikipedia) ... 48 65 6C 6C 6F 20 57 69 6B 69 70 65 64 69 61

Note that the text in the short_message field must match the data_coding. When the data_coding is 8 (UCS2), the text must be in UCS-2BE (or its extension, UTF-16BE). When the data_coding indicates a 7-bit encoding, each septet is stored in a separate octet in the short_message field (with the most significant bit set to 0). SMPP 3.3 data_coding exactly copied TP-DCS values of GSM 03.38, which make it suitable only for GSM 7-bit default alphabet, UCS2 or binary messages; SMPP 3.4 introduced a new list of data_coding values:

The meaning of the codice_5 or codice_6 is the same as in SMPP 3.3. Other values in the range 1-15 are reserved in SMPP 3.3. Unfortunately, unlike SMPP 3.3, where data_coding=0 was unambiguously GSM 7-bit default alphabet, for SMPP 3.4 and higher the GSM 7-bit default alphabet is missing in this list, and codice_7 may differ for various Short message service centers—it may be ISO-8859-1, ASCII, GSM 7-bit default alphabet, UTF-8 or even configurable per ESME. When using codice_7, both sides (ESME and SMSC) must be sure they consider it the same encoding. Otherwise it is better not to use codice_7. It may be tricky to use the GSM 7-bit default alphabet, some Short message service centers requires codice_7, others e.g. codice_11.

== Quirks ==

Despite its wide acceptance, the SMPP has a number of problematic features:

* No codice_12 for GSM 7-bit default alphabet
* Not standardized meaning of codice_7
* Unclear support for Shift-JIS encoding
* Incompatibility of codice_14 between SMPP versions
* Using of SMPP 3.3 SMSC Delivery Receipts, especially the Message Id format in them

=== No data_coding for GSM 7-bit default alphabet ===

Although data_coding value in SMPP 3.3 are based on the GSM 03.38, since SMPP 3.4 there is no data_coding value for GSM 7-bit alphabet (GSM 03.38). However, it is common for DCS=0 to indicate the GSM 7-bit alphabet, particularly for SMPP connections to SMSCs on GSM mobile networks. It is further ambiguous whether the 7-bit alphabet is packed, as in GSM, allowing sending 160 characters in 140 octets, or whether the each 7-bit character takes up an entire octet (with the high bit set to zero, as with ASCII).

=== Not standardized meaning of data_coding=0 ===

According to SMPP 3.4 and 5.0 the codice_7 means ″SMSC Default Alphabet″. Which encoding it really is, depends on the type of the SMSC and its configuration.

=== Unclear support for Shift-JIS encoding ===

One of the encodings in CDMA standard C.R1001 is Shift-JIS used for Japanese. SMPP 3.4 and 5.0 specifies three encodings for Japanese (JIS, ISO-2022-JP and Extended Kanji JIS), but none of them is identical with CDMA MSG_ENCODING 00101. It seems that the Pictogram encoding (data_coding=9) is used to carry the messages in Shift-JIS in SMPP.

=== Incompatibility of submit_sm_resp between SMPP versions ===

When a submit_sm fails, the SMSC returns a codice_14 with non-zero value of command_status and ″empty″ message_id.

* SMPP 3.3 explicitly states about the codice_17 ″If absent this field must contain a single NULL byte″. The length of the PDU is at least 17 octets.
* SMPP 3.4 contains an unfortunate note in the codice_18 section ″The codice_14 PDU Body is not returned if the codice_3 field contains a non-zero value.″ Then the length of the PDU is 16 octets.
* SMPP 5.0 just specifies that codice_21 is a mandatory parameter of the type C-Octet string of the codice_14 message. According to the section 3.1.1 NULL Settings, ″A NULL string ″″ is encoded as 0x00″. The length of the PDU is at least 17 octets.

For the best compatibility, any SMPP implementation should accept both variants of negative codice_14 regardless of the version of SMPP standard used for the communication.

=== Message ID in SMPP 3.3 SMSC Delivery Receipts ===

The only way to pass delivery receipts in SMPP 3.3 is to put information in a text form to the codice_24 field; however, the format of the text is described in Appendix B of SMPP 3.4, although SMPP 3.4 may (and should) use codice_25 and codice_26 TLVs for the purpose. While SMPP 3.3 states that Message ID is a C-Octet String (Hex) of up to 8 characters (plus terminating &#x27;\0&#x27;), the SMPP 3.4 specification states that the id field in the Delivery Receipt Format is a C-Octet String (Decimal) of up to 10 characters. This splits SMPP implementations to 2 groups:

* Implementations using the decimal representation of an integer Message Id in the id field of the Delivery Receipt body and the hexadecimal representation of an integer Message Id in codice_21 and codice_25 fields
* Implementations using the same hexadecimal number (or even the same arbitrary string) both in codice_21 parameter and in the id field of the Delivery Receipt body

The SMPP 3.4 specification does however state that the delivery receipt format is SMSC vendor specific, and therefore the format included in the specification is merely one possibility. As noted above, when using SMPP 3.4 codice_25 and codice_26 TLVs should be used to convey the outcome of a message.

== Extensibility, compatibility and interoperability ==

Since introduction of TLV parameters in version 3.4, the SMPP may be regarded an extensible protocol. In order to achieve the highest possible degree of compatibility and interoperability any implementation should apply the Internet robustness principle: ″Be conservative in what you send, be liberal in what you accept″. It should use a minimal set of features which are necessary to accomplish a task. And if the goal is communication and not quibbling, each implementation should overcome minor nonconformities with standard:

* Respond with a codice_32 with codice_33 to any unrecognised SMPP command, but do not stop the communication.
* Ignore any unrecognised, unexpected or unsupported TLV parameters.
* The borders of PDUs are always given by the PDUs&#x27; codice_1 field. Any message field must not exceed the end of PDU. If a field is not properly finished, it should be treated as truncated at the end of PDU, and it should not affect further PDUs.

Information applicable to one version of SMPP can often be found in another version of SMPP, for example with the case of SMPP 3.4 describing the only mechanism of delivery receipts in SMPP 3.3 described above.

== Security ==
The SMPP protocol is designed on a clear-text binary protocol which needs to be considered if using for potentially sensitive information such as one-time passwords via SMS. There are, however, implementations of SMPP over SSL/TLS if required.

==See also==
* Universal Computer Protocol/External Machine Interface (UCP/EMI)
* Computer Interface for Message Distribution (CIMD)
* Rich Communication Services

==References==
==External links==
*Short Message Peer-to-Peer Protocol Specification v3.3
*Short Message Peer-to-Peer Protocol Specification v3.4
*Short Message Peer-to-Peer Protocol Specification v5.0
*SMPP v3.4 Protocol Implementation guide for GSM / UMTS
*SMPP v3.4 Implementation Guide for WAP
*SMPP implemented in Java
*SMPP Wireshark</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1886728" start="0" end="26" title="Short Message Peer-to-Peer" label="Short Message Peer-to-Peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886728" start="28" end="32" title="Short Message Peer-to-Peer" label="SMPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q43024" start="188" end="201" title="short message service" label="short message"/>
<link wikidata="Q5324178" start="215" end="248" title="External Short Messaging Entity" label="External Short Messaging Entities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067024" start="285" end="289" title="Short Message service center" label="SMSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q349044" start="340" end="368" title="value-added service provider" label="value-added service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q43024" start="496" end="510" title="Short Message Service" label="short messages"/>
<link wikidata="Q954282" start="521" end="524" title="Enhanced Messaging Service" label="EMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734312" start="526" end="535" title="voicemail" label="voicemail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052989" start="551" end="565" title="Cell Broadcast" label="Cell Broadcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q186224" start="568" end="571" title="Wireless Application Protocol" label="WAP"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="591" end="599" title="Wireless Application Protocol#WAP Push" label="WAP Push"/>
<link wikidata="Q189443" start="626" end="629" title="Multimedia Message Service" label="MMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569935" start="646" end="650" title="Unstructured Supplementary Service Data" label="USSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="719" end="722" title="GSM" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q79686" start="743" end="747" title="UMTS" label="UMTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375972" start="749" end="754" title="IS-95" label="IS-95"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023122" start="763" end="771" title="CDMA2000" label="CDMA2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q887303" start="773" end="781" title="IS-136" label="ANSI-136"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531090" start="793" end="797" title="iDEN" label="iDEN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139465" start="874" end="877" title="Signalling System No. 7" label="SS7"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713852" start="962" end="970" title="Aldiscon" label="Aldiscon"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="980" end="985" title="Ireland" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q691207" start="1021" end="1027" title="Logica" label="Logica"/>
<link wikidata="Q54437388" start="1067" end="1074" title="Mavenir" label="Mavenir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067024" start="1178" end="1182" title="short message service center" label="SMSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q899383" start="1249" end="1253" title="ETSI" label="ETSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q146813" start="1790" end="1809" title="client–server model" label="client–server model"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067024" start="1874" end="1909" title="short message service center" label="Short Message Service Center (SMSC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634565" start="2103" end="2121" title="protocol data unit" label="protocol data unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q93312" start="2151" end="2154" title="Open Systems Interconnection" label="OSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q8803" start="2164" end="2167" title="Transmission Control Protocol" label="TCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q622993" start="2179" end="2183" title="X.25" label="X.25"/>
<link wikidata="Q756750" start="2207" end="2222" title="well-known port" label="well-known port"/>
<link wikidata="Q242540" start="2239" end="2243" title="Internet Assigned Numbers Authority" label="IANA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8803" start="2273" end="2276" title="Transmission Control Protocol" label="TCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="3628" end="3631" title="GSM" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544297" start="3718" end="3734" title="tag–length–value" label="tag–length–value"/>
<link wikidata="Q954187" start="3797" end="3808" title="transceiver" label="transceiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q132364" start="4267" end="4281" title="Binary protocol" label="binary encoded"/>
<link wikidata="Q592860" start="5013" end="5027" title="Sliding window protocol" label="sliding window"/>
<link wikidata="Q339338" start="5072" end="5082" title="big endian" label="big endian"/>
<link wikidata="Q851872" start="5280" end="5285" title="Octet (computing)" label="octet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390458" start="6165" end="6168" title="Numbering plan" label="npi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390458" start="6291" end="6294" title="Numbering plan" label="npi"/>
<link wikidata="Q740701" start="7044" end="7052" title="UTF-16" label="UTF-16BE"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739638" start="7268" end="7277" title="Data Coding Scheme" label="GSM 03.38"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067024" start="7758" end="7786" title="Short message service center" label="Short message service center"/>
<link wikidata="Q935289" start="7798" end="7808" title="ISO-8859-1" label="ISO-8859-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="7810" end="7815" title="ASCII" label="ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q193537" start="7845" end="7850" title="UTF-8" label="UTF-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067024" start="8084" end="8112" title="Short message service center" label="Short message service center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441241" start="8624" end="8633" title="GSM 03.38" label="GSM 03.38"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441241" start="8704" end="8713" title="GSM 03.38" label="GSM 03.38"/>
<link wikidata="Q286345" start="9388" end="9397" title="Shift-JIS" label="Shift-JIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115054" start="12084" end="12094" title="Extensibility" label="extensible"/>
<link wikidata="Q749647" start="12174" end="12190" title="interoperability" label="interoperability"/>
<link wikidata="Q633480" start="12236" end="12256" title="robustness principle" label="robustness principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495531" start="13453" end="13517" title="EMI (protocol)" label="Universal Computer Protocol/External Machine Interface (UCP/EMI)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011746" start="13520" end="13570" title="CIMD" label="Computer Interface for Message Distribution (CIMD)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710059" start="13573" end="13600" title="Rich Communication Services" label="Rich Communication Services"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28908" wikidata="Q188509" url="?curid=28908" title="Suburb">
<text>A suburb (more broadly suburban area) is an area within a metropolitan area which is predominantly residential and within commuting distance of a large city. Suburbs can have their own political or legal jurisdictions, especially in the United States, but this is not always the case, especially in the United Kingdom, where most suburbs are located within the administrative boundaries of cities. In most English-speaking countries, suburban areas are defined in contrast to central city or inner city areas, but in Australian English and South African English, &quot;suburb&quot; has become largely synonymous with what is called a &quot;neighborhood&quot; in the U.S. Due in part to historical trends such as white flight, some suburbs in the United States have a higher population and higher incomes than their nearby inner cities.

In some countries, including India, China, New Zealand, Canada, the United Kingdom, and parts of the United States, new suburbs are routinely annexed by adjacent cities due to urban sprawl. In others, such as Morocco, France, and much of the United States, many suburbs remain separate municipalities or are governed locally as part of a larger metropolitan area such as a county, district or borough. In the United States, regions beyond the suburbs are known as &quot;exurban areas&quot; or exurbs; exurbs have less population density than suburbs, but still more than rural areas. Suburbs and exurbs are sometimes linked to the nearby city economically, particularly by commuters.

Suburbs first emerged on a large scale in the 19th and 20th centuries, as a result of improved rail and road transport, which led to an increase in commuting. In general, they are less densely populated than inner city neighborhoods within the same metropolitan area, and most residents routinely commute to city centers or business districts via private vehicles or public transit; however, there are many exceptions, including industrial suburbs, planned communities, and satellite cities. Suburbs tend to proliferate around cities that have an abundance of adjacent flat land.

==Etymology and usage==
The English word is derived from the Old French , which is in turn derived from the Latin , formed from (meaning &quot;under&quot; or &quot;below&quot;) and (&quot;city&quot;). The first recorded use of the term in English according to the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; appears in Middle English in the manuscript of the Midlands Prose Psalter, in which the form is used.

===Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa===

In Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa, suburban areas (in the wider sense noted in the lead paragraph) have become formalized as geographic subdivisions of a city and are used by postal services in addressing. In rural areas in both countries, their equivalents are called localities (see suburbs and localities). The terms &quot;inner suburb&quot; and &quot;outer suburb&quot; are used to differentiate between the higher-density areas in proximity to the city center (which would not be referred to as &#x27;suburbs&#x27; in most other countries), and the lower-density suburbs on the outskirts of the urban area. The term &#x27;middle suburbs&#x27; is also used. Inner suburbs, such as Te Aro in Wellington, Eden Terrace in Auckland, Prahran in Melbourne and Ultimo in Sydney, are usually characterized by higher density apartment housing and greater integration between commercial and residential areas.

===North America===
In the United States and Canada, &quot;suburb&quot; can refer either to an outlying residential area of a city or town or to a separate municipality or unincorporated area outside a town or city.

Although a majority of Americans regard themselves as residents of suburban communities, the federal government of the United States has no formal definition for what constitutes a &quot;suburb&quot; in the United States, leaving its precise meaning disputed.

In Canada, the term may also be used in the British sense, especially as cities annex formerly outlying areas.

===United Kingdom and Ireland===

In the United Kingdom and Ireland, the term &quot;suburb&quot; simply refers to a residential area outside the city centre, regardless of administrative boundaries. Suburbs, in this sense, can range from areas that seem more like residential areas of a city proper to areas separated by open countryside from the city centre. In large cities such as London and Leeds, many suburbs are formerly separate towns and villages that have been absorbed during a city&#x27;s expansion, such as Ealing, Bromley, and Guiseley. In Ireland, this can be seen in the Dublin suburban areas of Swords, Blanchardstown, and Tallaght.

== History ==

The history of suburbia is part of the study of urban history, which focuses on the origins, growth, diverse typologies, culture, and politics of suburbs, as well as on the gendered and family-oriented nature of suburban space. Many people have assumed that early-20th-century suburbs were enclaves for middle-class whites, a concept that carries tremendous cultural influence yet is actually stereotypical. Some suburbs are based on a society of working-class and minority residents, many of whom want to own their own house. Meanwhile, other suburbs instituted &quot;explicitly racist&quot; policies to deter people deemed as &quot;other&quot;, a practice most common in the United States in contrast to other countries around the world. Mary Corbin Sies argues that it is necessary to examine how &quot;suburb&quot; is defined as well as the distinction made between cities and suburbs, geography, economic circumstances, and the interaction of numerous factors that move research beyond acceptance of stereotyping and its influence on scholarly assumptions.

===Early history===
The earliest appearance of suburbs coincided with the spread of the first urban settlements. Large walled towns tended to be the focus around which smaller villages grew up in a symbiotic relationship with the market town. The word &quot;suburbani&quot; was first employed by the Roman statesman Cicero in reference to the large villas and estates built by the wealthy patricians of Rome on the city&#x27;s outskirts.

Towards the end of the Eastern Han Dynasty, until 190 AD, when Dong Zhuo razed the city, the capital Luoyang was mainly occupied by the emperor and important officials; the city&#x27;s people mostly lived in small cities right outside Luoyang, which were suburbs in all but name.

As populations grew during the Early Modern Period in Europe, towns swelled with a steady influx of people from the countryside. In some places, nearby settlements were swallowed up as the main city expanded. The peripheral areas on the outskirts of the city were generally inhabited by the very poorest.

===Origins of the modern suburb===
Due to the rapid migration of the rural poor to the industrializing cities of England in the late 18th century, a trend in the opposite direction began to develop, whereby newly rich members of the middle classes began to purchase estates and villas on the outskirts of London. This trend accelerated through the 19th century, especially in cities like London and Birmingham that were growing rapidly, and the first suburban districts sprung up around downtowns to accommodate those who wanted to escape the squalid conditions of the industrial towns. Initially, such growth came along rail lines in the form of ribbon developments, as suburban residents could commute via train to downtown for work. In Australia, where Melbourne would soon become the second-largest city in the British Empire,
the distinctively Australasian suburb, with its loosely aggregated quarter-acre sections, developed in the 1850s and eventually became a component of the Australian Dream.
Toward the end of the century, with the development of public transit systems such as the underground railways, trams and buses, it became possible for the majority of a city&#x27;s population to reside outside the city and to commute into the center for work.

By the mid-19th century, the first major suburban areas were springing up around London as the city (then the largest in the world) became more overcrowded and unsanitary. A major catalyst for suburban growth was the opening of the Metropolitan Railway in the 1860s. The line later joined the capital&#x27;s financial heart in the City to what were to become the suburbs of Middlesex. The line reached Harrow in 1880.

Unlike other railway companies, which were required to dispose of surplus land, London&#x27;s Met was allowed to retain such land that it believed was necessary for future railway use. Initially, the surplus land was managed by the Land Committee, and, from the 1880s, the land was developed and sold to domestic buyers in places like Willesden Park Estate, Cecil Park, near Pinner and at Wembley Park.

In 1912 it was suggested that a specially formed company should take over from the Surplus Lands Committee and develop suburban estates near the railway. However, World War I (1914–1918) delayed these plans until 1919, when, with the expectation of a postwar housing-boom, Metropolitan Railway Country Estates Limited (MRCE) formed. MRCE went on to develop estates at Kingsbury Garden Village near Neasden, Wembley Park, Cecil Park and Grange Estate at Pinner and the Cedars Estate at Rickmansworth and to found places such as Harrow Garden Village.

The Met&#x27;s marketing department coined the term Metro-land in 1915 when the &quot;Guide to the Extension Line&quot; became the &quot;Metro-land&quot; guide, priced at 1d. This promoted the land served by the Met for the walker, visitor and later the house-hunter. Published annually until 1932 (the last full year of independence for the Met), the guide extolled the benefits of &quot;The good air of the Chilterns&quot;, using language such as &quot;Each lover of Metroland may well have his own favorite wood beech and coppice — all tremulous green loveliness in Spring and russet and gold in October&quot;. The dream as promoted involved a modern home in beautiful countryside with a fast railway-service to central London. By 1915 people from across London had flocked to live the new suburban dream in large newly built areas across north-west London.

===Interwar suburban expansion in England===

Suburbanization in the interwar period was heavily influenced by the garden city movement of Ebenezer Howard and the creation of the first garden suburbs at the turn of the 20th century. The first garden suburb was developed through the efforts of social reformer Henrietta Barnett and her husband; inspired by Ebenezer Howard and the model housing development movement (then exemplified by Letchworth garden city), as well as the desire to protect part of Hampstead Heath from development, they established trusts in 1904 which bought 243 acres of land along the newly opened Northern line extension to Golders Green and created the Hampstead Garden Suburb. The suburb attracted the talents of architects including Raymond Unwin and Sir Edwin Lutyens, and it ultimately grew to encompass over 800 acres.

During World War I, the Tudor Walters Committee was commissioned to make recommendations for the post war reconstruction and housebuilding. In part, this was a response to the shocking lack of fitness amongst many recruits during World War One, attributed to poor living conditions; a belief summed up in a housing poster of the period &quot;you cannot expect to get an A1 population out of C3 homes&quot; – referring to military fitness classifications of the period.

The committee&#x27;s report of 1917 was taken up by the government, which passed the Housing, Town Planning, &amp;c. Act 1919, also known as the Addison Act after Christopher Addison, the then Minister for Housing. The Act allowed for the building of large new housing estates in the suburbs after the First World War, and marked the start of a long 20th century tradition of state-owned housing, which would later evolve into council estates.

The Report also legislated on the required, minimum standards necessary for further suburban construction; this included regulation on the maximum housing density and their arrangement, and it even made recommendations on the ideal number of bedrooms and other rooms per house. Although the semi-detached house was first designed by the Shaws (a father and son architectural partnership) in the 19th century, it was during the suburban housing boom of the interwar period that the design first proliferated as a suburban icon, being preferred by middle-class home owners to the smaller terraced houses. The design of many of these houses, highly characteristic of the era, was heavily influenced by the Art Deco movement, taking influence from Tudor Revival, chalet style, and even ship design.

Within just a decade suburbs dramatically increased in size. Harrow Weald went from just 1,500 to over 10,000 while Pinner jumped from 3,000 to over 20,000. During the 1930s, over 4 million new suburban houses were built, the &#x27;suburban revolution&#x27; had made England the most heavily suburbanized country in the world, by a considerable margin.

===North America===

Boston and New York City spawned the first major suburbs. The streetcar lines in Boston and the rail lines in Manhattan made daily commutes possible. No metropolitan area in the world was as well served by railroad commuter lines at the turn of the twentieth century as New York, and it was the rail lines to Westchester from the Grand Central Terminal commuter hub that enabled its development. Westchester&#x27;s true importance in the history of American suburbanization derives from the upper-middle class development of villages including Scarsdale, New Rochelle and Rye serving thousands of businessmen and executives from Manhattan.

==== Postwar suburban expansion ====
The suburban population in North America exploded during the post-World War II economic expansion. Returning veterans wishing to start a settled life moved in masses to the suburbs. Levittown developed as a major prototype of mass-produced housing. Due to the influx of people in these suburban areas, the amount of shopping centers began to increase as suburban America took shape. These malls helped supply goods and services to the growing urban population. Shopping for different goods and services in one central location without having to travel to multiple locations, helped to keep shopping centers a component of these newly designed suburbs which were booming in population. The television helped contribute to the rise of shopping centers by allowing for additional advertisement through the medium in addition to creating a desire among consumers to buy products that are shown being used in suburban life on various television programs. Another factor that led to the rise of these shopping centers was the building of many highways. The Highway Act of 1956 helped to fund the building of 64,000 kilometers across the nation by having 26 billion dollars on hand, which helped to link many more to these shopping centers with ease. These newly built shopping centers, which were often large buildings full of multiple stores, and services, were being used for more than shopping, but as a place of leisure and a meeting point for those who lived within suburban America at this time. These centers thrived offering goods and services to the growing populations in suburban America. In 1957, 940 shopping centers were built and this number more than doubled by 1960 to keep up with the demand of these densely populated areas.

==== Housing ====
Very little housing had been built during the Great Depression and World War II, except for emergency quarters near war industries. Overcrowded and inadequate apartments was the common condition. Some suburbs had developed around large cities where there was rail transportation to the jobs downtown. However, the real growth in suburbia depended on the availability of automobiles, highways, and inexpensive housing. The population had grown, and the stock of family savings had accumulated the money for down payments, automobiles and appliances. The product was a great housing boom. Whereas an average of 316,000 new non-farm housing units were constructed from the 1930s through 1945, there were 1,450,000 constructed annually from 1946 through 1955. The G.I. Bill guaranteed low-cost loans for veterans, with very low down payments, and low interest rates. 

With 16 million eligible veterans, the opportunity to buy a house was suddenly at hand. In 1947 alone, 540,000 veterans bought one; their average price was $7300. The construction industry kept prices low by standardization—for example, standardizing sizes for kitchen cabinets, refrigerators and stoves allowed for mass production of kitchen furnishings. Developers purchased empty land just outside the city, installed tract houses based on a handful of designs, and provided streets and utilities, while local public officials raced to build schools. The most famous development was Levittown, in Long Island just east of New York City. It offered a new house for $1000 down and $70 a month; it featured three bedrooms, a fireplace, a gas range and gas furnace, and a landscaped lot of 75 by 100 feet, all for a total price of $10,000. Veterans could get one with a much lower down payment.

At the same time, African Americans were rapidly moving north and west for better jobs and educational opportunities than were available to them in the segregated South. Their arrival in Northern and Western cities en masse, in addition to being followed by race riots in several large cities such as Philadelphia, Los Angeles, Detroit, Chicago, and Washington, D.C., further stimulated white suburban migration. The growth of the suburbs was facilitated by the development of zoning laws, redlining and numerous innovations in transport. Redlining and other discriminatory measures built into federal housing policy furthered the racial segregation of postwar America–for example, by refusing to insure mortgages in and near African-American neighborhoods. The government&#x27;s efforts were primarily designed to provide housing to White middle-class and lower-middle-class families. African Americans and other people of color largely remained concentrated within decaying cores of urban poverty creating a phenomenon known as white flight.

After World War II, the availability of FHA loans stimulated a housing boom in American suburbs. In the older cities of the northeast U.S., streetcar suburbs originally developed along train or trolley lines that could shuttle workers into and out of city centers where the jobs were located. This practice gave rise to the term &quot;bedroom community&quot;, meaning that most daytime business activity took place in the city, with the working population leaving the city at night for the purpose of going home to sleep.

Economic growth in the United States encouraged the suburbanization of American cities that required massive investments for the new infrastructure and homes. Consumer patterns were also shifting at this time, as purchasing power was becoming stronger and more accessible to a wider range of families. Suburban houses also brought about needs for products that were not needed in urban neighborhoods, such as lawnmowers and automobiles. During this time commercial shopping malls were being developed near suburbs to satisfy consumers&#x27; needs and their car–dependent lifestyle.

Zoning laws also contributed to the location of residential areas outside of the city center by creating wide areas or &quot;zones&quot; where only residential buildings were permitted. These suburban residences are built on larger lots of land than in the central city. For example, the lot size for a residence in Chicago is usually deep, while the width can vary from wide for a row house to wide for a large stand–alone house. In the suburbs, where stand–alone houses are the rule, lots may be wide by deep, as in the Chicago suburb of Naperville. Manufacturing and commercial buildings were segregated in other areas of the city.

Alongside suburbanization, many companies began locating their offices and other facilities in the outer areas of the cities, which resulted in the increased density of older suburbs and the growth of lower density suburbs even further from city centers. An alternative strategy is the deliberate design of &quot;new towns&quot; and the protection of green belts around cities. Some social reformers attempted to combine the best of both concepts in the garden city movement.

In the U.S., 1950 was the first year that more people lived in suburbs than elsewhere. In the U.S., the development of the skyscraper and the sharp inflation of downtown real estate prices also led to downtowns being more fully dedicated to businesses, thus pushing residents outside the city center.

== Worldwide ==

While suburbs are often associated with the middle classes, in many parts of the developed world, suburbs can be economically distressed areas, inhabited by higher proportions of recent immigrants, with higher delinquency rates and social problems, reminiscent of the inner cities of the U.S. Examples include the &quot;banlieues&quot; of France, or the concrete suburbs of Sweden, even if the suburbs of these countries also include middle-class and upper-class neighborhoods that often consist of single-family houses.

=== Africa ===
Following the growth of the middle class due to African industrialization, the development of middle class suburbs has boomed since the beginning of the 1990s, particularly in cities such as Cairo, Nairobi, Johannesburg, and Lagos.

In an illustrative case of South Africa, RDP housing has been built. In much of Soweto, many houses are American in appearance, but are smaller, and often consist of a kitchen and living room, two or three bedrooms, and a bathroom. However, there are more affluent neighborhoods, more comparable to American suburbs, particularly east of the FNB (&quot;Soccer City&quot;) Stadium and south of the city in areas like Eikenhof, where the &quot;Eye of Africa&quot; planned community exists. This master-planned community is nearly indistinguishable from the most amenity-rich resort-style American suburbs in Florida, Arizona, and California, complete with a golf course, resort pool, equestrian facility, 24-hour staffed gates, gym, and BMX track, as well as several tennis, basketball, and volleyball courts.

In Cape Town, there is a distinct European style originating from European influence during the mid-1600s when the Dutch settled the Cape. Houses like these are called Cape Dutch Houses and can be found in the affluent suburbs of Constantia and Bishopscourt.

=== Australia ===

Large cities like Sydney and Melbourne had streetcar suburbs in the tram era. With the automobile, the Australian usage came about as outer areas were quickly surrounded in fast-growing cities, but retained the appellation &quot;suburb&quot;; the term was eventually applied to neighborhoods in the original core as well. In Australia, Sydney&#x27;s urban sprawl has occurred predominantly in the Western Suburbs. The locality of Olympic Park was designated an official suburb in 2009. 

===Bangladesh===
Bangladesh has multiple suburbs, Uttara &amp; Ashulia to name a few. However, most suburbs in Dhaka are different from the ones in Europe &amp; Americas. Most suburbs in Bangladesh are filled with high-rise buildings, paddy fields, and farms, and are designed more like rural villages.

=== Canada ===

Canada is an urbanized nation where over 80% of the population lives in urban areas (loosely defined), and roughly two-thirds live in one of Canada&#x27;s 33 census metropolitan areas (CMAs) with a population of over 100,000. However, of this metropolitan population, in 2001 nearly half lived in low-density neighborhoods, with only one in five living in a typical &quot;urban&quot; neighborhood. The percentage living in low-density neighborhoods varied from a high of nearly two-thirds of Calgary CMA residents (67%), to a low of about one-third of Montréal CMA residents (34%).

Large cities in Canada acquired streetcar suburbs in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Modern Canadian suburbs tend to be less automobile-centric than those in the United States, and public transit use is encouraged but can be notably unused. Throughout Canada, there are comprehensive plans in place to curb sprawl.

Population and income growth in Canadian suburbs had tended to outpace growth in core urban or rural areas, but in many areas, this trend has now reversed. The suburban population increased by 87% between 1981 and 2001, well ahead of urban growth. The majority of recent population growth in Canada&#x27;s three largest metropolitan areas (Greater Toronto, Greater Montréal, and Greater Vancouver) has occurred in non-core municipalities. This trend is also beginning to take effect in Vancouver, and to a lesser extent, Montréal. In certain cities, particularly Edmonton and Calgary, suburban growth takes place within the city boundaries as opposed to in bedroom communities. This is due to annexation and a large geographic footprint within the city borders.
Calgary is unusual among Canadian cities because it has developed as a unicity – it has annexed most of its surrounding towns and large amounts of undeveloped land around the city. As a result, most of the communities that Calgarians refer to as &quot;suburbs&quot; are actually inside the city limits. In the 2016 census, the City of Calgary had a population of 1,239,220, whereas the Calgary Metropolitan Area had a population of 1,392,609, indicating the vast majority of people in the Calgary CMA lived within the city limits. The perceived low population density of Calgary largely results from its many internal suburbs and the large amount of undeveloped land within the city. The city actually has a policy of densifying its new developments.

=== China ===

In China, the term suburb is new, although suburbs are already being constructed rapidly. Chinese suburbs mostly consist of rows upon rows of apartment blocks and condos that end abruptly into the countryside. Also new town developments are extremely common. Single family suburban homes tend to be similar to their Western equivalents; although primarily outside Beijing and Shanghai, also mimic Spanish and Italian architecture.

==== Hong Kong ====
In Hong Kong, however, suburbs are mostly government-planned new towns containing numerous public housing estates. However, other new towns also contain private housing estates and low density developments for the upper classes.

=== Italy ===
In the illustrative case of Rome, Italy, in the 1920s and 1930s, suburbs were intentionally created &quot;ex novo&quot; to give lower classes a destination, in consideration of the actual and foreseen massive arrival of poor people from other areas of the country. Many critics have seen in this development pattern (which was circularly distributed in every direction) also a quick solution to a problem of public order (keeping the unwelcome poorest classes together with the criminals, in this way better controlled, comfortably remote from the elegant &quot;official&quot; town). On the other hand, the expected huge expansion of the town soon effectively covered the distance from the central town, and now those suburbs are completely engulfed by the main territory of the town. Other newer suburbs (called exurbs) were created at a further distance from them.

=== Japan ===
In Japan, the construction of suburbs has boomed since the end of World War II and many cities are experiencing the urban sprawl effect.

=== Latin America ===

In Mexico, suburbs are generally similar to their United States counterparts. Houses are made in many different architectural styles which may be of European, American and International architecture and which vary in size. Suburbs can be found in Guadalajara, Mexico City, Monterrey, and most major cities. Lomas de Chapultepec is an example of an affluent suburb, although it is located inside the city and by no means is today a suburb in the strict sense of the word. In other countries, the situation is similar to that of Mexico, with many suburbs being built, most notably in Peru and Chile, which have experienced a boom in the construction of suburbs since the late 1970s and early 1980s. As the growth of middle-class and upper-class suburbs increased, low-class squatter areas have increased, most notably &quot;lost cities&quot; in Mexico, campamentos in Chile, barriadas in Peru, villa miserias in Argentina, asentamientos in Guatemala and favelas of Brazil.

Brazilian affluent suburbs are generally denser, more vertical and mixed in use inner suburbs. They concentrate infrastructure, investment and attention from the municipal seat and the best offer of mass transit. True sprawling towards neighboring municipalities is typically empoverished – (&quot;the periphery&quot;, in the sense of it dealing with spatial marginalization) –, with a very noticeable example being the rail suburbs of Rio de Janeiro – the North Zone, the Baixada Fluminense, the part of the West Zone associated with SuperVia&#x27;s Ramal de Santa Cruz. These, in comparison with the inner suburbs, often prove to be remote, violent food deserts with inadequate sewer structure coverage, saturated mass transit, more precarious running water, electricity and communication services, and lack of urban planning and landscaping, while also not necessarily qualifying as actual or slums. They often are former agricultural land or wild areas settled through squatting; suburbs grew and expanded due to the mass rural exodus during the years of the military dictatorship. This is particularly true of São Paulo, Rio de Janeiro and Brasília, which grew with migration from more distant and impoverished parts of the country and deal with overpopulation as a result.

=== Malaysia ===

In Malaysia, suburbs are common especially in Klang Valley, the largest conurbation in the country. These suburbs also serve as major housing areas and commuter towns. Terraced houses, semi-detached houses and shophouses are common concepts in suburban planning. In certain places such as Klang, Subang Jaya and Petaling Jaya, suburbs form the core. The latter one has been turned into a satellite city of Kuala Lumpur. Suburbs are also evident in other major conurbations in the country such as Penang Island (Butterworth, Bukit Mertajam), Johor Bahru (Skudai, Pasir Gudang), Ipoh (Simpang Pulai), Kota Melaka (Ayer Keroh), Kuching (Petra Jaya) and Alor Setar (Anak Bukit).

=== Russia ===
In Russia, until recently, the term suburb refers to high-rise residential apartments which usually consist of two bedrooms, one bathroom, a kitchen and a living room. However, since the beginning of the 21st century in Russia there has been a &quot;cottage boom&quot;, as a result of which a huge number of cottage villages appeared in almost every city of the country (including Moscow), no different from the suburbs in western countries.

=== United Kingdom ===
In the United Kingdom suburbs are located between the exurbs and inner cities of a metropolitan area. The growth in the use of trains, and later cars and highways, increased the ease with which workers could have a job in the city while commuting in from the suburbs. In the United Kingdom, as mentioned above, railways stimulated the first mass exodus to the suburbs. The Metropolitan Railway, for example, was active in building and promoting its own housing estates in the north-west of London, consisting mostly of detached houses on large plots, which it then marketed as &quot;Metro-land&quot;. In the UK, the government is seeking to impose minimum densities on newly approved housing schemes in parts of South East England. The goal is to &quot;build sustainable communities&quot; rather than housing estates. However, commercial concerns tend to delay the opening of services until a large number of residents have occupied the new neighborhood.

=== United States ===
Many white people moved to the suburbs during the white flight.

In the 19th century, horse-drawn and later electric trolleys enabled the creation of streetcar suburbs, which expanded the area in which city commuters could live. These are typically medium-density neighborhoods contiguous with the core urban area, built for pedestrian access to the streetcar lines.

With widespread adoption of the automobile progressing from the 1920s to the 1950s, and especially with the introduction of the Interstate Highway System, new suburbs were designed around car transport instead of pedestrians. Over time, many suburban areas, especially those not within the political boundaries of the city containing the central business area, began to see independence from the central city as an asset. In some cases, suburbanites saw self-government as a means to keep out people who could not afford the added suburban property maintenance costs not needed in city living. Federal subsidies for suburban development accelerated this process as did the practice of redlining by banks and other lending institutions. In some cities such as Miami, San Francisco, and Washington, D.C., the main city is much smaller than the surrounding suburban areas, leaving the city proper with a small portion of the metro area&#x27;s population and land area.

Mesa, Arizona, and Virginia Beach, Virginia, the two most populous suburbs in the U.S., are actually more populous than many core cities, including Miami, Minneapolis, New Orleans, Cleveland, Tampa, St. Louis, Pittsburgh, Cincinnati, and others. Virginia Beach is now the most populous city in Virginia, having long since exceeded the population of its neighboring primary city, Norfolk. While Virginia Beach has slowly been taking on the characteristics of an urban city, it will not likely achieve the population density and urban characteristics of Norfolk. A second suburban city in Virginia, Chesapeake, has also exceeded the population of adjacent Norfolk. With only a few large commercial areas and no definitive downtown area, Chesapeake is primarily residential in nature with vast rural areas remaining within the city limits.

Cleveland, Ohio, is typical of many American central cities; its municipal borders have changed little since 1922, even though the Cleveland urbanized area has grown many times over. Several layers of suburban municipalities now surround cities like Boston, Cleveland, Chicago, Detroit, Los Angeles, Dallas, Denver, Houston, New York City, San Francisco, Sacramento, Atlanta, Miami, Baltimore, Milwaukee, Pittsburgh, Philadelphia, Phoenix, Norfolk, St. Louis, Salt Lake City, Las Vegas, Minneapolis, and Washington, D.C..

Suburbs in the United States have a prevalence of usually detached single-family homes.

They are characterized by:

* Lower densities than central cities, dominated by single-family homes on small plots of land – anywhere from 0.1 acres and up – surrounded at close quarters by very similar dwellings.
* Zoning patterns that separate residential and commercial development, as well as different intensities and densities of development. Daily needs are not within walking distance of most homes.
* A greater percentage of whites (both non-Hispanic and, in some areas, Hispanic) and lesser percentage of citizens of other ethnic groups than in urban areas. However, black suburbanization grew between 1970 and 1980 by 2.6% as a result of central city neighborhoods expanding into older neighborhoods vacated by whites.
* Subdivisions carved from previously rural land into multiple-home developments built by a single real estate company. These subdivisions are often segregated by minute differences in home value, creating entire communities where family incomes and demographics are almost completely homogeneous.
* Shopping malls and strip malls behind large parking lots instead of a classic downtown shopping district.
* A road network designed to conform to a hierarchy, including culs-de-sac, leading to larger residential streets, in turn leading to large collector roads, in place of the grid pattern common to most central cities and pre-World War II suburbs.
* A greater percentage of one-story administrative buildings than in urban areas.
* Compared to rural areas, suburbs usually have greater population density, higher standards of living, more complex road systems, more franchised stores and restaurants, and less farmland and wildlife.

By 2010, suburbs increasingly gained people in racial minority groups, as many members of minority groups gained better access to education and sought more favorable living conditions compared to inner city areas.

Conversely, many white Americans also moved back to city centers. Nearly all major city downtowns (such as Downtown Miami, Downtown Detroit, Downtown Philadelphia, Downtown Roanoke, or Downtown Los Angeles) are experiencing a renewal, with large population growth, residential apartment construction, and increased social, cultural, and infrastructural investments, as have suburban neighborhoods close to city centers. Better public transit, proximity to work and cultural attractions, and frustration with suburban life and gridlock have attracted young Americans to the city centers.

The Hispanic and Asian population is increasing in the suburbs.

== Traffic flows ==

Suburbs typically have longer travel times to work than traditional neighborhoods. Only the traffic &quot;within&quot; the short streets themselves is less. This is due to three factors: almost-mandatory automobile ownership due to poor suburban bus systems and nearly-nonexistent rail systems, longer travel distances and the hierarchy system, which is less efficient at distributing traffic than the traditional grid of streets.

In the suburban system, most trips from one component to another component requires that cars enter a collector road, no matter how short or long the distance is. This is compounded by the hierarchy of streets, where entire neighborhoods and subdivisions are dependent on one or two collector roads. Because all traffic is forced onto these roads, they are often heavy with traffic all day. If a traffic crash occurs on a collector road, or if road construction inhibits the flow, then the entire road system may be rendered useless until the blockage is cleared. The traditional &quot;grown&quot; grid, in turn, allows for a larger number of choices and alternate routes.

Suburban systems of the sprawl type are also quite inefficient for cyclists or pedestrians, as the direct route is usually not available for them either. This encourages car trips even for distances as low as several hundreds of yards or meters (which may have become up to several miles or kilometers due to the road network). Improved sprawl systems, though retaining the car detours, possess cycle paths and footpaths connecting across the arms of the sprawl system, allowing a more direct route while still keeping the cars out of the residential and side streets.

More commonly, central cities seek ways to tax nonresidents working downtown – known as commuter taxes – as property tax bases dwindle. Taken together, these two groups of taxpayers represent a largely untapped source of potential revenue that cities may begin to target more aggressively, particularly if they&#x27;re struggling. According to struggling cities, this will help bring in a substantial revenue for the city which is a great way to tax the people who make the most use of the highways and repairs.

Today more companies settle down in suburbs because of low property costs.

==Criticism==

Criticism of suburbia dates back to the boom of suburban development in the 1950s and critiques a culture of aspirational homeownership. In the English-speaking world, this discourse is prominent in the United States and Australia being prevalent both in popular culture and academia.

==In popular culture==

Suburbs and suburban living have been the subject for a wide variety of films, books, television shows and songs.

French songs like &quot;La Zone&quot; by Fréhel (1933), &quot;Aux quatre coins de la banlieue&quot; by Damia (1936), &quot;Ma banlieue&quot; by Reda Caire (1937), or &quot;Banlieue&quot; by Robert Lamoureux (1953), evoke the suburbs of Paris explicitly since the 1930s. Those singers give a sunny festive, almost bucolic, image of the suburbs, yet still few urbanized. During the fifties and the sixties, French singer-songwriter Léo Ferré evokes in his songs popular and proletarian suburbs of Paris, to oppose them to the city, considered by comparison as a bourgeois and conservative place.

French cinema was although soon interested in urban changes in the suburbs, with such movies as &quot;Mon oncle&quot; by Jacques Tati (1958), &quot;L&#x27;Amour existe&quot; by Maurice Pialat (1961) or &quot;Two or Three Things I Know About Her&quot; by Jean-Luc Godard (1967).

In his one-act opera &quot;Trouble in Tahiti&quot; (1952), Leonard Bernstein skewers American suburbia, which produces misery instead of happiness.

The American photojournalist Bill Owens documented the culture of suburbia in the 1970s, most notably in his book &quot;Suburbia&quot;. The 1962 song &quot;Little Boxes&quot; by Malvina Reynolds lampoons the development of suburbia and its perceived bourgeois and conformist values, while the 1982 song &quot;Subdivisions&quot; by the Canadian band Rush also discusses suburbia, as does Rockin&#x27; the Suburbs by Ben Folds. The 2010 album &quot;The Suburbs&quot; by the Canadian-based alternative band Arcade Fire dealt with aspects of growing up in suburbia, suggesting aimlessness, apathy and endless rushing are ingrained into the suburban culture and mentality. &quot;Suburb The Musical,&quot; was written by Robert S. Cohen and David Javerbaum. &quot;Over the Hedge&quot; is a syndicated comic strip written and drawn by Michael Fry and T. Lewis. It tells the story of a raccoon, turtle, a squirrel, and their friends who come to terms with their woodlands being taken over by suburbia, trying to survive the increasing flow of humanity and technology while becoming enticed by it at the same time. A film adaptation of &quot;Over the Hedge&quot; was produced in 2006.

British television series such as &quot;The Good Life&quot;, &quot;Butterflies&quot; and &quot;The Fall and Rise of Reginald Perrin&quot; have depicted suburbia as well-manicured but relentlessly boring, and its residents as either overly conforming or prone to going stir crazy. In contrast, U.S. shows such as &quot;Knots Landing&quot;, &quot;Desperate Housewives&quot; and &quot;Weeds&quot; portray the suburbs as concealing darker secrets behind a façade of manicured lawns, friendly people, and beautifully kept houses. Films such as &quot;The &#x27;Burbs&quot; and &quot;Disturbia&quot; have brought this theme to the cinema.

== See also ==
== Notes ==
== References ==
== Bibliography ==

* Archer, John; Paul J.P. Sandul, and Katherine Solomonson (eds.), &quot;Making Suburbia: New Histories of Everyday America.&quot; Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 2015.
* Baxandall, Rosalyn and Elizabeth Ewen. &quot;Picture Windows: How the Suburbs Happened.&quot; New York: Basic Books, 2000.
* Beauregard, Robert A. &quot; When America Became Suburban&quot;. University of Minnesota Press, 2006.
* &quot;The Earliest Complete English Prose Salter,&quot;ed. by K. D. Bülbring. Early English Text Society, Original Series, 1891.
* Fishman, Robert. &quot;Bourgeois Utopias: The Rise and Fall of Suburbia&quot;. Basic Books, 1987; in U.S.
* Galinou, Mireille. &quot;Cottages and Villas: The Birth of the Garden Suburb&quot; (2011), in England
* 
* Harris, Richard. &quot;Creeping Conformity: How Canada Became Suburban, 1900–1960&quot; (2004)
* Hayden, Dolores. &quot;Building Suburbia: Green Fields and Urban Growth, 1820–2000&quot;. Vintage Books, 2003.
* 
* &quot;Psalter&quot;, London, British Library Add. MS. 17376
* 
* Stilgoe, John R. &quot;Borderland: Origins of the American Suburb, 1820–1939&quot;. Yale University Press, 1989.
* Teaford, Jon C. &quot;The American Suburb: The Basics&quot;. Routledge, 2008.
==External links==
* A Future Vision for the North American Suburb
* Images of a mature north London suburb illustrating a wide range of domestic architecture
* Centre for Suburban Studies</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="2" end="8" title="Suburb" label="suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="23" end="36" title="Suburb" label="suburban area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="58" end="75" title="metropolitan area" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q48442" start="122" end="131" title="commuting" label="commuting"/>
<link wikidata="Q987355" start="406" end="432" title="English-speaking world" label="English-speaking countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q87311542" start="476" end="488" title="core city" label="central city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739536" start="492" end="502" title="inner city" label="inner city"/>
<link wikidata="Q44679" start="517" end="535" title="Australian English" label="Australian English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156228" start="540" end="561" title="South African English" label="South African English"/>
<link wikidata="Q123705" start="640" end="652" title="neighborhood" label="neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989605" start="712" end="724" title="white flight" label="white flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q40889769" start="979" end="986" title="municipal annexation" label="annexed"/>
<link wikidata="Q192042" start="1013" end="1025" title="urban sprawl" label="urban sprawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="1046" end="1053" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501447" start="1145" end="1161" title="local government" label="governed locally"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195043" start="1230" end="1237" title="borough" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q25398029" start="1330" end="1335" title="exurb" label="exurb"/>
<link wikidata="Q738570" start="1846" end="1864" title="business districts" label="business districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661652" start="1869" end="1884" title="private transport" label="private vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="1889" end="1903" title="public transit" label="public transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6028003" start="1951" end="1968" title="industrial suburb" label="industrial suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074523" start="1971" end="1990" title="planned communities" label="planned communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q691960" start="1996" end="2012" title="satellite cities" label="satellite cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="2164" end="2174" title="Old French" label="Old French"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="2373" end="2398" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q36395" start="2416" end="2430" title="Middle English" label="Middle English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632426" start="2851" end="2873" title="Suburbs and localities (Australia)" label="suburbs and localities"/>
<link wikidata="Q6035676" start="3228" end="3241" title="Inner suburbs" label="Inner suburbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7690766" start="3251" end="3257" title="Te Aro" label="Te Aro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047399" start="3273" end="3285" title="Eden Terrace" label="Eden Terrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733565" start="3299" end="3306" title="Prahran, Victoria" label="Prahran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915990" start="3324" end="3330" title="Ultimo, New South Wales" label="Ultimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3498" end="3511" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="3516" end="3522" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="3643" end="3662" title="unincorporated area" label="unincorporated area"/>
<link wikidata="Q83726" start="4581" end="4587" title="Ealing" label="Ealing"/>
<link wikidata="Q122892" start="4589" end="4596" title="Bromley" label="Bromley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342139" start="4602" end="4610" title="Guiseley" label="Guiseley"/>
<link wikidata="Q496387" start="4681" end="4695" title="Blanchardstown" label="Blanchardstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q990099" start="4701" end="4709" title="Tallaght" label="Tallaght"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569011" start="4775" end="4788" title="urban history" label="urban history"/>
<link wikidata="Q18511725" start="6020" end="6031" title="market town" label="market town"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="6090" end="6095" title="Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="6106" end="6112" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="6252" end="6271" title="Eastern Han Dynasty" label="Eastern Han Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q334081" start="6292" end="6301" title="Dong Zhuo" label="Dong Zhuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q187136" start="6330" end="6337" title="Luoyang" label="Luoyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="6541" end="6560" title="Early Modern Period" label="Early Modern Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q175185" start="6626" end="6637" title="countryside" label="countryside"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="7215" end="7225" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322262" start="7463" end="7481" title="ribbon development" label="ribbon development"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269254" start="7714" end="7726" title="quarter acre" label="quarter-acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q17049318" start="7801" end="7817" title="Australian Dream" label="Australian Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="7881" end="7888" title="Public transport" label="transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="7909" end="7929" title="Rapid transit" label="underground railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q935025" start="8313" end="8333" title="Metropolitan Railway" label="Metropolitan Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="8408" end="8416" title="City of London" label="the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19186" start="8455" end="8464" title="Middlesex" label="Middlesex"/>
<link wikidata="Q654577" start="8483" end="8489" title="Harrow-on-the-Hill station" label="Harrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453742" start="8875" end="8881" title="Pinner" label="Pinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="9067" end="9078" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q16889223" start="9177" end="9221" title="Metropolitan Railway Country Estates" label="Metropolitan Railway Country Estates Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q147127" start="9272" end="9296" title="Kingsbury, London" label="Kingsbury Garden Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q2315832" start="9302" end="9309" title="Neasden" label="Neasden"/>
<link wikidata="Q146294" start="9311" end="9323" title="Wembley Park" label="Wembley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q9611" start="9389" end="9402" title="Rickmansworth" label="Rickmansworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5666536" start="9431" end="9452" title="Harrow Garden Village" label="Harrow Garden Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q470522" start="9507" end="9517" title="Metro-land" label="Metro-land"/>
<link wikidata="Q123344782" start="9627" end="9628" title="£sd" label="d"/>
<link wikidata="Q660088" start="10432" end="10452" title="garden city movement" label="garden city movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766" start="10456" end="10471" title="Ebenezer Howard" label="Ebenezer Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323572" start="10611" end="10624" title="social reform" label="social reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q5715904" start="10627" end="10644" title="Henrietta Barnett" label="Henrietta Barnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q19801" start="10754" end="10764" title="Letchworth" label="Letchworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570958" start="10820" end="10835" title="Hampstead Heath" label="Hampstead Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q149684" start="10967" end="10980" title="Golders Green" label="Golders Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q150195" start="10997" end="11020" title="Hampstead Garden Suburb" label="Hampstead Garden Suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q977815" start="11079" end="11092" title="Raymond Unwin" label="Raymond Unwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q378157" start="11101" end="11114" title="Edwin Lutyens" label="Edwin Lutyens"/>
<link wikidata="Q17110533" start="11193" end="11216" title="Tudor Walters Committee" label="Tudor Walters Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916045" start="11724" end="11764" title="Housing, Town Planning, &amp;amp;c. Act 1919" label="Housing, Town Planning, &amp;amp;c. Act 1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q334088" start="11802" end="11821" title="Christopher Addison" label="Christopher Addison"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="11941" end="11956" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q21585398" start="12066" end="12080" title="council estate" label="council estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419624" start="12375" end="12388" title="semi-detached" label="semi-detached"/>
<link wikidata="Q6257467" start="12421" end="12426" title="John Shaw Sr." label="Shaws"/>
<link wikidata="Q875016" start="12670" end="12684" title="terraced house" label="terraced house"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="12787" end="12795" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851317" start="12828" end="12841" title="Tudor Revival architecture" label="Tudor Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256729" start="12843" end="12855" title="Swiss chalet style" label="chalet style"/>
<link wikidata="Q5666599" start="12941" end="12953" title="Harrow Weald" label="Harrow Weald"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="13255" end="13261" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="13266" end="13279" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300959" start="13799" end="13808" title="Scarsdale, New York" label="Scarsdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q744948" start="13810" end="13822" title="New Rochelle, New York" label="New Rochelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379757" start="13827" end="13830" title="Rye, New York" label="Rye"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634334" start="13994" end="14030" title="post-World War II economic expansion" label="post-World War II economic expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452134" start="14115" end="14124" title="Levittown, New York" label="Levittown"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="15736" end="15752" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="15757" end="15769" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484269" start="16450" end="16459" title="G.I. Bill" label="G.I. Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5659877" start="17491" end="17520" title="Second Great Migration (African American)" label="rapidly moving north and west"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571602" start="17751" end="17763" title="1964 Philadelphia race riot" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q377682" start="17765" end="17776" title="Watts riots" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q768155" start="17778" end="17785" title="1967 Detroit riot" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588253" start="17787" end="17794" title="1968 Chicago riots" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573266" start="17800" end="17816" title="1968 Washington, D.C., riots" label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q702232" start="17927" end="17933" title="zoning" label="zoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453838" start="17940" end="17949" title="redlining" label="redlining"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989605" start="18480" end="18492" title="white flight" label="white flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5425519" start="18535" end="18543" title="FHA loan" label="FHA loan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623078" start="18635" end="18651" title="streetcar suburb" label="streetcar suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="18689" end="18696" title="tram" label="trolley"/>
<link wikidata="Q828359" start="18830" end="18847" title="commuter town" label="bedroom community"/>
<link wikidata="Q243007" start="20141" end="20151" title="Naperville, Illinois" label="Naperville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552255" start="20588" end="20598" title="green belt" label="green belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739536" start="21301" end="21313" title="inner city" label="inner cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935602" start="21387" end="21403" title="Million Programme" label="concrete suburbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307276" start="21532" end="21552" title="single-family houses" label="single-family houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="21761" end="21766" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3870" start="21768" end="21775" title="Nairobi" label="Nairobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q34647" start="21777" end="21789" title="Johannesburg" label="Johannesburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q8673" start="21795" end="21800" title="Lagos" label="Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302788" start="21844" end="21847" title="Reconstruction and Development Programme" label="RDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q217426" start="21883" end="21889" title="Soweto" label="Soweto"/>
<link wikidata="Q163521" start="22145" end="22182" title="FNB Stadium" label="FNB (&amp;quot;Soccer City&amp;quot;) Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621657" start="22485" end="22504" title="equestrian facility" label="equestrian facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127739" start="22842" end="22852" title="Constantia, Cape Town" label="Constantia"/>
<link wikidata="Q936777" start="22857" end="22869" title="Bishopscourt, Cape Town" label="Bishopscourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623078" start="22934" end="22951" title="streetcar suburbs" label="streetcar suburbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438976" start="23288" end="23303" title="Greater Western Sydney" label="Western Suburbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196395" start="23321" end="23333" title="Olympic Park, Sydney" label="Olympic Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3346612" start="23429" end="23435" title="Uttara (town)" label="Uttara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806112" start="23442" end="23449" title="Ashulia" label="Ashulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="23527" end="23533" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="23540" end="23548" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="23566" end="23576" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053463" start="23857" end="23881" title="census metropolitan area" label="census metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q578452" start="24191" end="24202" title="Calgary Region" label="Calgary CMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q656150" start="24251" end="24263" title="Greater Montreal" label="Montréal CMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623078" start="24314" end="24331" title="streetcar suburbs" label="streetcar suburbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="24471" end="24485" title="public transit" label="public transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024624" start="24946" end="24961" title="Greater Toronto" label="Greater Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600798" start="24985" end="25002" title="Greater Vancouver" label="Greater Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="25092" end="25101" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="25127" end="25135" title="Montréal" label="Montréal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096" start="25169" end="25177" title="Edmonton" label="Edmonton"/>
<link wikidata="Q36312" start="25182" end="25189" title="Calgary" label="Calgary"/>
<link wikidata="Q18142" start="26277" end="26292" title="apartment block" label="apartment block"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923459" start="27239" end="27251" title="public order" label="public order"/>
<link wikidata="Q25398029" start="27644" end="27649" title="exurb" label="exurb"/>
<link wikidata="Q192042" start="27829" end="27841" title="urban sprawl" label="urban sprawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q9022" start="28121" end="28132" title="Guadalajara" label="Guadalajara"/>
<link wikidata="Q81033" start="28147" end="28156" title="Monterrey" label="Monterrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002727" start="28181" end="28201" title="Lomas de Chapultepec" label="Lomas de Chapultepec"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28690" end="28713" title="Shanty town#Examples" label="&amp;quot;lost cities&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767917" start="28725" end="28736" title="Campamento (Chile)" label="campamentos"/>
<link wikidata="Q456075" start="28747" end="28756" title="Pueblos jóvenes" label="barriadas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142573" start="28766" end="28779" title="villa miseria" label="villa miseria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804181" start="28795" end="28807" title="asentamiento" label="asentamiento"/>
<link wikidata="Q693827" start="28826" end="28832" title="favela" label="favela"/>
<link wikidata="Q6035676" start="28926" end="28938" title="inner suburb" label="inner suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q149013" start="29197" end="29204" title="Spatial planning" label="spatial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5853064" start="29205" end="29220" title="Social exclusion" label="marginalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="29282" end="29296" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q804016" start="29319" end="29337" title="Baixada Fluminense" label="Baixada Fluminense"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358552" start="29497" end="29508" title="food desert" label="food desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608153" start="29872" end="29884" title="rural exodus" label="rural exodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q174" start="29961" end="29970" title="São Paulo" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844" start="29991" end="29999" title="Brasília" label="Brasília"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234461" start="30190" end="30202" title="Klang Valley" label="Klang Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q245260" start="30216" end="30227" title="conurbation" label="conurbation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30312" end="30327" title="Terraced house#In Malaysia and Singapore" label="Terraced houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200548" start="30354" end="30363" title="shophouse" label="shophouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q856003" start="30433" end="30438" title="Klang, Malaysia" label="Klang"/>
<link wikidata="Q876876" start="30440" end="30451" title="Subang Jaya" label="Subang Jaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q864965" start="30456" end="30469" title="Petaling Jaya" label="Petaling Jaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q691960" start="30532" end="30546" title="Satellite town" label="satellite city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865" start="30550" end="30562" title="Kuala Lumpur" label="Kuala Lumpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150673" start="30640" end="30653" title="Penang Island" label="Penang Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018159" start="30655" end="30666" title="Butterworth, Seberang Perai" label="Butterworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2158697" start="30668" end="30682" title="Bukit Mertajam" label="Bukit Mertajam"/>
<link wikidata="Q231318" start="30685" end="30696" title="Johor Bahru" label="Johor Bahru"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254191" start="30698" end="30704" title="Skudai" label="Skudai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018693" start="30706" end="30718" title="Pasir Gudang" label="Pasir Gudang"/>
<link wikidata="Q271619" start="30721" end="30725" title="Ipoh" label="Ipoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7520583" start="30727" end="30740" title="Simpang Pulai" label="Simpang Pulai"/>
<link wikidata="Q61089" start="30743" end="30754" title="Malacca City" label="Kota Melaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2802663" start="30756" end="30766" title="Ayer Keroh" label="Ayer Keroh"/>
<link wikidata="Q220445" start="30769" end="30776" title="Kuching" label="Kuching"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178638" start="30778" end="30788" title="Petra Jaya" label="Petra Jaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q474868" start="30794" end="30804" title="Alor Setar" label="Alor Setar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4750958" start="30806" end="30816" title="Anak Bukit" label="Anak Bukit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="31384" end="31401" title="metropolitan area" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q48442" start="31538" end="31547" title="commuting" label="commuting"/>
<link wikidata="Q48015" start="32013" end="32031" title="South East England" label="South East England"/>
<link wikidata="Q235155" start="32284" end="32296" title="white people" label="white people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989605" start="32329" end="32341" title="white flight" label="white flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623078" start="32429" end="32446" title="streetcar suburbs" label="streetcar suburbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="32679" end="32689" title="automobile" label="automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q94247" start="32775" end="32800" title="Interstate Highway System" label="Interstate Highway System"/>
<link wikidata="Q193219" start="33249" end="33258" title="subsidies" label="subsidies"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="33406" end="33411" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="33413" end="33426" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="33432" end="33448" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q49261" start="33614" end="33627" title="Mesa, Arizona" label="Mesa, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q49259" start="33633" end="33657" title="Virginia Beach, Virginia" label="Virginia Beach, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="33769" end="33780" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="33795" end="33804" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q49255" start="33806" end="33811" title="Tampa, Florida" label="Tampa"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="33813" end="33822" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="33824" end="33834" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="33836" end="33846" title="Cincinnati" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q49231" start="33993" end="34000" title="Norfolk, Virginia" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q49222" start="34211" end="34221" title="Chesapeake, Virginia" label="Chesapeake"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="34760" end="34766" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="34768" end="34775" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="34807" end="34817" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="34819" end="34826" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="34835" end="34844" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="34846" end="34855" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="34883" end="34890" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q23337" start="34912" end="34926" title="Salt Lake City" label="Salt Lake City"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="34928" end="34937" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307276" start="35033" end="35041" title="Detached house" label="detached"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307276" start="35042" end="35055" title="Single-family house" label="single-family"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069949" start="35100" end="35109" title="urban density" label="densities"/>
<link wikidata="Q683595" start="35173" end="35186" title="Land lot" label="plots of land"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="35498" end="35504" title="White Americans" label="whites"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048763" start="35511" end="35523" title="Non-Hispanic whites" label="non-Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994805" start="35544" end="35552" title="White Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021105" start="35591" end="35610" title="ethnic groups in the United States" label="other ethnic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="35641" end="35646" title="African Americans" label="black"/>
<link wikidata="Q449111" start="35796" end="35808" title="Subdivision (land)" label="Subdivisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q695829" start="35893" end="35912" title="Real estate developer" label="real estate company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652357" start="35943" end="35953" title="Racial segregation in the United States" label="segregated"/>
<link wikidata="Q7624088" start="36113" end="36123" title="strip mall" label="strip mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625200" start="36181" end="36198" title="shopping district" label="shopping district"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623012" start="36242" end="36251" title="street hierarchy" label="hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256511" start="36373" end="36385" title="grid pattern" label="grid pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q831691" start="36476" end="36481" title="storey" label="story"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215877" start="37054" end="37068" title="Greater Downtown Miami" label="Downtown Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303416" start="37070" end="37086" title="Downtown Detroit" label="Downtown Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739353" start="37088" end="37109" title="Center City, Philadelphia" label="Downtown Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303561" start="37111" end="37127" title="Downtown Roanoke" label="Downtown Roanoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q995043" start="37132" end="37152" title="Downtown Los Angeles" label="Downtown Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q8189896" start="37473" end="37481" title="gridlock" label="gridlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="37539" end="37547" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="37552" end="37557" title="Asian Americans" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q786773" start="37808" end="37845" title="automobile dependency" label="almost-mandatory automobile ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373492" start="37867" end="37870" title="commuter bus" label="bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="37902" end="37906" title="Rail transport" label="rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256511" start="38035" end="38039" title="Grid plan" label="grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146212" start="38155" end="38169" title="collector road" label="collector road"/>
<link wikidata="Q177348" start="38826" end="38838" title="as the crow flies" label="direct route"/>
<link wikidata="Q359309" start="39105" end="39111" title="detour" label="detour"/>
<link wikidata="Q221722" start="39122" end="39132" title="cycle path" label="cycle path"/>
<link wikidata="Q192042" start="39182" end="39188" title="suburban sprawl" label="sprawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091971" start="39949" end="39969" title="Suburbanization" label="suburban development"/>
<link wikidata="Q98108964" start="40023" end="40036" title="homeownership" label="homeownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q541576" start="40045" end="40067" title="Anglosphere" label="English-speaking world"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="40104" end="40117" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="40122" end="40131" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q253990" start="40367" end="40373" title="Fréhel" label="Fréhel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229856" start="40429" end="40434" title="Marie-Louise Damien" label="Damia"/>
<link wikidata="Q922973" start="40470" end="40480" title="Reda Caire" label="Reda Caire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671274" start="40516" end="40532" title="Robert Lamoureux" label="Robert Lamoureux"/>
<link wikidata="Q320146" start="40756" end="40765" title="Léo Ferré" label="Léo Ferré"/>
<link wikidata="Q242080" start="40921" end="40934" title="French cinema" label="French cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346590" start="41023" end="41032" title="Mon oncle" label="Mon oncle"/>
<link wikidata="Q51549" start="41042" end="41054" title="Jacques Tati" label="Jacques Tati"/>
<link wikidata="Q3204892" start="41069" end="41088" title="L&amp;#x27;Amour existe" label="L&amp;#x27;Amour existe"/>
<link wikidata="Q503898" start="41098" end="41112" title="Maurice Pialat" label="Maurice Pialat"/>
<link wikidata="Q232217" start="41129" end="41165" title="Two or Three Things I Know About Her" label="Two or Three Things I Know About Her"/>
<link wikidata="Q53001" start="41175" end="41190" title="Jean-Luc Godard" label="Jean-Luc Godard"/>
<link wikidata="Q377876" start="41227" end="41244" title="Trouble in Tahiti" label="Trouble in Tahiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q152505" start="41259" end="41276" title="Leonard Bernstein" label="Leonard Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q506858" start="41362" end="41377" title="photojournalist" label="photojournalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4910416" start="41378" end="41388" title="Bill Owens (photographer)" label="Bill Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632409" start="41469" end="41477" title="Suburbia (book)" label="Suburbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170021" start="41505" end="41517" title="Little Boxes" label="Little Boxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q268478" start="41527" end="41543" title="Malvina Reynolds" label="Malvina Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="41599" end="41608" title="bourgeois" label="bourgeois"/>
<link wikidata="Q221284" start="41613" end="41623" title="Conformity" label="conformist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631025" start="41658" end="41670" title="Subdivisions (song)" label="Subdivisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q203871" start="41698" end="41702" title="Rush (band)" label="Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355354" start="41736" end="41760" title="Rockin&amp;#x27; the Suburbs" label="Rockin&amp;#x27; the Suburbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q435681" start="41764" end="41773" title="Ben Folds" label="Ben Folds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575638" start="41796" end="41807" title="The Suburbs (album)" label="The Suburbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q58608" start="41853" end="41864" title="Arcade Fire" label="Arcade Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q427874" start="42107" end="42121" title="Over the Hedge (comic strip)" label="Over the Hedge"/>
<link wikidata="Q245366" start="42457" end="42502" title="Over the Hedge" label="film adaptation of &amp;quot;Over the Hedge&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2789136" start="42566" end="42579" title="The Good Life (1975 TV series)" label="The Good Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q5002904" start="42593" end="42604" title="Butterflies (TV series)" label="Butterflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733193" start="42621" end="42657" title="The Fall and Rise of Reginald Perrin" label="The Fall and Rise of Reginald Perrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q489412" start="42794" end="42804" title="Stir crazy (condition)" label="stir crazy"/>
<link wikidata="Q640535" start="42844" end="42857" title="Knots Landing" label="Knots Landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q131758" start="42871" end="42891" title="Desperate Housewives" label="Desperate Housewives"/>
<link wikidata="Q23609" start="42908" end="42913" title="Weeds (TV series)" label="Weeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740544" start="43071" end="43086" title="The &amp;#x27;Burbs" label="The &amp;#x27;Burbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q592445" start="43103" end="43112" title="Disturbia (film)" label="Disturbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q50082892" start="44378" end="44393" title="Jon C. Teaford" label="Teaford, Jon C."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28910" wikidata="Q231302" url="?curid=28910" title="Shōnen manga">
<text>is an editorial category of Japanese comics targeting an audience of adolescent boys and young men. It is, along with manga (targeting adolescent girls and young women), manga (targeting young adults and adult men), and manga (targeting adult women), one of the primary demographic categories of manga and, by extension, of Japanese anime. manga is traditionally published in dedicated manga magazines that often almost exclusively target the demographic group. 

Of the four primary demographic categories of manga, is the most popular category in the Japanese market. While manga ostensibly targets an audience of young males, its actual readership extends significantly beyond this target group to include all ages and genders. The category originated from Japanese children&#x27;s magazines at the turn of the 20th century and gained significant popularity by the 1920s. The editorial focus of manga is primarily on action, adventure, and the fighting of monsters or other clearly defined forces of evil. Though action narratives dominate the category, there is deep editorial diversity and a significant number of genres and sub-genres within manga, especially compared to other comic cultures outside of Japan, including comedy, crime, romance, slice of life, and sports.

==Terminology and etymology==
The Japanese word , meaning &quot;young boy&quot;, historically referred to juveniles in a general sense and was used by the Japanese publishing industry until the end of the 19th century to designate publications aimed at children and young people. The word shifted to its current usage of referring specifically to media aimed at adolescent boys, beginning with the practice of segmenting periodicals (especially manga magazines) by sex and age-specific target groups, which was established at the beginning of the 20th century and accelerated starting in the 1960s. This segmentation system is now openly used as a categorization system by manga publishers and extends into works that are adapted from manga, such as anime.

=== manga===
 manga refers to manga aimed at an audience of adolescent boys, with the primary target audience alternately defined as 10 to 19 years old and as 12 to 21 years old. It is the most popular category in the Japanese market of the four primary demographic categories of manga (, , , and ). 

The actual readership of manga, as is the case for all demographic categories of manga, extends significantly beyond this adolescent male target group to include all ages and genders. For example, a 2006 survey of female manga readers found that &quot;Weekly Shōnen Jump&quot; was the most popular manga magazine among this demographic, placing ahead of magazines that specifically target a female readership. The target group orientation of manga is particularly evident in the non-manga content of manga magazines, which include advertising and articles on topics tailored to the interests of young males, such as video games. Non-manga content often corresponds to a major manga series in a given magazine, for example, advertisements for a video game adaptation of the series or articles about an animated film adaptation of the series.

==History==

===Pre-war and wartime era===
Children&#x27;s magazines with sex-segregated readerships have existed in Japan since the early 1900s. While early youth magazines were ostensibly unisex – &quot;Shōnen Sekai&quot; was the first youth magazine in Japan in 1895, targeting a readership of both boys and girls – in practice, the editorial content of these publications largely concerned topics that were thought to be of interest to boys. This provoked the emergence of first exclusively (girls) magazines in 1902, and magazines subsequently began to exclusively target a male audience. Initially, these magazines did not publish manga; the first magazine to do so was &quot;Shōnen Pakku&quot;, first published in 1907. This was followed by &quot;Shōnen Club&quot; in 1914 and later &quot;Yōnen Club&quot;. Among the most successful and influential manga series in these early magazines were &quot;Norakuro&quot; by Suihō Tagawa, which follows the life of an anthropomorphic dog soldier, and &quot;Tank Tankuro&quot; by Gajo Sakamoto, about a robot-like character who can change his appearance.

 magazine enjoyed significant popularity during the 1920s and 1930s, with &quot;Yōnen Club&quot; selling over 950,000 copies. During the Second Sino-Japanese War and Second World War, magazine sales declined and publications were used increasingly for wartime propaganda purposes. The manga content in these publications was reduced, and the series that remained typically focused on patriotic and militaristic themes, such as stories about samurai. In other stories, robots were depicted as fighting in the war against the Allied forces, as analogous to western superhero comics that depicted superheroes fighting the Axis powers during this same period.

===Post-war era===
During the post-war occupation of Japan, the Japanese publishing industry was rebuilt under initially strict guidelines. Stories focused on war, combat, and most competitive sports were banned with the aim of discouraging belligerence and hindering the use of manga for pro-Imperial propaganda. Manga developed during this period under the influence of artist Osamu Tezuka, with series such as &quot;Astro Boy&quot; and &quot;Kimba the White Lion&quot;. Tezuka was inspired by American cartoons, and pioneered the so-called &quot;story manga&quot;: long-running manga series with a cinematic style and continuity across multiple chapters, contrasting what had previously been a medium defined by one-off comic strips. Science fiction stories about robots, space travel, and heroic space-faring adventures enjoyed popularity during this period; many sci-fi stories took themes and concepts from war comics and re-imagined them with pacifist ideals, such as &quot;Tetsujin 28-go&quot; by Mitsuteru Yokoyama. 

One of the first new manga magazines of the post-war period was &quot;Manga Shōnen&quot;, which launched in 1947 and published works by Tezuka, Leiji Matsumoto, and Shōtarō Ishinomori. As post-war censorship codes were repealed and Japan entered a period of significant economic development in the 1950s, sales of manga and the number of manga magazines increased significantly, and and manga came to further establish themselves as distinct categories. The first works of sports manga also emerged from manga during this time; notable early works include &quot;&quot; by Eiichi Fukui as the first manga series in the genre, and &quot;Ashita no Joe&quot; by Asao Takamori and Tetsuya Chiba, which became one of the most commercially successful works in the genre. 1959 saw the launch of &quot;Shōnen Sunday&quot; and &quot;Weekly Shōnen Magazine&quot;, the first weekly manga magazines. Other weeklies, such as &quot;Shōnen Champion&quot;, &quot;Shōnen King&quot;, and &quot;Shōnen Ace&quot;, emerged in the 1960s. &quot;Weekly Shōnen Jump&quot; was first published in 1968, and would establish itself as the best-selling manga magazine across demographic categories, a position it holds to this day. Many of the most popular and commercially successful series originated in &quot;Weekly Shōnen Jump&quot;, including &quot;Dragon Ball&quot; by Akira Toriyama, &quot;Naruto&quot; by Masashi Kishimoto, &quot;Bleach&quot; by Tite Kubo, &quot;One Piece&quot; by Eiichiro Oda, and &quot;Slam Dunk&quot; by Takehiko Inoue.

===Modern era===
manga became formalized as a category of manga aimed at an older male audience in the late 1960s and early 1970s, and many artists associated with the realist movement migrated to manga. The demise of the (rental manga) market led many artists to move into magazine publishing, including manga, bringing their distinct themes and style with them. As a result, manga came to deal with more serious and political themes, and saw an increase in depictions of violent and explicit subjects, as well as an increase in profanity. Significant artists of this era include Shigeru Mizuki, creator of the horror series &quot;GeGeGe no Kitarō&quot;; and George Akiyama, whose manga series &quot;Ashura&quot; depicts cannibalism, child abuse, and mass murder. Although this provoked a public backlash, it did not lead to the decline for the industry: series with anarchic, offensive humor became popular in and manga alike, with &quot;Crayon Shin-Chan&quot; by Yoshito Usui becoming an internationally famous example of this phenomenon. Manga artist Go Nagai originated the sexually-charged genre with &quot;Harenchi Gakuen&quot;, which was serialized in &quot;Weekly Shōnen Jump&quot;.
The stylistic and thematic differences between and began to narrow considerably beginning in the 1980s, with widespread exchange of stylistic devices and themes. For example, the characteristic large eyes of manga became common in manga to convey the emotions of characters, and female characters have enjoyed greater prominence as both supporting and primary characters in manga. Other graphic storytelling techniques that originated in manga, such as montages of multiple panels, were imported into manga and have become common stylistic devices. In the 1980s, combat-focused &quot;battle manga&quot; stories became popular, with &quot;Dragon Ball&quot; and &quot;Fist of the North Star&quot; emerging as representative works of this development. Manga critic Jason Thompson credits the success of &quot;Dragon Ball&quot;, first published in 1984, as originating a trend that has persisted to contemporary manga of favoring cartoonish art styles over the more mature art styles of titles such as &quot;City Hunter&quot; and &quot;Fist of the North Star&quot;. 

Female manga artists also began to enjoy increasing critical and commercial success as manga creators. As a result of the combined influence of and the rise of female artists, romance emerged as a subgenre of manga, especially romantic comedy. When manga began to emerge in the Western world in the early 1990s, the category was so dominant in these new markets that it came to shape the image of manga as a whole. While made gains in popularity by the 2000s, remains the most popular category of manga, both in Japan and internationally.

==Characteristics==
===Themes and genres===
This thematic orientation of manga is readily inferred from the formal values or slogans that manga magazines assign themselves: for example, &quot;friendship, perseverance, and victory&quot; for &quot;Weekly Shōnen Jump&quot;, and &quot;courage, friendship and fighting spirit&quot; for &quot;CoroCoro Comic&quot;. The editorial focus of manga is primarily on action, adventure, and the fighting of monsters or other forces of evil. Action stories are so dominant in manga that some manga and non-manga works are occasionally designated as not because of their ostensible target group, but because of their content focus on action and adventure. Though action narratives dominate the category, there is deep editorial diversity and a significant number of genres and subgenres within manga, especially when compared to other comic cultures outside of Japan. This includes but is not limited to comedy, crime, romance, slice of life, and stories about activities such as sports and the lives of different types of working professionals. 

The action genre is itself is expressed through a variety of subgenres, from historical and contemporary drama to science fiction and fantasy. war fiction has been alternately jingoistic or critical of militarism and violence, with &quot;Barefoot Gen&quot; by Keiji Nakazawa as a notable example of the latter. Samurai appeared frequently as idealized role models for boy readers in early , analogous to representations of cowboys in western comics; samurai stories shifted to comedy and sportsmanship in the post-war period, before returning to themes of idealized themes of good versus evil. Though manga typically attempts to convey a message of peace, the category has been criticized by individuals such as director Hayao Miyazaki for promoting overly simple good/evil dichotomies.

===Narrative conventions===
A protagonist is often characterized by contradictory qualities: short-tempered and cool, mischievous and rebellious, serious and cynical, clumsy and infallible, or who appears as a good-for-nothing but possesses hidden abilities. In some cases, the contradiction takes on a literal form in the form of , where the hero is able to switch between two personas with different appearances and personalities; examples of this device include &quot;Yu-Gi-Oh&quot; by Kazuki Takahashi and &quot;Samurai Deeper Kyo&quot; by Akimine Kamijyo. Transformation abilities are often linked with bonds to a spirit, monster or robot. A major narrative device in manga is rivalry between the protagonist and his opponent, with a fight or a quest often appearing as a central element; &quot;Dragon Ball&quot; is among the most popular and commercially successful examples of this archetypal story. 

Typically, a protagonist is an outsider, or in some way disadvantaged compared to others, but who through training, perseverance, and willpower eventually succeeds against all odds. Plots typically follow the basic structure of the hero&#x27;s journey, with much of the story focused on the protagonist&#x27;s training and transformation into a hero, and on characters who earn their status as heroes through effort and tenacity rather than by virtue of birth or assignment. For long-running series, the hero&#x27;s journey repeats itself; as a new story arc begins, the enemy becomes more powerful and the danger to be overcome becomes greater. In addition to these external conflicts, a protagonist often also faces internal conflicts, typically focused around maturity and growing older. In contrast to manga, which often focuses on the thoughts and interior monologue of the hero, typically advances plot through dialogue and action. Happy endings are common in manga, but are not obligatory, with writers expressing the happy ending fitting for the demography even if it not comes up as a suitable.

===Visual style===
Comics theorist Neil Cohn regards the art style of as generally &quot;edgier&quot; than that of manga, and notes how most regular manga readers are able to easily distinguish between and based on visual appearance alone. Visually, a protagonist often possesses what manga critic Jason Thompson describes as &quot;insanely spiky hair&quot; that distinguishes the protagonist&#x27;s silhouette from that of other characters. The eyes of characters in the post-war period are significantly smaller than those of characters in manga; large eyes are used in manga to better convey the emotions of the characters, an aspect which has historically been given less focus in manga. A common visual device in action scenes is to depict the contours of figures with rough, coarse motion lines to give the appearance of movement.

===Role of women===
Historically, the protagonists of manga were almost exclusively men and boys; women and girls appeared primarily in supporting roles as sisters, mothers, or girlfriends, if at all. This was especially true of stories that developed out of manga beginning in the 1970s, with &quot;The Abashiri Family&quot; by Go Nagai as one of the earliest representative works of this development, as well as an early example of a manga with a female protagonist. Since the 1980s, women and girls have played a more active role in manga, fighting alongside male characters and not merely as passive support. &quot;Dr. Slump&quot; by Akira Toriyama was an early representative work of this development, with its mischievous child protagonist Arale Norimaki being among the first manga to depict this type of archetypal character as a girl rather than a boy. The 1980s also saw female manga artists rise to greater prominence: notably horror manga artist Kei Kusunoki, and Rumiko Takahashi with her romantic comedies &quot;Urusei Yatsura&quot; and &quot;Ranma ½&quot;.

Especially in series that are aimed at an older audience, female characters are often presented in a manner that is attractive to the male target audience as (literally &quot;beautiful young girls&quot;). They exist as objects of romantic or sexual desire not merely for the male characters, but also for the ostensibly heterosexual male reader as a form of fan service. While these objectifying tropes have persisted in manga, women have also developed more active roles in these fan service-oriented stories. A common romantic comedy trope in manga since the 1980s has been to pair a weak male protagonist with a strong female love interest who is not only the target of his romantic and sexual desire, but also his good friend and confidante. In the harem genre, which originated from manga, a male protagonist is surrounded by several female characters who desire him, and who are often more confident and assertive than he is; examples include &quot;Negima! Magister Negi Magi&quot; by Ken Akamatsu and &quot;Hanaukyo Maid Team&quot; by Morishige. In other cases, the male protagonist is unsuccessful in his attempts to woo the female character, or the story is focused around the originally naïve and infantile male protagonist maturing and learning how to develop healthy relationships with women.

For certain series, a female readership who read in or interpret subtextual homoerotic relationships between canonically heterosexual male characters constitute a significant proportion of the series&#x27; audience; this is especially true of series featuring male characters who are (literally &quot;beautiful boys&quot;), or who are perceived as such by readers. This reading of manga is expressed in the form of fan works such as (self-published amateur manga) and the boys&#x27; love (BL) genre of manga and anime, which includes both original and derivative works. Manga scholar Yukari Fujimoto notes in her analysis of the female readership of the titles &quot;One Piece&quot;, &quot;Naruto&quot;, and &quot;The Prince of Tennis&quot; that homoerotic interpretations of manga tend to be most common among titles that do not include prominent female characters that a female readership is able to identify with.

==Magazines==

 manga is traditionally published in dedicated manga magazines that specifically target an audience of . At the industry&#x27;s peak in the mid-1990s, there were 23 total magazines, which collectively sold 662 million copies in 1995. The total manga magazine market that year included 265 magazines, with a total of 1.595 billion copies sold.

A manga magazine is typically several hundred pages long, and contains over a dozen series or one-shots. The largest Japanese magazines in terms of circulation are &quot;Weekly Shōnen Jump&quot; by Shueisha, &quot;Weekly Shōnen Magazine&quot; by Kodansha, and &quot;Weekly Shōnen Sunday&quot; by Shogakukan; these publishers are also the largest publishers of manga generally. The fourth largest magazine, albeit by a significant margin, is &quot;Weekly Shōnen Champion&quot; by Akita Shoten, which was among the most popular manga magazines in the 1970s and 1980s. The magazines &quot;CoroCoro Comic&quot; and the now-defunct &quot;Comic BomBom&quot; technically belong to the (children&#x27;s manga) demographic, but are often counted as magazines as they target an audience of school-aged boys. A list of the top magazines by circulation as of 2015 are listed below:

==References==
===Bibliography===
**
*
*
**
**
*
*
*
*
*
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="28" end="43" title="Manga" label="Japanese comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q242492" start="118" end="123" title="Shōjo manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q237338" start="170" end="175" title="Seinen manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q503106" start="220" end="225" title="Josei manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="324" end="338" title="Anime" label="Japanese anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q457524" start="386" end="401" title="List of manga magazines" label="manga magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762165" start="920" end="926" title="Action fiction" label="action"/>
<link wikidata="Q21802675" start="928" end="937" title="Adventure fiction" label="adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q40831" start="1227" end="1233" title="comedy" label="comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5937792" start="1235" end="1240" title="Crime fiction" label="crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636940" start="1242" end="1249" title="List of romance manga" label="romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561438" start="1251" end="1264" title="slice of life" label="slice of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q11313192" start="1270" end="1276" title="Sports manga" label="sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="2029" end="2034" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="2067" end="2072" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q242492" start="2326" end="2326" title="Shōjo manga" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q237338" start="2328" end="2328" title="Seinen manga" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q503106" start="2334" end="2334" title="Josei manga" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q220015" start="2591" end="2609" title="Weekly Shōnen Jump" label="Weekly Shōnen Jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="2955" end="2966" title="video games" label="video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q7506198" start="3386" end="3398" title="Shōnen Sekai" label="Shōnen Sekai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3863" end="3875" title="Shōnen Pakku" label="Shōnen Pakku"/>
<link wikidata="Q11464653" start="3935" end="3946" title="Shōnen Club" label="Shōnen Club"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3977" end="3987" title="Yōnen Club" label="Yōnen Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354149" start="4086" end="4094" title="Norakuro" label="Norakuro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7635423" start="4104" end="4116" title="Suihō Tagawa" label="Suihō Tagawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="4147" end="4162" title="anthropomorphic" label="anthropomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11316468" start="4186" end="4198" title="Tank Tankuro" label="Tank Tankuro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4208" end="4221" title="Gajo Sakamoto" label="Gajo Sakamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="4421" end="4445" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4450" end="4466" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6158963" start="4536" end="4563" title="Propaganda in Japan during the Second Sino-Japanese War and World War II" label="wartime propaganda purposes"/>
<link wikidata="Q38142" start="4725" end="4732" title="samurai" label="samurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643429" start="4847" end="4863" title="superhero comics" label="superhero comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q696251" start="4980" end="4999" title="occupation of Japan" label="occupation of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q193300" start="5320" end="5332" title="Osamu Tezuka" label="Osamu Tezuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q673036" start="5360" end="5369" title="Astro Boy" label="Astro Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q696580" start="5386" end="5406" title="Kimba the White Lion" label="Kimba the White Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q627603" start="5446" end="5454" title="Cartoon" label="cartoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141130" start="5562" end="5572" title="Continuity (fiction)" label="continuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="5678" end="5693" title="Science fiction" label="Science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q95159" start="5922" end="5936" title="Tetsujin 28-go" label="Tetsujin 28-go"/>
<link wikidata="Q471133" start="5946" end="5964" title="Mitsuteru Yokoyama" label="Mitsuteru Yokoyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q11565576" start="6038" end="6050" title="Manga Shōnen" label="Manga Shōnen"/>
<link wikidata="Q431443" start="6112" end="6127" title="Leiji Matsumoto" label="Leiji Matsumoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q471103" start="6133" end="6151" title="Shōtarō Ishinomori" label="Shōtarō Ishinomori"/>
<link wikidata="Q11313192" start="6441" end="6453" title="sports manga" label="sports manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349184" start="6540" end="6552" title="Eiichi Fukui" label="Eiichi Fukui"/>
<link wikidata="Q697000" start="6603" end="6616" title="Ashita no Joe" label="Ashita no Joe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319237" start="6626" end="6639" title="Asao Takamori" label="Asao Takamori"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339941" start="6644" end="6657" title="Tetsuya Chiba" label="Tetsuya Chiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q875066" start="6761" end="6774" title="Shōnen Sunday" label="Shōnen Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q508948" start="6791" end="6813" title="Weekly Shōnen Magazine" label="Weekly Shōnen Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660441" start="6885" end="6900" title="Shōnen Champion" label="Shōnen Champion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6914" end="6925" title="Shōnen King" label="Shōnen King"/>
<link wikidata="Q938736" start="6943" end="6953" title="Shōnen Ace" label="Shōnen Ace"/>
<link wikidata="Q220015" start="6989" end="7007" title="Weekly Shōnen Jump" label="Weekly Shōnen Jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q15051307" start="7291" end="7302" title="Dragon Ball (manga)" label="Dragon Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q208582" start="7312" end="7326" title="Akira Toriyama" label="Akira Toriyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q26971382" start="7334" end="7340" title="Naruto" label="Naruto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993" start="7350" end="7367" title="Masashi Kishimoto" label="Masashi Kishimoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q904" start="7375" end="7381" title="Bleach (manga)" label="Bleach"/>
<link wikidata="Q295073" start="7391" end="7400" title="Tite Kubo" label="Tite Kubo"/>
<link wikidata="Q28667972" start="7408" end="7417" title="One Piece" label="One Piece"/>
<link wikidata="Q2010" start="7427" end="7439" title="Eiichiro Oda" label="Eiichiro Oda"/>
<link wikidata="Q714760" start="7451" end="7460" title="Slam Dunk (manga)" label="Slam Dunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q459911" start="7470" end="7484" title="Takehiko Inoue" label="Takehiko Inoue"/>
<link wikidata="Q237338" start="7504" end="7509" title="seinen manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q669049" start="8068" end="8082" title="Shigeru Mizuki" label="Shigeru Mizuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368693" start="8119" end="8135" title="GeGeGe no Kitarō" label="GeGeGe no Kitarō"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778019" start="8147" end="8161" title="George Akiyama" label="George Akiyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q120300" start="8427" end="8443" title="Crayon Shin-Chan" label="Crayon Shin-Chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q360638" start="8453" end="8465" title="Yoshito Usui" label="Yoshito Usui"/>
<link wikidata="Q551359" start="8542" end="8550" title="Go Nagai" label="Go Nagai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086005" start="8600" end="8615" title="Harenchi Gakuen" label="Harenchi Gakuen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8873" end="8883" title="Shōjo_manga#Large_eyes" label="large eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366174" start="9153" end="9159" title="Panel (comics)" label="panels"/>
<link wikidata="Q733498" start="9345" end="9367" title="Fist of the North Star" label="Fist of the North Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q4460327" start="9441" end="9455" title="Jason Thompson (writer)" label="Jason Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q714064" start="9683" end="9694" title="City Hunter" label="City Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636940" start="9919" end="9926" title="List of romance manga" label="romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q860626" start="9970" end="9985" title="romantic comedy" label="romantic comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q556441" start="10398" end="10404" title="Business value" label="values"/>
<link wikidata="Q715274" start="10621" end="10635" title="CoroCoro Comic" label="CoroCoro Comic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762165" start="10688" end="10694" title="Action fiction" label="action"/>
<link wikidata="Q21802675" start="10696" end="10705" title="Adventure fiction" label="adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q40831" start="11222" end="11228" title="comedy" label="comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5937792" start="11230" end="11235" title="Crime fiction" label="crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054574" start="11237" end="11244" title="romance film" label="romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561438" start="11246" end="11259" title="slice of life" label="slice of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q11313192" start="11298" end="11304" title="Sports manga" label="sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168625" start="11443" end="11453" title="historical drama" label="historical"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="11480" end="11495" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="11500" end="11507" title="fantasy" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4347" start="11604" end="11616" title="Barefoot Gen" label="Barefoot Gen"/>
<link wikidata="Q959193" start="11626" end="11640" title="Keiji Nakazawa" label="Keiji Nakazawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q38142" start="11677" end="11684" title="Samurai" label="Samurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q178521" start="11789" end="11795" title="cowboy" label="cowboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q55400" start="12087" end="12101" title="Hayao Miyazaki" label="Hayao Miyazaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q192015" start="12625" end="12633" title="Yu-Gi-Oh" label="Yu-Gi-Oh"/>
<link wikidata="Q240225" start="12643" end="12659" title="Kazuki Takahashi" label="Kazuki Takahashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q621603" start="12670" end="12688" title="Samurai Deeper Kyo" label="Samurai Deeper Kyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q749265" start="12698" end="12713" title="Akimine Kamijyo" label="Akimine Kamijyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542815" start="13295" end="13314" title="hero&amp;#x27;s journey" label="hero&amp;#x27;s journey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620972" start="13612" end="13621" title="story arc" label="story arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284176" start="13916" end="13934" title="interior monologue" label="interior monologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q177576" start="14001" end="14013" title="Happy ending" label="Happy ending"/>
<link wikidata="Q16204174" start="14203" end="14212" title="Neil Cohn" label="Neil Cohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4460327" start="14466" end="14480" title="Jason Thompson (writer)" label="Jason Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q898700" start="14568" end="14578" title="silhouette" label="silhouette"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14660" end="14715" title="Manga iconography#Facial features" label="significantly smaller than those of characters in manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917787" start="14956" end="14968" title="motion lines" label="motion lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q933754" start="15306" end="15325" title="The Abashiri Family" label="The Abashiri Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q18008936" start="15625" end="15634" title="Dr. Slump" label="Dr. Slump"/>
<link wikidata="Q208582" start="15644" end="15658" title="Akira Toriyama" label="Akira Toriyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859491" start="15752" end="15766" title="Arale Norimaki" label="Arale Norimaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232808" start="15964" end="15976" title="Kei Kusunoki" label="Kei Kusunoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q219948" start="15982" end="15998" title="Rumiko Takahashi" label="Rumiko Takahashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q715723" start="16032" end="16046" title="Urusei Yatsura" label="Urusei Yatsura"/>
<link wikidata="Q272015" start="16063" end="16070" title="Ranma ½" label="Ranma ½"/>
<link wikidata="Q747359" start="16437" end="16448" title="fan service" label="fan service"/>
<link wikidata="Q690342" start="16832" end="16837" title="Harem (genre)" label="harem"/>
<link wikidata="Q642944" start="17034" end="17060" title="Negima! Magister Negi Magi" label="Negima! Magister Negi Magi"/>
<link wikidata="Q311589" start="17070" end="17082" title="Ken Akamatsu" label="Ken Akamatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191955" start="17093" end="17111" title="Hanaukyo Maid Team" label="Hanaukyo Maid Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324120" start="17121" end="17130" title="Morishige" label="Morishige"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069508" start="17461" end="17471" title="homoerotic" label="homoerotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433601" start="17800" end="17809" title="fan works" label="fan works"/>
<link wikidata="Q242488" start="17857" end="17872" title="boys&amp;#x27; love" label="boys&amp;#x27; love"/>
<link wikidata="Q836950" start="17937" end="17953" title="derivative works" label="derivative works"/>
<link wikidata="Q11624209" start="17969" end="17984" title="Yukari Fujimoto" label="Yukari Fujimoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q706167" start="18099" end="18119" title="The Prince of Tennis" label="The Prince of Tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q457524" start="18365" end="18380" title="List of manga magazines" label="manga magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q933530" start="18756" end="18765" title="One-shot_(comics)" label="one-shots"/>
<link wikidata="Q220015" start="18832" end="18850" title="Weekly Shōnen Jump" label="Weekly Shōnen Jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q844822" start="18860" end="18868" title="Shueisha" label="Shueisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q508948" start="18876" end="18898" title="Weekly Shōnen Magazine" label="Weekly Shōnen Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q726081" start="18908" end="18916" title="Kodansha" label="Kodansha"/>
<link wikidata="Q875066" start="18928" end="18948" title="Weekly Shōnen Sunday" label="Weekly Shōnen Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q785697" start="18958" end="18968" title="Shogakukan" label="Shogakukan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660441" start="19109" end="19131" title="Weekly Shōnen Champion" label="Weekly Shōnen Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q419352" start="19141" end="19153" title="Akita Shoten" label="Akita Shoten"/>
<link wikidata="Q715274" start="19248" end="19262" title="CoroCoro Comic" label="CoroCoro Comic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721265" start="19295" end="19307" title="Comic BomBom" label="Comic BomBom"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28912" wikidata="Q156053" url="?curid=28912" title="Srebrenica">
<text>Srebrenica (, ) is a town and municipality in Republika Srpska, Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is a small mountain town, with its main industry being salt mining and a nearby spa.

During the Bosnian War in 1995, Srebrenica was the site of genocidal killing of more than 8,000 Bosniak men and boys, which was subsequently designated as an act of genocide by the ICTY and the International Court of Justice. Perpetrated by units of the Bosnian Serb Army of Republika Srpska under Ratko Mladić, though the Serb paramilitary unit Scorpions also participated.

As of 2013, the town has a population of 2,607 inhabitants, while the municipality has 13,409 inhabitants. Before the war, the municipality&#x27;s Bosniak population was 27,542 (75.12%) and the Serb population was 8,315 (22.68%). As of 2013, the equivalent figures were 7,248 Bosniaks (54.05%) and 6,028 Serbs (44.95%).

==Etymology==
The town&#x27;s name (Srebrenica) () means &quot;silver mine&quot;, the same meaning of its old Latin name Argentaria. In other languages it is known as: &quot;Srebrenitza&quot; in German, &quot;Srebrenicë/a&quot; in Albanian, &quot;Srebrenitsa&quot; in Turkish, &quot;Szrebrenica&quot; in Hungarian and &quot;Srebrenița&quot; in Romanian.

==History==

===Roman era===

Illyrians inhabited Srebrenica and mined the silver in a nearby mine. Silver was also the main reason behind the Roman invasion of the area.

During the Roman times, there was a settlement of Domavia, known to have been near a mine. Silver ore from there was moved to the mints in Salona in the southwest and Sirmium in the northeast using the Via Argentaria. The current settlement of Srebrenica was also known by the Romans as Argentaria.

A Roman tombstone was excavated near Sase Monastery.

===Middle Ages===
An early Christian church dated to the 6th century was discovered in Srebrenica.

In the 13th and 14th century the region was part of the Banate of Bosnia, and, subsequently, the Bosnian Kingdom. The earliest reference to the name Srebrenica was in 1376, by which time it was already an important centre for trade in the western Balkans, based especially on the silver mines of the region. (Compare modern &quot;silver&quot;.) By that time, a large number of merchants of the Republic of Ragusa were established there, and they controlled the domestic silver trade and the export by sea, almost entirely via the port of Ragusa (Dubrovnik). During the 14th century, many German miners moved into the area. There were often armed conflicts about Srebrenica because of its mines. According to Czech historian Konstantin Josef Jireček, from 1411 to 1463, Srebrenica switched hands several times, being Hungarian one time, Serbian five times, Bosnian four times, and Ottoman three times. The mines of Bosnian Podrinje and Usora were part of the Serbian Despotate prior to the Ottoman conquest.

===Ottoman period===

With the town coming under Ottoman rule, becoming less influenced by the Republic of Ragusa, the economic importance of Srebrenica went into decline, as did the proportion of Christians in the population. The Franciscan church of St. Nicholas was converted into the White Mosque, but the large number of Catholics, Ragusan and Saxon, caused the transformation of the town to Islam to be slower than in most of the other towns in the area.

The area of Osat was liberated for a short time during the First Serbian Uprising (1804–13), under the leadership of Kara-Marko Vasić from Crvica. Upon the breakout of the uprising, Metropolitan Hadži Melentije Stevanović contacted Vasić, who met with the rebel leadership. After participating in battles on the Drina (1804), Vasić asked Karađorđe for an army to liberate Osat; Lazar Mutap was dispatched and the region came under rebel rule. In 1808, the Ottomans cleared out Osat, and by 1813, the rebels left the region.

===Austro-Hungarian period===

The town came under Austro-Hungarian rule in 1878, when the Congress of Berlin approved the occupation of the Bosnia Vilayet, which later in 1908 became a condominium under the joint control of Austria and Hungary. The natural mineral water springs Crni Guber (&quot;Black Guber&quot;) developed into an important part of the local economy. The Bohemian company Mattoni established a distribution infrastructure to tap and export the water named &quot;Guber-Quelle&quot; (&quot;Guber Spring&quot;) throughout the monarchy and abroad. The construction of a spa was recommended. Modern infrastructure such as administration, electricity, roads, schools, telephone, healthcare, a postal service and other things were introduced.

Although the Austrian rulers tried to stop the spread of nationalism and favoured a multi-religious and multi-cultural makeup with religious tolerance under their hegemony, Serbian nationalism was viewed with suspicion and hostility, since it demanded a unification of Bosnia with Serbia. As modern education raised the levels of general literacy, ideas spread through the advent of newspapers and publications. The region became increasingly restless as nationalism spread to all groups.

During the First World War, one of the region&#x27;s main battle areas was in Eastern Bosnia and the Drina, from where the units of Austria-Hungary advanced towards the Kingdom of Serbia. In late summer 1914 Srebrenica was taken over by Serbian volunteers under Kosta Todorović but later retaken by Austro-Hungarian units. Following World War I, Bosnia was incorporated into the South Slav kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, which later was renamed Yugoslavia.

===Second World War===
During the Second World War there were many atrocities committed by the Chetniks and Ustashas. Partisans fought Chetniks and Ustashe during the war and the people of Srebrenica built a partisan memorial cemetery monument for the fallen victims.

===Yugoslav period===
Tourism gained importance during the communist Yugoslav period and wellness spa and taking to the waters became an important part of the local economy. The &quot;Banja Guber&quot; was constructed for that purpose. Up to the 1990s over 90,000 overnight stays were recorded and an annual income of about three million dollars generated.

===Bosnian War===
The town of Srebrenica came to global prominence as a result of events during the Bosnian War (1992–1995). The strategic objectives proclaimed by the secessionist Bosnian Serb presidency included the creation of a border separating the Serb people from Bosnia&#x27;s other ethnic communities and the abolition of the border along the River Drina separating Serbia and the Bosnian Serbs&#x27; Republika Srpska. The Bosnian Muslim/Bosniak majority population of the Drina Valley posed a major obstacle to the achievement of these objectives. In the early days of the campaign of forcible transfer (ethnic cleansing) that followed the outbreak of war in April 1992 the town of Srebrenica was occupied by Serb/Serbian forces. It was subsequently retaken by Bosniak resistance groups. Refugees expelled from towns and villages across the central Drina valley sought shelter in Srebrenica, swelling the town&#x27;s population.

The town and its surrounding area was surrounded and besieged by Serb forces. On 16 April 1993, the United Nations declared the Bosnian Muslim/Bosniak enclave a UN safe area, to be &quot;free from any armed attack or any other hostile act&quot;, and guarded by a small Dutch unit operating under the mandate of United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR), which did not get permission to use force from the UN, which they needed to defend the local population.

Srebrenica and the other UN safe areas of Žepa and Goražde were isolated pockets of Bosnian government-held territory in eastern Bosnia. In July 1995, despite the town&#x27;s UN-protected status, it was attacked and captured by the Army of Republika Srpska led by general Ratko Mladić. Following the town&#x27;s capture, all men of fighting age who fell into Bosnian Serb hands were massacred in a systematically organised series of summary executions. The women of the town, boys below 12 years of age, and men above 65 were transferred by bus to Tuzla. The Srebrenica massacre was the deadliest massacre in Europe since World War II, being the only incident in Europe to have been recognized as a genocide since the Holocaust.

In 2001, the Srebrenica massacre was determined by judgement of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) to have been a crime of genocide (confirmed on appeal in 2004). This finding was upheld in 2007 by the International Court of Justice. The decision of the ICTY was followed by an admission to and an apology for the massacre by the Republika Srpska government.

Under the 1995 Dayton Agreement which ended the Bosnian War, Srebrenica was included in the territory assigned to Bosnian Serb control as the Republika Srpska entity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Although guaranteed under the provisions of the Dayton Agreement, the return of survivors was repeatedly obstructed. In 2007, verbal and physical attacks on returning refugees continued to be reported in the region around Srebrenica.

====Fate of Bosnian Muslim villages====
In 1992, Bosniak villages around Srebrenica were under constant attacks by Serb forces. The Bosnian Institute in the United Kingdom has published a list of 296 villages destroyed by Serb forces around Srebrenica three years before the genocide and in the first three months of war (April–June 1992):

According to the Naser Orić trial judgement:

===Post-war period===
The town has a religious makeup of roughly half Muslim and half Orthodox. Most of the town&#x27;s 23 mosques that were destroyed were reconstructed with donations and aid, also from abroad.

Unemployment rates are high since the economy was destroyed and reconstruction progresses slowly, as in many parts of the country. There are plans to revive the mineral water and spa business again. The reconstruction of the &quot;Banja Guber&quot; was scheduled for 2019 but experienced delays.

==Politics==
In 2007, Srebrenica&#x27;s municipal assembly adopted a resolution demanding independence from the Republika Srpska entity (although not from Bosnia&#x27;s sovereignty); the Serb members of the assembly did not vote on the resolution. In the 2016 elections Mladen Grujičić, a Bosnian Serb and native of the town of Srebrenica, was elected as mayor.

The municipality emblem was developed during the Yugoslav period and depicts a red and white stylised &quot;S&quot; with a depiction of the mineral water spring in the lower middle and a tree in the upper middle. The spring underscores the historical importance to the town&#x27;s economy and the tree the nature and forests of the region.

==Local communities==
The municipality (општина or &quot;opština&quot;) is further subdivided into the following local communities (мјесне заједнице or &quot;mjesne zajednice&quot;):

*Brežani
*Crvica
*Donji Potočari
*Gornji Potočari
*Gostilj
*Kostolomci
*Brezova Njiva
*Krnići
*Luka
*Orahovica
*Osatica
*Podravanje
*Radoševići
*Ratkovići
*Sase
*Skelani
*Skenderovići
*Srebrenica
*Sućeska
*Toplica
*Viogor
==Demographics==

===Population===
===Ethnic composition===

The borders of the municipality in the 1953 and 1961 census were different. In 1953, a distinctive Muslim nationality had been yet to emerge as an ethnicity, leading Slavic Muslims to identify as Yugoslavs. As &quot;Yugoslav&quot; was itself not adopted in 1948, they were classified as &quot;other&quot; and while many self-identified as “Serbs” or “Croats”. Until 1961 census, the municipality of Srebrenica included today&#x27;s territory of Bratunac municipality. The ethnic composition of the municipality:


==Culture==
* Sase Monastery, Serbian Orthodox monastery dating back to 13th century
* White Mosque, dating to 17th century, on the foundations of a Franciscan Catholic church
* Čaršija mosque, built or rebuilt in 1836 by Selmanaga Selmanagic. Rebuilt in 1988, demolished in 1995, rebuilt in 2011 by Ahmed Smajlovic.
* various other mosques such as the Red Mosque
* Church of the Intercession of the Holy Virgin (Srebrenica), dating to 1903
* St Mary&#x27;s Catholic Chapel
* local museum
* Mosque youth center (&quot;Omladinski centar&quot;), completed in 2019 in neo-Ottoman style
* mineral water springs and spa

==Economy==

Before 1992, there was a metal factory in the town, and lead, zinc, and gold mines nearby. The town&#x27;s name (Srebrenica) means &quot;silver mine&quot;, the same meaning of its old Latin name &quot;Argentaria&quot;.

Before the war, Srebrenica also had a big spa and the town prospered from wellness tourism from the Crni Guber (&quot;Black Guber&quot;) ferruginous spring water and other springs. Nowadays, Srebrenica has some tourism but a lot less developed than before the war. Currently, a pension, motel and a hostel are operating in the town.

;Economic preview
The following table gives a preview of total number of registered people employed in legal entities per their core activity (as of 2018):
==Notable people==
* Asmir Suljić (b. 1991), footballer
* Desnica Radivojević (born 1952), Bosnian politician
* Emir Suljagić (b. 1975), author
* Emir Sulejmanović (b. 1995), basketball player
* Esmir Ahmetović (born 1991), Bosnian footballer
* Hamza Alić (b. 1979), shot putter
* Irvin Mujčić (b. 1987) human rights activist
* Juraj Dragišić (–1520), Franciscan theologian and philosopher
* Kadir Hodžić (born 1994), Bosnian footballer
* Milorad Simić (b. 1946), philologist
* Mirsad Bektić (b. 1991), Bosnian-American UFC fighter
* Mirzad Mehanović (born 1993), Bosnian footballer
* Mladen Grujičić (born 1982), Bosnian Serb politician and mayor of Srebrenica
* Muamer Jahić (born 1979), Bosnian footballer
* Naser Orić (b. 1967), Bosnian military officer during Bosnian war 1992–1995
* Sabahudin Vugdalić (born 1953), Bosnian sports journalist and former football goalkeeper
* Sanin Muminović (born 1990), Croatian footballer
* Selman Selmanagić (b. 1905), Bosnian-German architect from the Bauhaus school

==References==
==Sources==
*
*

==External links==

*Opština Srebrenica – Srebrenica municipality 
*The Advocacy Project partners with Bosnian Family (BOSFAM)
*Fiction stories about Srebrenica women: &quot;Integration Under the Midnight Sun&quot; by Adnan Mahmutovic</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q156053" start="0" end="10" title="Srebrenica" label="Srebrenica"/>
<link wikidata="Q11196" start="46" end="62" title="Republika Srpska" label="Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="64" end="86" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q12148489" start="146" end="157" title="Salt mine" label="salt mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341387" start="171" end="174" title="Thermal bath" label="spa"/>
<link wikidata="Q181533" start="188" end="199" title="Bosnian War" label="Bosnian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q170334" start="236" end="245" title="Srebrenica massacre" label="genocidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="273" end="280" title="Bosniaks" label="Bosniak"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="342" end="350" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q183219" start="358" end="362" title="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia" label="ICTY"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801" start="371" end="401" title="International Court of Justice" label="International Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125372" start="444" end="468" title="Army of Republika Srpska" label="Army of Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q93167" start="475" end="487" title="Ratko Mladić" label="Ratko Mladić"/>
<link wikidata="Q392134" start="523" end="532" title="Scorpions (paramilitary)" label="Scorpions"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="1069" end="1075" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q8748" start="1105" end="1113" title="Albanian language" label="Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="1142" end="1149" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="1178" end="1187" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="1218" end="1226" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q146715" start="1259" end="1268" title="Illyrians" label="Illyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="1412" end="1417" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q464780" start="1531" end="1535" title="Mint (facility)" label="mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258998" start="1540" end="1546" title="Salona" label="Salona"/>
<link wikidata="Q833060" start="1568" end="1575" title="Sirmium" label="Sirmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030415" start="1603" end="1617" title="Via Argentaria" label="Via Argentaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q203443" start="1709" end="1718" title="tombstone" label="tombstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q18331574" start="1738" end="1752" title="Sase Monastery" label="Sase Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627069" start="1911" end="1927" title="Banate of Bosnia" label="Banate of Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2980623" start="1952" end="1967" title="Bosnian Kingdom" label="Bosnian Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q208169" start="2249" end="2267" title="Republic of Ragusa" label="Republic of Ragusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722" start="2401" end="2410" title="Dubrovnik" label="Dubrovnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q700589" start="2579" end="2603" title="Konstantin Josef Jireček" label="Konstantin Josef Jireček"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="2671" end="2680" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744391" start="2777" end="2785" title="Podrinje" label="Podrinje"/>
<link wikidata="Q295985" start="2790" end="2795" title="Usora (region)" label="Usora"/>
<link wikidata="Q878319" start="2813" end="2830" title="Serbian Despotate" label="Serbian Despotate"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="3094" end="3104" title="Franciscan" label="Franciscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q31183580" start="3151" end="3163" title="White Mosque (Srebrenica)" label="White Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q12756760" start="3337" end="3341" title="Osat" label="Osat"/>
<link wikidata="Q368689" start="3384" end="3406" title="First Serbian Uprising" label="First Serbian Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q14796518" start="3442" end="3458" title="Kara-Marko Vasić" label="Kara-Marko Vasić"/>
<link wikidata="Q347497" start="3464" end="3470" title="Crvica, Srebrenica" label="Crvica"/>
<link wikidata="Q315172" start="3663" end="3672" title="Karađorđe" label="Karađorđe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3703" end="3714" title="Lazar Mutap" label="Lazar Mutap"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="3901" end="3917" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austro-Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q151423" start="3941" end="3959" title="Congress of Berlin" label="Congress of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q848372" start="3991" end="4005" title="Bosnia Vilayet" label="Bosnia Vilayet"/>
<link wikidata="Q734818" start="4036" end="4047" title="Condominium (international law)" label="condominium"/>
<link wikidata="Q533534" start="4075" end="4082" title="Cisleithania" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q696970" start="4087" end="4094" title="Transleithania" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q178921" start="4108" end="4121" title="mineral water" label="mineral water"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4130" end="4140" title="Crni Guber" label="Crni Guber"/>
<link wikidata="Q27778959" start="4243" end="4250" title="Mattoni" label="Mattoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341387" start="4437" end="4440" title="spa" label="spa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754526" start="4488" end="4502" title="Administration (government)" label="administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725" start="4504" end="4515" title="electricity" label="electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q34442" start="4517" end="4522" title="roads" label="roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q3914" start="4524" end="4531" title="schools" label="schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q11035" start="4533" end="4542" title="telephone" label="telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q31207" start="4544" end="4554" title="healthcare" label="healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q49845" start="4558" end="4564" title="Mail" label="postal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="4665" end="4676" title="nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11032" start="4991" end="5001" title="newspapers" label="newspapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="5109" end="5124" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="5488" end="5525" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5598" end="5614" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q872672" start="5659" end="5667" title="Chetniks" label="Chetniks"/>
<link wikidata="Q151179" start="5672" end="5680" title="Ustaše" label="Ustashas"/>
<link wikidata="Q872672" start="5699" end="5707" title="Chetniks" label="Chetniks"/>
<link wikidata="Q151179" start="5712" end="5719" title="Ustashe" label="Ustashe"/>
<link wikidata="Q181533" start="6291" end="6302" title="Bosnian War" label="Bosnian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q186901" start="6549" end="6554" title="Drina" label="Drina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480288" start="7184" end="7207" title="Siege of Srebrenica" label="besieged by Serb forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="7231" end="7245" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="7282" end="7289" title="Enclave and exclave" label="enclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467392" start="7292" end="7304" title="United Nations Safe Areas" label="UN safe area"/>
<link wikidata="Q170245" start="7442" end="7473" title="United Nations Protection Force" label="United Nations Protection Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q393848" start="7634" end="7638" title="Žepa" label="Žepa"/>
<link wikidata="Q504058" start="7643" end="7650" title="Goražde" label="Goražde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125372" start="7824" end="7848" title="Army of Republika Srpska" label="Army of Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q93167" start="7864" end="7876" title="Ratko Mladić" label="Ratko Mladić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752350" start="8025" end="8042" title="summary execution" label="summary execution"/>
<link wikidata="Q174684" start="8140" end="8145" title="Tuzla" label="Tuzla"/>
<link wikidata="Q170334" start="8151" end="8170" title="Srebrenica massacre" label="Srebrenica massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q183219" start="8390" end="8447" title="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia" label="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="8479" end="8487" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801" start="8558" end="8588" title="International Court of Justice" label="International Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q190315" start="8731" end="8747" title="Dayton Agreement" label="Dayton Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9502" end="9528" title="Naser Orić#The verdict" label="Naser Orić trial judgement"/>
<link wikidata="Q11196" start="10153" end="10169" title="Republika Srpska" label="Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q99454404" start="10311" end="10326" title="Mladen Grujičić" label="Mladen Grujičić"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="10396" end="10401" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q325237" start="10930" end="10937" title="Brežani (Srebrenica)" label="Brežani"/>
<link wikidata="Q347497" start="10939" end="10945" title="Crvica (Srebrenica)" label="Crvica"/>
<link wikidata="Q332455" start="10947" end="10961" title="Donji Potočari" label="Donji Potočari"/>
<link wikidata="Q332461" start="10963" end="10978" title="Gornji Potočari" label="Gornji Potočari"/>
<link wikidata="Q332390" start="10980" end="10987" title="Gostilj, Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Gostilj"/>
<link wikidata="Q347504" start="10989" end="10999" title="Kostolomci" label="Kostolomci"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11001" end="11014" title="Brezova Njiva" label="Brezova Njiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q332409" start="11024" end="11028" title="Luka (Srebrenica)" label="Luka"/>
<link wikidata="Q331726" start="11030" end="11039" title="Orahovica (Srebrenica)" label="Orahovica"/>
<link wikidata="Q332327" start="11041" end="11048" title="Osatica" label="Osatica"/>
<link wikidata="Q348057" start="11062" end="11072" title="Radoševići (Srebrenica)" label="Radoševići"/>
<link wikidata="Q347542" start="11074" end="11083" title="Ratkovići (Srebrenica)" label="Ratkovići"/>
<link wikidata="Q347445" start="11085" end="11089" title="Sase, Srebrenica" label="Sase"/>
<link wikidata="Q347647" start="11091" end="11098" title="Skelani" label="Skelani"/>
<link wikidata="Q347439" start="11100" end="11112" title="Skenderovići" label="Skenderovići"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11114" end="11124" title="Srebrenica (local community)" label="Srebrenica"/>
<link wikidata="Q347770" start="11126" end="11133" title="Sućeska" label="Sućeska"/>
<link wikidata="Q347431" start="11135" end="11142" title="Toplica (Srebrenica)" label="Toplica"/>
<link wikidata="Q331675" start="11144" end="11150" title="Viogor" label="Viogor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137457" start="11311" end="11317" title="Muslims (ethnicity)" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q236807" start="11408" end="11417" title="Yugoslavs" label="Yugoslavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q18331574" start="11740" end="11754" title="Sase Monastery" label="Sase Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q31183580" start="11813" end="11825" title="White Mosque (Srebrenica)" label="White Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12092" end="12150" title="Church of the Intercession of the Holy Virgin (Srebrenica)" label="Church of the Intercession of the Holy Virgin (Srebrenica)"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="12411" end="12415" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="12417" end="12421" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="12539" end="12544" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341387" start="12617" end="12620" title="spa" label="spa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046709" start="12712" end="12730" title="Chalybeate" label="ferruginous spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q16234222" start="13086" end="13098" title="Asmir Suljić" label="Asmir Suljić"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264848" start="13123" end="13142" title="Desnica Radivojević" label="Desnica Radivojević"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372542" start="13177" end="13190" title="Emir Suljagić" label="Emir Suljagić"/>
<link wikidata="Q11857841" start="13211" end="13228" title="Emir Sulejmanović" label="Emir Sulejmanović"/>
<link wikidata="Q20675827" start="13260" end="13275" title="Esmir Ahmetović" label="Esmir Ahmetović"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441334" start="13310" end="13320" title="Hamza Alić" label="Hamza Alić"/>
<link wikidata="Q131416488" start="13346" end="13358" title="Irvin Mujčić" label="Irvin Mujčić"/>
<link wikidata="Q261218" start="13393" end="13407" title="Juraj Dragišić" label="Juraj Dragišić"/>
<link wikidata="Q55314695" start="13457" end="13469" title="Kadir Hodžić" label="Kadir Hodžić"/>
<link wikidata="Q12755421" start="13504" end="13517" title="Milorad Simić" label="Milorad Simić"/>
<link wikidata="Q19609701" start="13543" end="13556" title="Mirsad Bektic" label="Mirsad Bektić"/>
<link wikidata="Q18342479" start="13599" end="13615" title="Mirzad Mehanović" label="Mirzad Mehanović"/>
<link wikidata="Q99454404" start="13650" end="13665" title="Mladen Grujičić" label="Mladen Grujičić"/>
<link wikidata="Q107293347" start="13729" end="13741" title="Muamer Jahić" label="Muamer Jahić"/>
<link wikidata="Q361189" start="13776" end="13786" title="Naser Orić" label="Naser Orić"/>
<link wikidata="Q7395846" start="13854" end="13872" title="Sabahudin Vugdalić" label="Sabahudin Vugdalić"/>
<link wikidata="Q55281502" start="13945" end="13960" title="Sanin Muminović" label="Sanin Muminović"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724433" start="13996" end="14013" title="Selman Selmanagić" label="Selman Selmanagić"/>
<link wikidata="Q124354" start="14059" end="14066" title="Bauhaus" label="Bauhaus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28913" wikidata="Q3498865" url="?curid=28913" title="Steve Bracks">
<text>Stephen Phillip Bracks (born 15 October 1954) is a former Australian politician and was the 44th Premier of Victoria. He first won the electoral district of Williamstown in 1994 for the Labor Party and was party leader and premier from 1999 to 2007.

Bracks led Labor in Victoria to minority government at the 1999 election, defeating the incumbent Jeff Kennett Liberal and National coalition government. Labor was returned with a majority government after a landslide win at the 2002 election. Labor was elected for a third term at the 2006 election with a substantial but reduced majority. The treasurer, John Brumby, became Labor leader and premier in 2007 when Bracks retired from politics. Bracks is the third-longest-serving Labor premier in Victorian history, surpassed only by John Cain Jr. and Daniel Andrews.

Bracks has served as the 6th Chancellor of Victoria University since 2021.

==Early life==
Steve Bracks was born in Ballarat, where his family owns a fashion business. He is a Lebanese Australian; his paternal grandfather came to Australia as a child from Zahlé in the Beqaa Valley of Lebanon in the 1890s. His family were Melkite Catholic before migrating and became Latin Catholic.

Bracks was educated in Ballarat at St Patrick&#x27;s College and the Ballarat College of Advanced Education (now Federation University), where he graduated in business studies and education. He became a keen follower of Australian rules football, supporting the Geelong Football Club.

==Before politics==
From 1976 to 1981 Bracks was a school commerce teacher at Sacred Heart College, Ballarat. During the 1980s he worked in local government in Ballarat and then as executive director of the Ballarat Education Centre. While in these positions he twice (1985 and 1988) contested the seat of Ballarat North in the Victorian Legislative Assembly for the Labor Party.

In 1989 Bracks was appointed statewide manager of Victorian state government employment programs, under the Labor government of John Cain Jr. He then became an adviser to both Cain and Cain&#x27;s successor as Premier, Joan Kirner. Here he witnessed from the inside the collapse of the Labor government following the economic and budgetary crisis which began in 1988. This experience gave Bracks a very conservative and cautious view of economic management in government.

Following the defeat of the Kirner government by the Liberal leader Jeff Kennett in late 1992, Bracks became executive director of the Victorian Printing Industry Training Board. Kirner resigned from parliament in 1994, and Bracks was elected to Kirner&#x27;s seat of Williamstown in the western suburbs of Melbourne. Bracks and his wife Terry lived in Williamstown. They have three children, one of whom is model Nick Bracks.

==State politics==

===Early days===

Bracks was immediately elected to Labor&#x27;s front bench, as Shadow Minister for Employment, Industrial Relations and Tourism. In 1996, after Labor under John Brumby was again defeated, he became Shadow Treasurer. In March 1999, when it became apparent that Labor was headed for another defeat under Brumby&#x27;s leadership, Brumby resigned and Bracks was elected Opposition Leader.

===First term as Premier===

Political observers were almost unanimous that Bracks had no chance of defeating Liberal premier Jeff Kennett at the September 1999 election: polls gave Kennett a 60% popularity rating. Bracks and his senior colleagues (particularly Brumby, who comes from Bendigo) campaigned heavily in regional areas, accusing Kennett of ignoring regional communities. In response, voters in regional areas deserted the Kennett government. On election night, much to its own surprise, Labor increased its seat count from 29 to 41, with the Liberals and their National Party allies retaining 43, and three falling to rural independents. With the Coalition one seat short of government, the election was to be decided in Frankston East, when the death of incumbent Peter McLellan forced a supplementary election. That supplementary election was won by Labor on a large swing, resulting in a hung parliament. The independents then threw their support to Labor, allowing Bracks to form government by one seat.

The Coalition briefly considered forcing Bracks to demonstrate that he had support on the floor of the Assembly. However, two of the independents, Russell Savage and Susan Davies, felt Kennett had given them short shrift in the previous legislature, and would not have even considered supporting him. In any event, this gambit was brought undone when Kennett announced his retirement from politics on 20 October. Bracks then advised the Governor, Sir James Gobbo, that he could form a government, which was duly sworn in later that day. Bracks became the first Catholic Labor Premier of Victoria since 1932.

Former leader Brumby, appointed Treasurer, was regarded as a major part of the government&#x27;s success. He and the Deputy Premier and Minister for Health, John Thwaites, and the Attorney-General, Rob Hulls, were regarded as the key ministers in the Bracks government.

Following a pre-1999 election commitment to consider the feasibility of introducing fast rail services to regional centres, in 2000 the government approved funding for the Regional Fast Rail project, upgrading rail lines between Melbourne and Ballarat, Bendigo, Geelong and Traralgon. However, in 2006 the Victorian Auditor General noted that in spite of $750 million spent, &quot;We found that the delivery of more frequent fast rail services in the Geelong, Ballarat, and Bendigo corridors by the agreed dates was not achieved. In total, the journey time outcomes will be more modest than we would have expected with only a minority of travellers likely to benefit from significant journey time improvements. These outcomes occur because giving some passengers full express services means bypassing often large numbers of passengers at intermediate stations along the corridors.&quot;

On 14 December 2000, Steve Bracks released a document outlining his government&#x27;s intent to introduce the Racial and Religious Tolerance Act 2001.

The major criticism of Bracks&#x27;s first government was that their insistence on consultation stood in the way of effective, proactive government. Bracks, according to critics, achieved little, and lost the excitement of constant change that was characteristic of the Kennett years. The talents of some of the more junior ministers in the government were also questioned. Nevertheless, Bracks got through his first term without major mishaps, and his popularity undiminished.

===Second term as Premier===
Labor won the 2002 election in a landslide, taking 62 seats out of 88 in the Legislative Assembly—only the third time in Victoria&#x27;s history that a Labor government had been reelected. In another first, Labor won a slim but clear majority in the Legislative Council as well. While this was the greatest victory Labor had ever had in a Victorian state election, it brought with it considerable risks. With majorities in both houses Bracks could no longer cite his weak parliamentary position as an excuse for inaction.

On 28 August 2002, Bracks, in conjunction with his then New South Wales counterpart, Bob Carr, opened the Mowamba aqueduct between Jindabyne and Dalgety, to divert 38 gigalitres of water a year from Lake Eucumbene to the Snowy and Murray rivers. The ten-year plan cost A$300 million with Victoria and NSW splitting the costs. Melbourne Water has stated that within 50 years there will be 20 per cent less water going into Victorian reservoirs.

In May 2003 Bracks broke an election promise and announced that the proposed Scoresby Freeway in Melbourne&#x27;s eastern suburbs would be a tollway rather than a freeway, as promised at the 2002 elections. As well as risking a loss of support in marginal seats in eastern Melbourne, this decision brought about a strong response from the Howard Federal government, which cut off federal funding for the project on the grounds that the Bracks government had reneged on the terms of the federal-state funding agreement. The decision seems to have been on the recommendation of Brumby, who was concerned with the state&#x27;s budgetary position. Also opposing the decision was the Federal Labor Opposition, which feared anti-Labor reaction at the 2004 Federal election. The then Opposition Leader Mark Latham described a meeting with Bracks and federal shadow ministers, writing:
This backflip, while seen by many as an opportunity for the Liberals to make ground, saw the then leader of the Liberals, Robert Doyle, adopt a much-criticised policy of half tolls, which was later overturned by his successor, Ted Baillieu.

In 2005, following extensive independent studies it was found that cattle had created extensive damage to the high country National Park and their continued presence in the Park was incompatible with the values of National Parks. Bracks backed the environment and his environment minister, John Thwaites and announced that Victoria would follow the NSW example and cattlemen would be banned from using the &quot;High Plains&quot; in Victoria&#x27;s National Parks to graze cattle. Stockmen had been fearing this decision since 1984, when a Labor government excised land to create the Alpine National Park. Some estimated three hundred cattlemen rode horses down Bourke street in protest while police said it was closer to 100. Colourful Victorian National Party leader Peter Ryan was quoted as saying that Bracks had killed &quot;The Man from Snowy River&quot; (although the poem was about mustering horses, not cattle – a practice which was stopped in the high country just after World War 2.)

Bracks&#x27; second government achieved one of Victorian Labor&#x27;s longest-held goals with a complete reform of the state&#x27;s system for electing its upper house. It saw the introduction of proportional representation, with eight five-member regions replacing the current single-member constituencies. This system increases the opportunity for minor parties such as the Greens and DLP to win seats in the Legislative Council, giving them a greater chance of holding the balance of power. Illustrating the historic importance Labor assigns to the changes, in a speech to a conference celebrating the 150th anniversary of the Eureka Stockade, Bracks said it was &quot;another victory for the aspirations of Eureka&quot;, and has described the changes as &quot;his proudest achievement&quot;.

The staging of the 2006 Commonwealth Games, generally viewed as a success (albeit an expensive one), was viewed as a plus for Bracks and the government. With times reasonably good, a perception arguably reinforced by an extensive government advertising campaign selling the virtues of Victoria to Victorians, polls indicated little interest in change, although towards the end of the election campaign polling indicated that the Liberals under Baillieu were closing the gap.

===Third term as Premier===
The election campaign was a relatively low-key affair, with the Government and Bracks largely running on their record, as well as their plans to tackle infrastructure issues in their third term. Bracks&#x27; image loomed large in Labor&#x27;s election advertising. Liberal attacks concentrated on the slow process of infrastructure development under Bracks (notably on water supply issues relating to the severe drought affecting Victoria in the election leadup), and new Liberal leader Ted Baillieu promised to start construction on a range of new infrastructure initiatives, including a new dam on the Maribyrnong River and a desalination plant. Labor&#x27;s broken election promise on Eastlink was also expected to be a factor in some seats in the eastern suburbs of Melbourne.

On 25 November 2006, Steve Bracks won his third election, comfortably defeating Baillieu to secure a third term, with a slightly reduced majority in the Lower House. This marked only the second time that the Victorian Labor Party had won a third term in office. His third term Cabinet was sworn in on 1 December 2006 with Bracks also holding the portfolio of Minister for Veterans&#x27; Affairs and Multicultural Affairs.

===Resignation===
Bracks announced his resignation as Premier on 27 July 2007, saying this was to spend more time with his family. He stepped down on 30 July 2007. According to the ABC, Bracks had been under political and personal pressure in the weeks before his resignation. Alone among State Premiers, he had refused to agree to the Federal Government&#x27;s $10 billion Murray-Darling Basin water conservation plan, and his son had been involved in an accident involving a charge of drink driving. Bracks told a media conference he could no longer give a 100 per cent commitment to politics:

Bracks&#x27; deputy John Thwaites announced his resignation on the same day. News of the resignations caused surprise to the general community as well as to politicians. It was revealed that then Federal Labor Leader Kevin Rudd was informed only minutes before the announcement, and tried to talk Bracks out of his decision. Bracks&#x27; Treasurer John Brumby was elected unopposed by the Victorian Labor Caucus as Premier, while Attorney-General Rob Hulls was elected Deputy Premier.

One consequence of Bracks leaving politics may have been the introduction of abortion law reform in Victoria. It has been suggested that the resignation of Premier Bracks sowed the seeds for abortion law reform by legislation that parliamentarians previously had refused to support, fearing a backlash from anti-abortion groups led by veteran campaigner Margaret Tighe. Bracks, as a Catholic of Lebanese descent, almost certainly would not have allowed abortion legislation into the parliament, but his successor John Brumby did not share this view, and the Abortion Law Reform Bill introduced by upper house member Candy Broad was passed by the Parliament in 2008.

==After politics==
In August 2007, following his resignation as Premier, Bracks announced he would provide a short-term pro bono advising role in East Timor working alongside the newly elected Prime Minister Xanana Gusmão. Bracks was to spend a year travelling between Melbourne and Dili helping with the establishment of Gusmão&#x27;s administration, the key departments that would need to be involved, and advising on how they would be accountable and reportable to the legislature.

During 2008 Bracks indicated his support for Victorian abortion law reform in Victoria.

In addition to his role advising Gusmão, Bracks also joined several company advisory boards: KPMG, insurance firm Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group, the AIMS Financial Group and the NAB. The KPMG appointment was controversial, as the Victorian government had awarded the firm over 100 contracts during Bracks&#x27; time as Premier. On 14 February 2008, the Federal Labor Government appointed Bracks to head an inquiry into the ongoing viability of the Australian car industry.

In 2010, Bracks was appointed a Companion of the Order of Australia for services to the community and the Parliament of Victoria. In recognition of his distinguished services to the Victorian community, he was awarded the degree of Doctor of Laws (honoris causa) – LL.D &quot;(h.c.)&quot; by Deakin University on 27 April 2010. He was also appointed to the Honorary Chair of the Deakin University Foundation.

In February 2013 after the announcement that Nicola Roxon would retire from federal politics, Bracks was cited as a possible candidate for her safe Labor seat of Gellibrand, but he ruled out running for the seat.

Bracks was appointed to the role of Australian Consul-General in New York in May 2013, by the Federal ALP Government of Julia Gillard. At the time, the shadow Foreign Minister, the Deputy Liberal leader Julie Bishop, described the appointment as &quot;inappropriate&quot; because of the proximity to the upcoming election and &quot;arrogant&quot; because of a lack of consultation with the then-opposition. Following the defeat of the ALP at the 7 September election, incoming foreign minister Julie Bishop reversed the appointment in a decision described as &#x27;petty and vindictive&#x27; by acting ALP foreign affairs spokeswoman Tanya Plibersek.

In March 2019, it was announced that Bracks will serve as the 6th Chancellor of Victoria University from 2021.

In June 2020, Bracks and former federal Labor deputy leader Jenny Macklin were appointed as administrators of the Victorian branch of the Australian Labor Party by the party&#x27;s National Executive until early 2021, after allegations of branch-stacking by Victorian minister Adem Somyurek were revealed. The pair reviewed the state party&#x27;s operations and provided detailed recommendations to tackle the issue of branch-stacking within the party.

==References==

 
 

 
 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3498865" start="0" end="22" title="Steve Bracks" label="Stephen Phillip Bracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q13527909" start="97" end="116" title="Premier of Victoria" label="Premier of Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5356136" start="135" end="169" title="electoral district of Williamstown" label="electoral district of Williamstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q25210911" start="186" end="197" title="Australian Labor Party (Victorian Branch)" label="Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q114793" start="283" end="302" title="minority government" label="minority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030724" start="310" end="323" title="1999 Victorian state election" label="1999 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176518" start="349" end="361" title="Jeff Kennett" label="Jeff Kennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q55616818" start="362" end="369" title="Liberal Party of Australia (Victorian Division)" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19876086" start="374" end="382" title="National Party of Australia – Victoria" label="National"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065320" start="383" end="392" title="Coalition (Australia)" label="coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455328" start="431" end="450" title="majority government" label="majority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927387" start="480" end="493" title="2002 Victorian state election" label="2002 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927388" start="537" end="550" title="2006 Victorian state election" label="2006 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q17035438" start="596" end="605" title="Treasurer of Victoria" label="treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108047" start="607" end="618" title="John Brumby" label="John Brumby"/>
<link wikidata="Q16091741" start="785" end="798" title="John Cain (junior)" label="John Cain Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5216414" start="803" end="817" title="Daniel Andrews" label="Daniel Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q180514" start="863" end="882" title="Victoria University, Melbourne" label="Victoria University"/>
<link wikidata="Q17856" start="936" end="944" title="Ballarat" label="Ballarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q12179603" start="996" end="1015" title="Lebanese Australian" label="Lebanese Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q26569" start="1076" end="1081" title="Zahlé" label="Zahlé"/>
<link wikidata="Q202322" start="1089" end="1101" title="Beqaa Valley" label="Beqaa Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q64885" start="1143" end="1159" title="Melkite Greek Catholic Church" label="Melkite Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1188" end="1202" title="Catholic Church" label="Latin Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595062" start="1240" end="1265" title="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Ballarat" label="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121200" start="1318" end="1339" title="Federation University Australia" label="Federation University"/>
<link wikidata="Q50776" start="1425" end="1450" title="Australian rules football" label="Australian rules football"/>
<link wikidata="Q958369" start="1467" end="1488" title="Geelong Football Club" label="Geelong Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q23013847" start="1569" end="1599" title="Sacred Heart College, Ballarat" label="Sacred Heart College, Ballarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386693" start="1819" end="1849" title="Victorian Legislative Assembly" label="Victorian Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q25210911" start="1858" end="1869" title="Australian Labor Party (Victorian Branch)" label="Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16091741" start="2000" end="2012" title="John Cain (junior)" label="John Cain Jr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179594" start="2091" end="2102" title="Joan Kirner" label="Joan Kirner"/>
<link wikidata="Q55616818" start="2398" end="2405" title="Liberal Party of Australia (Victorian Division)" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176518" start="2413" end="2425" title="Jeff Kennett" label="Jeff Kennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q14073507" start="2759" end="2770" title="Nick Bracks" label="Nick Bracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108047" start="2967" end="2978" title="John Brumby" label="John Brumby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176518" start="3324" end="3336" title="Jeff Kennett" label="Jeff Kennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030724" start="3344" end="3367" title="1999 Victorian state election" label="September 1999 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q497793" start="3483" end="3490" title="Bendigo" label="Bendigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19876086" start="3771" end="3785" title="National Party of Australia – Victoria" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5355417" start="3931" end="3945" title="Electoral district of Frankston East" label="Frankston East"/>
<link wikidata="Q16014449" start="3975" end="3989" title="Peter McLellan" label="Peter McLellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394879" start="4101" end="4116" title="hung parliament" label="hung parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381763" start="4366" end="4380" title="Russell Savage" label="Russell Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647733" start="4385" end="4397" title="Susan Davies" label="Susan Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571023" start="4656" end="4664" title="Governor of Victoria" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q935115" start="4666" end="4681" title="James Gobbo" label="Sir James Gobbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6260803" start="4985" end="4998" title="John Thwaites (Australian politician)" label="John Thwaites"/>
<link wikidata="Q7340226" start="5026" end="5035" title="Rob Hulls" label="Rob Hulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309057" start="5271" end="5297" title="Regional Fast Rail project" label="Regional Fast Rail project"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279576" start="6097" end="6136" title="Racial and Religious Tolerance Act 2001" label="Racial and Religious Tolerance Act 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q9302011" start="6897" end="6916" title="Victorian Legislative Council" label="Legislative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q13527950" start="7226" end="7253" title="Premier of New South Wales" label="New South Wales counterpart"/>
<link wikidata="Q541217" start="7255" end="7263" title="Bob Carr" label="Bob Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q474" start="7284" end="7292" title="aqueduct (watercourse)" label="aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020373" start="7301" end="7310" title="Jindabyne" label="Jindabyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q992857" start="7315" end="7322" title="Dalgety, New South Wales" label="Dalgety"/>
<link wikidata="Q21942091" start="7369" end="7383" title="Lake Eucumbene" label="Lake Eucumbene"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="7458" end="7466" title="Victoria (Australia)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6811920" start="7496" end="7511" title="Melbourne Water" label="Melbourne Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277699" start="7692" end="7708" title="EastLink (Melbourne)" label="Scoresby Freeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q51330" start="7954" end="7960" title="John Howard" label="Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q982227" start="8410" end="8421" title="Mark Latham" label="Mark Latham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497630" start="8615" end="8627" title="Robert Doyle" label="Robert Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378246" start="8720" end="8732" title="Ted Baillieu" label="Ted Baillieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291186" start="9319" end="9339" title="Alpine National Park" label="Alpine National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176723" start="9504" end="9514" title="Peter Ryan (politician)" label="Peter Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16386865" start="9565" end="9589" title="The Man from Snowy River (poem)" label="The Man from Snowy River"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="9927" end="9954" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824226" start="10107" end="10113" title="Victorian Greens" label="Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054871" start="10118" end="10121" title="Democratic Labour Party (Australia, 1980)" label="DLP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164870" start="10361" end="10376" title="Eureka Stockade" label="Eureka Stockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q659207" start="10547" end="10570" title="2006 Commonwealth Games" label="2006 Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927388" start="11036" end="11053" title="2006 Victorian state election" label="election campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378246" start="11519" end="11531" title="Ted Baillieu" label="Ted Baillieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533714" start="11636" end="11653" title="Maribyrnong River" label="Maribyrnong River"/>
<link wikidata="Q118901957" start="12173" end="12208" title="Minister for Veterans&amp;#x27; Affairs (Victoria)" label="Minister for Veterans&amp;#x27; Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q781365" start="12418" end="12421" title="Australian Broadcasting Corporation" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q534290" start="12611" end="12631" title="Murray-Darling Basin" label="Murray-Darling Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6260803" start="12854" end="12867" title="John Thwaites (Australian politician)" label="John Thwaites"/>
<link wikidata="Q43135" start="13051" end="13061" title="Kevin Rudd" label="Kevin Rudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108047" start="13182" end="13193" title="John Brumby" label="John Brumby"/>
<link wikidata="Q751892" start="13239" end="13245" title="Caucus" label="Caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7340226" start="13281" end="13290" title="Rob Hulls" label="Rob Hulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032062" start="13936" end="13947" title="Candy Broad" label="Candy Broad"/>
<link wikidata="Q127537" start="14107" end="14115" title="pro bono" label="pro bono"/>
<link wikidata="Q574" start="14133" end="14143" title="East Timor" label="East Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11509" start="14195" end="14208" title="Xanana Gusmão" label="Xanana Gusmão"/>
<link wikidata="Q9310" start="14270" end="14274" title="Dili" label="Dili"/>
<link wikidata="Q493751" start="14655" end="14659" title="KPMG" label="KPMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q11310287" start="14676" end="14704" title="Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group" label="Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430985" start="14739" end="14742" title="National Australia Bank" label="NAB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141149" start="15067" end="15102" title="Order of Australia" label="Companion of the Order of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="15283" end="15296" title="honoris causa" label="honoris causa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518699" start="15300" end="15304" title="LL.D" label="LL.D"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="15311" end="15317" title="honorary degree" label="(h.c.)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180978" start="15327" end="15344" title="Deakin University" label="Deakin University"/>
<link wikidata="Q518856" start="15490" end="15502" title="Nicola Roxon" label="Nicola Roxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973604" start="15607" end="15617" title="Division of Gellibrand" label="Gellibrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="15761" end="15764" title="Australian Labor Party" label="ALP"/>
<link wikidata="Q41563" start="15779" end="15792" title="Julia Gillard" label="Julia Gillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q434858" start="15862" end="15874" title="Julie Bishop" label="Julie Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="16094" end="16097" title="Australian Labor Party" label="ALP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915375" start="16117" end="16125" title="2013 Australian federal election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="16261" end="16264" title="Australian Labor Party" label="ALP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7684036" start="16293" end="16308" title="Tanya Plibersek" label="Tanya Plibersek"/>
<link wikidata="Q180514" start="16391" end="16410" title="Victoria University, Melbourne" label="Victoria University"/>
<link wikidata="Q434649" start="16483" end="16496" title="Jenny Macklin" label="Jenny Macklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q25210911" start="16537" end="16583" title="Australian Labor Party (Victorian Branch)" label="Victorian branch of the Australian Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824361" start="16591" end="16622" title="Australian Labor Party National Executive" label="party&amp;#x27;s National Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4682122" start="16700" end="16713" title="Adem Somyurek" label="Adem Somyurek"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28915" wikidata="Q1194144" url="?curid=28915" title="Small Isles">
<text>The Small Isles () are a small archipelago in the Inner Hebrides, off the west coast of Scotland. They lie south of Skye and north of Mull and Ardnamurchan – the most westerly point of mainland Scotland.

Until 1891, Canna, Rùm and Muck belonged to the county of Argyll, while Eigg belonged to Inverness-shire. In that year, the entire archipelago was transferred to Inverness-shire. They now belong to the Highland council area.

==Name==
&quot;Small Isles&quot; is the name of the coterminous civil parish and former Church of Scotland parish, originally created in 1726 from part of Sleat parish, the balance of which lies on the much larger island of Skye. The original name of the new parish was Eigg or Short Isles. &quot;In process of time the name was by an easy transition changed from &#x27;Short&#x27; to &#x27;Small&#x27; Isles.&quot; The islands are not especially small, with Rùm being the 15th largest in Scotland. The Gaelic name of &quot;&quot; translates as &quot;cross isles&quot;, referring to the islands&#x27; position between Morar and Uist.

==Geography==
The four main islands are: Canna, Rùm, Eigg and Muck. The largest is Rùm, with an area of .

Smaller islands surrounding the main four include:
* Sanday, separated from Canna by a narrow tidal channel;
* Eilean Chathastail, near Eigg and
* Eilean nan Each (Horse Island), near the north coast of Muck ()

There are also a number of skerries:
* Hyskeir or Òigh-sgeir, (not to be confused with Heisker or the Monach Islands in the Outer Hebrides)
* Garbh Sgeir,
* Eagamol, near Eilean nan Each
* Humla, and
* two places called Dubh Sgeir

==Demographics==
According to the 2011 census, the total population of the Small Isles was 153. Five of the islands are inhabited: Eigg (83), Muck (27), Rùm (22), Canna (12) and Sanday (9).

The inhabited islands are in contrasting forms of ownership: Canna (along with the tidally linked Sanday) is owned by a national conservation charity, the National Trust for Scotland; Eigg has been owned by a local community trust since 1997; Muck remains in private ownership; and Rùm is largely in the hands of the state (via NatureScot), although some land in and around the only village (Kinloch) is owned by a community trust.

==Transport==
A Caledonian MacBrayne ferry, , links the Small Isles to each other and to the mainland port of Mallaig. The ferry runs a daily service, calling at different islands depending on the day of the week; there are two calls at certain islands on each day to allow for day visits to and from each island. The Lochnevis has a landing craft-style stern ramp allowing vehicles to be driven onto and off the vessel at a new slipway constructed in 2001, however visitors are not normally permitted to bring vehicles to the Small Isles. During the summer months the islands are also served by Arisaig Marine&#x27;s passenger ferry &quot;MV Sheerwater&quot; from Arisaig, south of Mallaig. Timetables are also arranged to allow time onshore on different islands depending on the day of the week.

==Nature and conservation==
The Small Isles are all important for their wildlife, with Rùm being designated as both a national nature reserve and a Special Area of Conservation (SAC). Rùm is home to one of the world&#x27;s largest colonies of Manx shearwater, and was the location for the first stage of the reintroduction of white-tailed sea-eagles into Scotland, with 82 birds being released between 1975 and 1985. Rùm, and Canna and Sanday (jointly), are designated as Special Protection Areas (SPA) due their birdlife, with all three islands hosting important breeding populations of guillemots and kittiwakes. The Canna and Sanday SPA is also designated due to its importance to breeding Atlantic puffins and shags, whilst the Rùm SPA designation notes the presence of golden eagles, Manx shearwaters, and red-throated divers.

Around of the waters around Rùm, Canna and the low-lying rocky islet of Oigh-sgeir have been designated as the Small Isles Nature Conservation Marine Protected Area (NCMPA). Of particular note is that this area holds the UK&#x27;s only known colony of fan mussels. The seas surrounding all of the Small Isles have also been designated as a SAC due to their importance for harbour porpoises.

The islands and surrounding sea area together form the Small Isles national scenic area, one of the forty such areas in Scotland, which are defined so as to identify areas of exceptional scenery and to ensure its protection from inappropriate development. The designated area covers in total, of which is on land and the remaining is marine (i.e. below low tide level).

==Footnotes==
==External links==
*Visit Small Isles
*Gazetteer for Scotland: Parish of Small Isles
*Gazetteer for Scotland: Parish of Small Isles (History)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1194144" start="4" end="15" title="Small Isles" label="Small Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="31" end="42" title="archipelago" label="archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q81052" start="50" end="64" title="Inner Hebrides" label="Inner Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="88" end="96" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q107393" start="116" end="120" title="Isle of Skye" label="Skye"/>
<link wikidata="Q111444" start="134" end="138" title="Isle of Mull" label="Mull"/>
<link wikidata="Q639680" start="143" end="155" title="Ardnamurchan" label="Ardnamurchan"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="194" end="202" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q194446" start="217" end="222" title="Canna, Scotland" label="Canna"/>
<link wikidata="Q278082" start="224" end="227" title="Rùm" label="Rùm"/>
<link wikidata="Q501215" start="232" end="236" title="Muck, Scotland" label="Muck"/>
<link wikidata="Q652539" start="263" end="269" title="Argyll" label="Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q514481" start="277" end="281" title="Eigg" label="Eigg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247390" start="294" end="309" title="Inverness-shire" label="Inverness-shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q208279" start="407" end="415" title="Highland (council area)" label="Highland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124673" start="495" end="507" title="Civil parishes in Scotland" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q922480" start="519" end="537" title="Church of Scotland" label="Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066913" start="586" end="591" title="Sleat" label="Sleat"/>
<link wikidata="Q278082" start="890" end="893" title="Rùm" label="Rùm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="904" end="916" title="List of islands of Scotland#Larger islands" label="15th largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947185" start="1049" end="1054" title="Morar" label="Morar"/>
<link wikidata="Q354289" start="1059" end="1063" title="Uist" label="Uist"/>
<link wikidata="Q194446" start="1107" end="1112" title="Canna, Scotland" label="Canna"/>
<link wikidata="Q278082" start="1114" end="1117" title="Rùm" label="Rùm"/>
<link wikidata="Q514481" start="1119" end="1123" title="Eigg" label="Eigg"/>
<link wikidata="Q501215" start="1128" end="1132" title="Muck, Scotland" label="Muck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558705" start="1226" end="1232" title="Sanday, Inner Hebrides" label="Sanday"/>
<link wikidata="Q555937" start="1267" end="1280" title="tidal island" label="tidal channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049405" start="1284" end="1302" title="Eilean Chathastail" label="Eilean Chathastail"/>
<link wikidata="Q216851" start="1412" end="1420" title="skerry" label="skerries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3144440" start="1424" end="1431" title="Hyskeir" label="Hyskeir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606513" start="1487" end="1501" title="Monach Islands" label="Monach Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q80967" start="1509" end="1523" title="Outer Hebrides" label="Outer Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q3095326" start="1527" end="1538" title="Garbh Sgeir" label="Garbh Sgeir"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="1651" end="1662" title="United Kingdom census, 2011" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q599997" start="1963" end="1990" title="National Trust for Scotland" label="National Trust for Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537425" start="2136" end="2146" title="NatureScot" label="NatureScot"/>
<link wikidata="Q58897653" start="2200" end="2207" title="Kinloch, Rùm" label="Kinloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026582" start="2257" end="2277" title="Caledonian MacBrayne" label="Caledonian MacBrayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010557" start="2351" end="2358" title="Mallaig" label="Mallaig"/>
<link wikidata="Q841751" start="2575" end="2588" title="landing craft" label="landing craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q361945" start="2670" end="2677" title="slipway" label="slipway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970117" start="3158" end="3181" title="National nature reserve (Scotland)" label="national nature reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191622" start="3188" end="3216" title="Special Area of Conservation" label="Special Area of Conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q208405" start="3283" end="3298" title="Manx shearwater" label="Manx shearwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q25438" start="3366" end="3388" title="white-tailed sea-eagle" label="white-tailed sea-eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463705" start="3512" end="3535" title="Special Protection Area" label="Special Protection Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q21062" start="3628" end="3638" title="Uria aalge" label="guillemots"/>
<link wikidata="Q310848" start="3643" end="3652" title="kittiwake" label="kittiwake"/>
<link wikidata="Q26685" start="3733" end="3748" title="Atlantic puffin" label="Atlantic puffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q83020448" start="3754" end="3759" title="Gulosus aristotelis" label="shags"/>
<link wikidata="Q41181" start="3814" end="3826" title="golden eagle" label="golden eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q26691" start="3851" end="3869" title="red-throated diver" label="red-throated diver"/>
<link wikidata="Q68441067" start="3996" end="4037" title="Marine Protected Areas in Scotland" label="Nature Conservation Marine Protected Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016868" start="4125" end="4135" title="Atrina fragilis" label="fan mussel"/>
<link wikidata="Q27027" start="4245" end="4261" title="harbour porpoise" label="harbour porpoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978246" start="4332" end="4352" title="National scenic area (Scotland)" label="national scenic area"/>
<link wikidata="Q956736" start="4618" end="4632" title="Mean low water spring" label="low tide level"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28916" wikidata="Q47134" url="?curid=28916" title="Shetland">
<text>Shetland (until 1975 spelled Zetland), also called the Shetland Islands, is an archipelago in Scotland lying between Orkney, the Faroe Islands, and Norway. It is the northernmost region of the United Kingdom. 

The islands lie about to the northeast of Orkney, from mainland Scotland and west of Norway. They form part of the border between the Atlantic Ocean to the west and the North Sea to the east. Their total area is , and the population totalled in . The islands comprise the Shetland constituency of the Scottish Parliament. Shetland forms one of the 32 council areas of Scotland; the local authority is the Shetland Islands Council. The islands&#x27; administrative centre, largest settlement and only burgh is Lerwick, which has been the capital of Shetland since 1708, before which time the capital was Scalloway. Due to its location it is only accessible by ferry or flight with an airport located in Sumburgh as well as a port and emergency airstrip in Lerwick.

The archipelago has an oceanic climate, complex geology, rugged coastline, and many low, rolling hills.
The largest island, known as &quot;the Mainland&quot;, has an area of , and is the fifth-largest island in the British Isles. It is one of 16 inhabited islands in Shetland.

Humans have lived in Shetland since the Mesolithic period. Picts are known to have been the original inhabitants of the islands, before the Norse conquest and subsequent colonisation in the Early Middle Ages. From the 10th to 15th centuries, the islands formed part of the Kingdom of Norway. In 1472, the Parliament of Scotland absorbed the Lordship of Shetland into the Kingdom of Scotland, following the failure to pay a dowry promised to James III of Scotland by the family of his bride, Margaret of Denmark. After Scotland and England united in 1707 to form the Kingdom of Great Britain, trade between Shetland and continental Northern Europe decreased. The discovery of North Sea oil in the 1970s significantly boosted Shetland&#x27;s economy, employment and public-sector revenues. Fishing has always been an important part of the islands&#x27; economy.

The local way of life reflects the Norse heritage of the isles, including the Up Helly Aa fire festivals and a strong musical tradition, especially the traditional fiddle style. Almost all place names in the islands have Norse origin. The islands have produced a variety of prose writers and poets, who have often written in the distinctive Shetland dialect of the Scots language. Many areas on the islands have been set aside to protect the local fauna and flora, including a number of important seabird nesting sites. The Shetland pony and Shetland Sheepdog are two well-known Shetland animal breeds. Other animals with local breeds include the Shetland sheep, cow, goose, and duck. The Shetland pig, or grice, has been extinct since about 1930.

The islands&#x27; motto, which appears on the Council&#x27;s coat of arms, is &quot;&quot; (&quot;By law shall the land be built&quot;). The phrase is of Old Norse origin, is mentioned in &quot;Njáls saga&quot;, and was likely borrowed from provincial Norwegian laws such as the Frostathing Law.

== Etymology ==

The name &quot;Shetland&quot; may derive from the Old Norse words (&#x27;hilt&#x27;), and (&#x27;land&#x27;), the popular and traditional claim. Another possibility is that the first syllable is derived from the name of an ancient Celtic tribe. Andrew Jennings has suggested a link with the Caledones.

In AD 43, the Roman author Pomponius Mela made reference in his writing to seven islands he called the . In AD 77, Pliny the Elder called these same lands the . Scholars have inferred that both of these references are to islands in the Shetland group. Another possible early written reference to the islands is Tacitus&#x27; report in &quot;Agricola&quot; in AD 98. After he described the Roman discovery and conquest of Orkney, he added that the Roman fleet had seen &quot;Thule, too&quot;. In early Irish literature, Shetland is referred to as — &quot;the Isles of Cats&quot; (meaning the island inhabited by the tribe called &quot;Cat&quot;). This may have been the pre-Norse inhabitants&#x27; name for the islands. Cat was the name of a Pictish people who occupied parts of the northern Scottish mainland (see Kingdom of Cat); and their name survives in the names of the county of Caithness and in the Scottish Gaelic name for Sutherland, , which means &quot;among the Cats&quot;.

The oldest known version of the modern name Shetland is ; this may represent &quot;Catland&quot;, the Germanic language softening the &quot;C-&quot; to &quot;H-&quot; according to Grimm&#x27;s law (also coinciding with Jennings&#x27; hypothesis for the early sound shift necessary for descent from &quot;*kalid-&quot; to &quot;*halit-&quot;, from &quot;Caledones&quot;). It occurs in a letter written by Harald, earl of Orkney, Shetland and Caithness, in ca. 1190. By 1431, the islands were being referred to as &quot;Hetland&quot;, after various intermediate transformations. It is possible that the Pictish &quot;cat&quot; sound contributed to this Norse name. In the 16th century, Shetland was referred to as . 

Gradually, the Scandinavian Norn language previously spoken by the inhabitants of the islands was replaced by the Shetland dialect of Scots and became . The initial letter is the Middle Scots letter, &quot;yogh&quot;, the pronunciation of which is almost identical to the original Norn sound, . When the use of the letter yogh was discontinued, it was often replaced by the similar-looking letter z (which at the time was usually rendered with a curled tail: ⟨ʒ⟩) hence , the form used in the name of the pre-1975 county council. This is the source of the ZE postcode used for Shetland.

Most of the individual islands have Norse names, although the derivations of some are obscure and may represent pre-Norse, Pictish, or even pre-Celtic names or elements.

== Geography and geology ==


Shetland is around north of Great Britain and west of Bergen, Norway. It covers an area of and has a coastline long.

Lerwick, the capital and largest settlement, has a population of 6,958. About half of the archipelago&#x27;s total population of 22,920 people live within of the town.

Scalloway on the west coast, which was the capital until 1708, has a population of fewer than 1,000 people.

Only 16 of about 100 islands are inhabited. The main island of the group is known as Mainland. The next largest are Yell, Unst, and Fetlar, which lie to the north, and Bressay and Whalsay, which lie to the east. East and West Burra, Muckle Roe, Papa Stour, Trondra, and Vaila are smaller islands to the west of Mainland. The other inhabited islands are Foula west of Walls, Fair Isle south-west of Sumburgh Head, and the Out Skerries to the east.

The uninhabited islands include Mousa, known for the Broch of Mousa, the finest preserved example of an Iron Age broch; Noss to the east of Bressay, which has been a national nature reserve since 1955; St Ninian&#x27;s Isle, connected to Mainland by the largest active tombolo in the United Kingdom; and Out Stack, the northernmost point of the British Isles. Shetland&#x27;s location means that it provides a number of such records: Muness is the most northerly castle in the United Kingdom and Skaw the most northerly settlement.

The geology of Shetland is complex, with numerous faults and fold axes. These islands are the northern outpost of the Caledonian orogeny, and there are outcrops of Lewisian, Dalradian and Moine metamorphic rocks with histories similar to their equivalents on the Scottish mainland. There are also Old Red Sandstone deposits and granite intrusions. The most distinctive feature is the ophiolite in Unst and Fetlar which is a remnant of the Iapetus Ocean floor made up of ultrabasic peridotite and gabbro.

Much of Shetland&#x27;s economy depends on the oil-bearing sediments in the surrounding seas. Geological evidence shows that in around 6100 BC a tsunami caused by the Storegga Slide hit Shetland, as well as the west coast of Norway, and may have created a wave of up to high in the voes where modern populations are highest.

The highest point of Shetland is Ronas Hill at . The Pleistocene glaciations entirely covered the islands. During that period, the Stanes of Stofast, a 2000-tonne glacial erratic, came to rest on a prominent hilltop in Lunnasting.

It has been estimated that there are about 275 sea stacks in Scotland of which circa 110 are located around the coasts of Shetland. For many of them there is no record of there having been any attempt by rock climbers to ascend them.

Shetland has a national scenic area which, unusually, includes a number of discrete locations: Fair Isle, Foula, South West Mainland (including the Scalloway Islands), Muckle Roe, Esha Ness, Fethaland and Herma Ness. The total area covered by the designation is 41,833 ha, of which 26,347 ha is marine (i.e. below low tide).

In October 2018, legislation came into force in Scotland to prevent public bodies, without good reason, showing Shetland in a separate box in maps, as had often been the practice. The legislation requires the islands to be &quot;displayed in a manner that accurately and proportionately represents their geographical location in relation to the rest of Scotland&quot;, so as make clear the islands&#x27; real distance from other areas.

=== Climate ===

Shetland has an oceanic temperate maritime climate (Köppen: &quot;Cfb&quot;), bordering on, but very slightly above average in summer temperatures, the subpolar variety, with long but cool winters and short warm summers. The climate all year round is moderate owing to the influence of the surrounding seas, with average night-time low temperatures a little above in January and February and average daytime high temperatures of near in July and August. The highest temperature on record was on 6 August 1910 at Sumburgh Head and the lowest in the Januaries of 1952 and 1959. The frost-free period may be as little as three months. In contrast, inland areas of nearby Scandinavia on similar latitudes experience significantly larger temperature differences between summer and winter, with the average highs of regular July days comparable to Lerwick&#x27;s all-time record heat that is around , further demonstrating the moderating effect of the Atlantic Ocean. In contrast, winters are considerably milder than those expected in nearby continental areas, even comparable to winter temperatures of many parts of England and Wales much further south.

The general character of the climate is windy, cloudy and often wet, with at least of rain falling on more than 250 days a year. Average yearly precipitation is , with November through January the wettest months, averaging 5.6 to 5.9 inches of precipitation, mostly rain. Snowfall is usually confined to the period November to February, and snow seldom lies on the ground for more than a day. Relatively less rain falls from April to July, although on average, no month receives less than . Fog is common during summer due to the cooling effect of the sea on mild southerly airflows.

Because of the islands&#x27; latitude, on clear winter nights the northern lights can sometimes be seen in the sky, while in summer there is almost perpetual daylight, a state of affairs known locally as the &quot;simmer dim&quot;. Annual bright sunshine averages 1110 hours, and overcast days are common.


== Settlements ==
There are only three settlements with a population over 500, being the town of Lerwick and the villages of Scalloway and Brae.
For town planning purposes, Shetland Islands Council has identified eight &#x27;Tier 1&#x27; settlements, being areas with the greatest concentration of services and facilities. They are the three settlements in the table above, plus Aith, Baltasound, Mid Yell, Sandwick, and Symbister.

List of inhabited islands and their populations:
== Prehistory ==


Due to the practice, dating to at least the early Neolithic, of building in stone on virtually treeless islands, Shetland is extremely rich in physical remains of the prehistoric eras and there are over 5,000 archaeological sites all told. A midden site at West Voe on the south coast of Mainland, dated to 4320–4030 BC, has provided the first evidence of Mesolithic human activity in Shetland. The same site provides dates for early Neolithic activity and finds at Scord of Brouster in Walls have been dated to 3400 BC. &quot;Shetland knives&quot; are stone tools that date from this period made from felsite from Northmavine.

Pottery shards found at the important site of Jarlshof also indicate that there was Neolithic activity there although the main settlement dates from the Bronze Age. This includes a smithy, a cluster of wheelhouses and a later broch. The site has provided evidence of habitation during various phases right up until Viking times. Heel-shaped cairns, are a style of chambered cairn unique to Shetland, with a particularly large example in Vementry.

Numerous brochs were erected during the Iron Age. In addition to Mousa there are significant ruins at Clickimin, Culswick, Old Scatness and West Burrafirth, although their origin and purpose is a matter of some controversy. The later Iron Age inhabitants of the Northern Isles were probably Pictish, although the historical record is sparse. Hunter (2000) states in relation to King Bridei I of the Picts in the sixth century AD: &quot;As for Shetland, Orkney, Skye and the Western Isles, their inhabitants, most of whom appear to have been Pictish in culture and speech at this time, are likely to have regarded Bridei as a fairly distant presence&quot;. In 2011, the collective site, &quot;The Crucible of Iron Age Shetland&quot;, including Broch of Mousa, Old Scatness and Jarlshof, joined the UKs &quot;Tentative List&quot; of World Heritage Sites.

== History ==
=== Scandinavian colonisation ===

The expanding population of Scandinavia led to a shortage of available resources and arable land there and led to a period of Viking expansion, so the Norse gradually shifted their attention from plundering to invasion. Shetland was colonised during the late 8th and 9th centuries, the fate of the existing indigenous Pictish population being uncertain. Modern Shetlanders still retain the Norse DNA with many family trees showing the Norse patronymic system (-sson/son, -dottir/daughter). Modern DNA studies such as the Viking Health Study are severely flawed as they account for only a tiny fraction of the population.

Vikings then used the islands as a base for pirate expeditions to Norway and the coasts of mainland Scotland. In response, Norwegian king Harald Hårfagre (&quot;Harald Fair Hair&quot;) annexed the Northern Isles (comprising Orkney and Shetland) in 875. Rognvald Eysteinsson received the Earldom of Orkney, which then included Shetland, from Harald as reparation for the death of his son in battle in Scotland, and then passed the earldom on to his brother Sigurd the Mighty. Sigurd went on to conquer further territory; by the time of his death in 892, the earldom of Orkney stretched from Shetland down to Caithness and Sutherland on mainland Britain.

The islands converted to Christianity in the late 10th century. King Olaf I Tryggvasson summoned the &quot;jarl&quot; Sigurd the Stout during a visit to Orkney and said, &quot;I order you and all your subjects to be baptised. If you refuse, I&#x27;ll have you killed on the spot and I swear I will ravage every island with fire and steel&quot;. Unsurprisingly, Sigurd agreed, and the islands became Christian at a stroke.

The Scottish crown claimed the overlordship of the Caithness and Sutherland area from Norway in 1098. The jarls thereafter owed allegiance to the Scottish crown for their territory on mainland Britain, which they held as the Mormaer of Caithness, but owed allegiance to the Norwegian crown for Orkney and Shetland.

In 1194, when Harald Maddadsson was Earl of Orkney, a rebellion broke out against King Sverre Sigurdsson of Norway. The Eyjarskeggjar (&quot;Island Beardies&quot;) sailed for Norway but were beaten in the Battle of Florvåg near Bergen. After his victory, King Sverre placed Shetland under direct Norwegian rule in 1195 as the &#x27;Lordship of Shetland&#x27;, removing it from the earldom of Orkney.

=== Increased Scottish interest ===
From the mid-13th century onwards Scottish monarchs increasingly sought to take control of the islands surrounding their seas. The process was begun in earnest by Alexander II and was continued by his successor Alexander III. This strategy eventually led to an invasion of Scotland by Haakon IV Haakonsson, King of Norway. His fleet assembled in Bressay Sound before sailing for Scotland. After the stalemate of the Battle of Largs, Haakon retreated to Orkney, where he died in December 1263, entertained on his deathbed by recitations of the sagas. His death halted any further Norwegian expansion in Scotland and following this ill-fated expedition, the Hebrides and Mann were yielded to the Kingdom of Scotland as a result of the 1266 Treaty of Perth, although the Scots recognised continuing Norwegian sovereignty over Orkney and Shetland.

=== Absorption by Scotland ===

In the 14th century, Orkney and Shetland remained Norwegian possessions, but Scottish influence was growing. Jon Haraldsson, who was murdered in Thurso in 1231, was the last of an unbroken line of Norse jarls, and thereafter the earls were Scots noblemen of the houses of Angus and St Clair. On the death of Haakon VI in 1380, Norway formed a political union with Denmark, after which the interest of the royal house in the islands declined. In 1469, both Orkney and Shetland was pledged by Christian I, in his capacity as King of Norway, as security against the payment of the dowry of his daughter Margaret, betrothed to James III of Scotland. As the money was never paid, the connection with the Crown of Scotland became permanent. In 1470, William Sinclair, 1st Earl of Caithness, ceded his title to James III, and the following year the Northern Isles were directly absorbed by the Crown of Scotland, an action confirmed by the Parliament of Scotland in 1472. Nonetheless, Shetland&#x27;s connection with Norway has proved to be enduring.

From the early 15th century onward Shetlanders sold their goods through the Hanseatic League of German merchantmen. The Hansa would buy shiploads of salted fish, wool and butter, and import salt, cloth, beer and other goods. The late 16th century and early 17th century were dominated by the influence of the despotic Robert Stewart, Earl of Orkney, who was granted the islands by his half-sister Mary Queen of Scots, and his son Patrick. The latter commenced the building of Scalloway Castle, but after his imprisonment in 1609, the Crown annexed Orkney and Shetland again until 1643, when Charles I granted them to William Douglas, 7th Earl of Morton. These rights were held on and off by the Mortons until 1766, when they were sold by James Douglas, 14th Earl of Morton to Laurence Dundas.

=== 18th and 19th centuries ===
The trade with the North German towns lasted until the Act of Union 1707, after which high salt duties prevented the German merchants from trading with Shetland. Shetland then went into an economic depression, as the local traders were not as skilled in trading salted fish. However, some local merchant-lairds took up where the German merchants had left off, and fitted out their own ships to export fish from Shetland to the Continent. For the independent farmers of Shetland this had negative consequences, as they now had to fish for these merchant-lairds.

Smallpox afflicted the islands in the 17th and 18th centuries (as it did all of Europe), but as vaccines became available after 1800, health improved. The islands were very badly hit by the potato famine of 1846 and the government introduced a Relief Plan for the islands under the command of Captain Robert Craigie of the Royal Navy who stayed in Lerwick to oversee the project 1847–1852. During this period Craigie also did much to improve and increase roads in the islands.

Population increased to a maximum of 31,670 in 1861. However, British rule came at a price for many ordinary people as well as traders. The Shetlanders&#x27; nautical skills were sought by the Royal Navy. Some 3,000 served during the Napoleonic wars from 1800 to 1815 and press gangs were rife. During this period 120 men were taken from Fetlar alone, and only 20 of them returned home. By the late 19th century 90% of all Shetland was owned by just 32 people, and between 1861 and 1881 more than 8,000 Shetlanders emigrated. With the passing of the Crofters&#x27; Holdings (Scotland) Act 1886 the Liberal prime minister William Gladstone emancipated crofters from the rule of the landlords. The Act enabled those who had effectively been landowners&#x27; serfs to become owner-occupiers of their own small farms. By this time fishermen from Holland, who had traditionally gathered each year off the coast of Shetland to fish for herring, triggered an industry in the islands that boomed from around 1880 until the 1920s when stocks of the fish began to dwindle. The production peaked in 1905 at more than a million barrels, of which 708,000 were exported.

=== 20th century ===

During World War I, many Shetlanders served in the Gordon Highlanders, a further 3,000 served in the Merchant Navy, and more than 1,500 in a special local naval reserve. The 10th Cruiser Squadron was stationed at Swarbacks Minn (the stretch of water to the south of Muckle Roe), and during a single year from March 1917 more than 4,500 ships sailed from Lerwick as part of an escorted convoy system. In total, Shetland lost more than 500 men, a higher proportion than any other part of Britain, and there were further waves of emigration in the 1920s and 1930s.

During World War II, a Norwegian naval unit nicknamed the &quot;Shetland bus&quot; was established by the Special Operations Executive in the autumn of 1940 with a base first at Lunna and later in Scalloway to conduct operations around the coast of Norway. About 30 fishing vessels used by Norwegian refugees were gathered and the Shetland Bus conducted covert operations, carrying intelligence agents, refugees, instructors for the resistance, and military supplies. It made over 200 trips across the sea, and Leif Larsen, the most highly decorated allied naval officer of the war, made 52 of them. Several RAF airfields and sites were also established at Sullom Voe and several lighthouses suffered enemy air attacks.

Oil reserves discovered in the later 20th century in the seas both east and west of Shetland have provided a much-needed alternative source of income for the islands. The East Shetland Basin is one of Europe&#x27;s prolific petroleum provinces. As a result of the oil revenue and the cultural links with Norway, a small Home Rule movement developed briefly to recast the constitutional position of Shetland. It saw as its models the Isle of Man, as well as Shetland&#x27;s closest neighbour, the Faroe Islands, an autonomous dependency of Denmark.

The population stood at 17,814 in 1961.

== Economy ==

Today, the main revenue producers in Shetland are agriculture, aquaculture, fishing, renewable energy, the petroleum industry (crude oil and natural gas production), the creative industries and tourism. Unst also has a rocket launch site called SaxaVord Spaceport (previously known as Shetland Space Centre). A February 2021 news item indicated that a rocket manufacturer from Germany, HyImpulse Technologies, planned to launch spacecraft powered by hydrogen from the Spaceport, starting in 2023. During the previous month, the Space Centre had filed plans with Council for a &quot;satellite launch facility and associated infrastructure&quot;.

As of February 2021, information on the Promote Shetland Web site indicated that &quot;Shetland is less reliant on tourism than many Scottish islands&quot; and that oil was an important sector of the economy. The &quot;process of gradually transitioning from oil to clean renewable energy ... production of clean hydrogen&quot; was also emphasized. Fishing remained the primary sector and was expected to grow.

=== Fishing ===

Fishing is central to the islands&#x27; economy today, with the total catch being in 2009, valued at over £73.2 million. Atlantic mackerel makes up more than half of the catch in Shetland by weight and value, and there are significant landings of haddock, cod, herring, whiting, monkfish and shellfish.

A report published in October 2020 was optimistic about the future of this sector in: &quot;With new fish markets in Lerwick and Scalloway, and plans to expand its aquaculture offerings in Yell, Shetland is preparing for more growth in its biggest industry&quot;.

As of February 2021, the Promote Shetland website stated that &quot;more fish is landed in Shetland than in England, Wales and Northern Ireland combined&#x27;, that &quot;Shetland harvests 40,000 tonnes of salmon a year, worth £180 million&quot; and that &quot;6,500 tonnes of mussels are grown in Shetland, more than 80 per cent of the total Scottish production&quot;.

=== Energy and fossil fuels ===

Oil and gas were first landed in 1978 at Sullom Voe, which has subsequently become one of the largest terminals in Europe. Taxes from the oil have increased public sector spending on social welfare, art, sport, environmental measures and financial development. Three-quarters of the islands&#x27; workforce is employed in the service sector, and the Shetland Islands Council alone accounted for 27.9% of output in 2003. Shetland&#x27;s access to oil revenues has funded the Shetland Charitable Trust, which in turn funds a wide variety of local programmes. The balance of the fund in 2011 was £217 million, i.e., about £9,500 per head.

In January 2007, the Shetland Islands Council signed a partnership agreement with Scottish and Southern Energy for the Viking Wind Farm, a 200-turbine wind farm and subsea cable. This renewable energy project would produce about 600 megawatts and contribute about £20 million to the Shetland economy per year. The plan met with significant opposition within the islands, primarily resulting from the anticipated visual impact of the development. However, in August 2024 the completion of the first part of the project saw Shetland connected to the mainland National Grid for the first time via a 600 MW HVDC link.

The PURE project in Unst is a research centre which uses a combination of wind power and fuel cells to create a wind-hydrogen system. The project is run by the Unst Partnership, the local community&#x27;s development trust.

A status report on hydrogen production in Shetland, published in September 2020, stated that Shetland Islands Council (SIC) had &quot;joined a number of organisations and projects to drive forward plans to establish hydrogen as a future energy source for the isles and beyond&quot;. For example, it was a member of the Scottish Hydrogen Fuel Cell Association (SHFCA). The ORION project, previously named the Shetland Energy Hub, was underway; the plan was to create an energy hub that would use clean electricity in the development of &quot;new technologies such as blue and green hydrogen generation&quot;.

In December 2020 the Scottish government released a hydrogen policy statement with plans for incorporating both blue and green hydrogen for use in heating, transportation and industry. The government also planned an investment of £100 million in the hydrogen sector &quot;for the £180 million Emerging Energy Technologies Fund&quot;. Shetland Islands Council planned to obtain further specifics about the availability of funding. The government had already agreed that the production of &quot;green&quot; hydrogen from wind power near Sullom Voe Terminal was a valid plan. A December 2020 report stated that &quot;the extensive terminal could also be used for direct refuelling of hydrogen-powered ships&quot; and suggested that the fourth jetty at Sullom Voe &quot;could be suitable for ammonia export&quot;.

=== Farming and textiles ===
Farming is mostly concerned with the raising of Shetland sheep, known for their unusually fine wool.

Knitwear is important both to the economy and culture of Shetland, and the Fair Isle design is well known. However, the industry faces challenges due to plagiarism of the word &quot;Shetland&quot; by manufacturers operating elsewhere, and a certification trademark, &quot;The Shetland Lady&quot;, has been registered.

Crofting, the farming of small plots of land on a legally restricted tenancy basis, is still practised and is viewed as a key Shetland tradition as well as an important source of income. Crops raised include oats and barley; however, the cold, windswept islands make for a harsh environment for most plants.

=== Media ===
Television signals in Shetland are received from the Bressay TV transmitter. Shetland is served by a weekly local newspaper, &quot;The Shetland Times&quot; and the online &quot;Shetland News&quot; with radio service being provided by BBC Radio Shetland and the commercial radio station SIBC.

=== Tourism ===

Shetland is a popular destination for cruise ships, and in 2010 the Lonely Planet guide named Shetland as the sixth best region in the world for tourists seeking unspoilt destinations. The islands were described as &quot;beautiful and rewarding&quot; and the Shetlanders as &quot;a fiercely independent and self-reliant bunch&quot;. Overall visitor expenditure was worth £16.4 million in 2006, in which year just under 26,000 cruise liner passengers arrived at Lerwick Harbour. This business has grown substantially with 109 cruise ships already booked in for 2019, representing over 107,000 passenger visits. In 2009, the most popular visitor attractions were the Shetland Museum, the RSPB reserve at Sumburgh Head, Bonhoga Gallery at Weisdale Mill and Jarlshof. Geopark Shetland (now Shetland UNESCO Global Geopark) was established by the Amenity Trust in 2009 to boost sustainable tourism to the islands.

According to the Promote Shetland organisation&#x27;s website, tourism increased &quot;by £12.6 million between 2017 and 2019 with more than half of visitors giving their trip a perfect rating&quot;.

Extremely popular in many countries, with seven series having been filmed and aired by early 2023, &quot;Shetland&quot; was inspired by the Ann Cleeves books about the fictional Detective Inspector Jimmy Perez. This has created an interest in Shetland and some tourists visit because they wish to see the places where the series is set and filmed. In 2018, series star Douglas Henshall said in an interview, &quot;When we were there filming, there&#x27;s people from Australia and different parts of America who had come specifically because of the show ... It&#x27;s showing all over the world. Now you get a lot of people from Scandinavia on these noir tours&quot;.

An October 2018 report stated that 91,000 passengers from cruise ships arrived that year (a record high), an increase over the 70,000 in 2017. There was a drop in 2019 to &quot;over 76,000 cruise ship passengers&quot;.

====Effect of the COVID-19 pandemic====
Tourism dropped significantly in 2020 (and into 2021) due to restrictions necessitated by the COVID-19 pandemic and the major decline in the number of cruise ships that continued to operate worldwide.

As of early February 2021, the Promote Shetland website was still stating this information: &quot;At present, nobody should travel to Shetland from a Level 3 or Level 4 local authority area in Scotland, unless it&#x27;s for essential purposes&quot;. That page reiterated the government recommendation &quot;that people avoid any unnecessary travel between Scotland and England, Wales, or Northern Ireland&quot;.

A September 2020 report stated that &quot;The Highlands and Islands region has been disproportionately impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic to date, when compared to Scotland and the UK as a whole&quot;. The tourism industry required short-term support for &quot;business survival and recovery&quot; and that was expected to continue as the sector was &quot;severely impacted for as long as physical distancing and travel restrictions&quot; remained in place. As of 31 December 2020, the usage of ferries and buses was restricted to those travelling for essential purposes. The Island Equivalent scheme was introduced in early 2021 by the Scottish government to financially assist hospitality and retail businesses &quot;affected by Level 3 coronavirus restrictions&quot;. Previous schemes in 2020 included the Strategic Framework Business Fund and the Coronavirus Business Support Fund.

=== Quarries ===
* Brindister: 
* Scord: Scalloway 05
* Sullom: 
* Vatster: 

=== Transport ===

Transport between islands is primarily by ferry, and Shetland Islands Council operates various inter-island services. Shetland is also served by a domestic connection from Lerwick to Aberdeen on mainland Scotland. This service, which takes about 12 hours, is operated by NorthLink Ferries. Some services also call at Kirkwall, Orkney, which increases the journey time between Aberdeen and Lerwick by 2 hours. There are plans for road tunnels to some of the islands, especially Bressay and Whalsay; however, it is hard to convince the mainland government to finance them.

Sumburgh Airport, the main airport in Shetland, is located close to Sumburgh Head, south of Lerwick. Loganair operates flights to other parts of Scotland up to ten times a day, the destinations being Kirkwall, Aberdeen, Inverness, Glasgow and Edinburgh. Lerwick/Tingwall Airport is located west of Lerwick. Operated by Directflight in partnership with Shetland Islands Council, it is devoted to inter-island flights from the Shetland Mainland to Fair Isle and Foula.

Scatsta Airport was an airport near Sullom Voe which allowed frequent charter flights from Aberdeen to transport oilfield workers. The airport closed on 30 June 2020.

Public bus services are operated in Mainland, Trondra, Burra, Unst and Yell, with scheduled dial-a-ride services available in Bressay and Fetlar. Buses also connect with ferries leading to Foula, Papa Stour, and Whalsay.

The archipelago is exposed to wind and tide, and there are numerous sites of wrecked ships. Lighthouses are sited as an aid to navigation at various locations.

==Governance==

The local authority is the Shetland Islands Council, based in Lerwick. It meets at the former St Ringan&#x27;s Church and has its main offices at 8 North Ness, overlooking the harbour.

===Administrative history===
On its absorption into Scotland in 1472, the landholdings and jurisdictions of the old lordship of Shetland passed to the Scottish crown. The separate earldom of Orkney was absorbed into Scotland at the same time. More typically Scottish forms of administration were gradually introduced to the Northern Isles. The position of Sheriff of Orkney and Shetland was created in 1541. Shetland and Orkney retained their own legal systems until 1612, when the general laws of Scotland were applied.

Commissioners of Supply were established in 1667 for each shire across Scotland. Unusually, despite being one shire, Shetland and Orkney were given separate bodies of commissioners. More local government functions were gradually given to the commissioners over time. At a court case in 1829, the Court of Session declined to rule on whether Shetland and Orkney were one county or two. They operated as one county for the purposes of the administration of justice, lieutenancy, and parliamentary constituencies, but operated as two counties for local government functions.
Elected county councils were created in 1890 under the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1889, taking most of the functions of the commissioners (which were eventually abolished in 1930). The 1889 Act also directed that Shetland and Orkney were to be separate counties (with the act using the then-prevalent spelling of &#x27;Zetland&#x27; for Shetland). Zetland County Council held its first meeting on 22 May 1890 at the County Buildings, Lerwick, which had been built in 1875 and served as Shetland&#x27;s main courthouse and also served as the meeting place for the commissioners of supply.

Local government was reformed in 1975 under the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973, which replaced Scotland&#x27;s counties, burghs and landward districts. In most of Scotland a two-tier structure of upper-tier regions and lower-tier districts was used, but a single-tier structure of island areas was used for Shetland, Orkney and the Western Isles. Further local government reform in 1996 introduced single-tier council areas across all of Scotland. The councils of the three island areas created in 1975 continued to provide the same services after 1996, but their areas were re-designated as council areas.

==Parishes and communities==

Parishes existed from medieval times. From 1845 to 1894 they had parish boards and from 1894 to 1930 they had parish councils. They have had no administrative functions since 1930, but continue to be used for the presentation of statistics.

Shetland&#x27;s civil parishes are:


===Community councils===
Community councils were created in 1975 as part of the wider reforms that year. They have no statutory powers, but serve as a representative body for their communities. Shetland Islands Council designates community council areas, but a community council is only formed if there is sufficient interest from the residents. Shetland comprises the following communities, all of which have community councils operating as at 2024:

*Bressay
*Burra and Trondra
*Delting
*Dunrossness
*Fetlar
*Gulberwick, Quarff and Cunningsburgh
*Lerwick
*Nesting and Lunnasting
*Northmavine
*Sandness and Walls
*Sandsting and Aithsting
*Sandwick
*Scalloway
*Skerries
*Tingwall, Whiteness and Weisdale
*Unst
*Whalsay
*Yell
== Education ==
As of early 2021, Shetland had 22 primary schools, five junior high schools, and two high schools: Anderson High School and Brae High School.

Shetland College UHI is a partner of the University of the Highlands and Islands (UHI). UHI&#x27;s Centre for Rural Creativity partners with Shetland Arts Development Agency to provide courses on film, music and media up to Masters level at Mareel. The North Atlantic Fisheries College (NAFC) also operates in partnership with UHI offering &quot;a range of training courses relevant to the maritime industries&quot;.

The Institute for Northern Studies, operated by UHI, provides &quot;postgraduate teaching and research programmes&quot;; one of the three locations is at Shetland.

== Sport ==
The Shetland Football Association oversees two divisions – a Premier League and a Reserve League – which are affiliated with the Scottish Amateur Football Association. Seasons take place during summer.

The islands are represented by the Shetland football team, which regularly competes in the Island Games.

== Churches and religion ==
The Reformation reached the archipelago in 1560. This was an apparently peaceful transition and there is little evidence of religious intolerance in Shetland&#x27;s recorded history.

In the 2011 census, Shetland registered a higher proportion of people with no religion than the Scottish average. Nevertheless, a variety of religious denominations are represented in the islands.

The Methodist Church has a relatively high membership in Shetland, which is a District of the Methodist Church (with the rest of Scotland comprising a separate District).

The Church of Scotland had a Presbytery of Shetland that includes St. Columba&#x27;s Church in Lerwick. On 1 June 2020 the Presbytery of Shetland merged with the Presbytery of Aberdeen becoming the Presbytery of Aberdeen and Shetland. In addition there was further church reorganisation in the islands with a series of church closures and all parishes merging into one, covering the whole of Shetland.

The Catholic population is served by the church of St. Margaret and the Sacred Heart in Lerwick. The parish is part of the Diocese of Aberdeen.

The Scottish Episcopal Church (part of the Anglican Communion) has regular worship at: St Magnus&#x27; Church, Lerwick; St Colman&#x27;s Church, Burravoe; and the Chapel of Christ the Encompasser, Fetlar, the last of which is maintained by the Society of Our Lady of the Isles, the most northerly and remote Anglican religious order of nuns.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has a congregation in Lerwick. The former print works and offices of the local newspaper, The Shetland Times, has been converted into a chapel. Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses has a congregation and Kingdom Hall in Lerwick.

== Politics ==
Shetland is represented in the House of Commons as part of the Orkney and Shetland constituency, which elects one Member of Parliament (MP). As of May 2023, and since 2001, the MP is Alistair Carmichael, a Liberal Democrat. This seat has been held by the Liberal Democrats or their predecessors the Liberal Party since 1950, longer than any other seat in the United Kingdom.

In the Scottish Parliament the Shetland constituency elects one Member of the Scottish Parliament (MSP) by the first past the post system. Tavish Scott of the Scottish Liberal Democrats had held the seat since the creation of the Scottish Parliament in 1999. Beatrice Wishart MSP, also of the Scottish Liberal Democrats, was elected to replace Tavish Scott in August 2019. Shetland is also within the Highlands and Islands electoral region which elects seven MSPs.

The political composition of the Shetland Islands Council is 21 Independents and 1 Scottish National Party.

In the 2014 referendum on Scottish independence from the United Kingdom, Shetland voted to remain in the United Kingdom by the third largest margin of the 32 local authority areas, by 63.71% to 36.29% in favour of the Union.

In the 2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum, Shetland voted for the UK to remain an EU member state, with 56.5% voting to remain and 43.5% voting to leave. In comparison to the rest of Scotland, Shetland had lower-than-average support for remaining in the EU.

The Wir Shetland movement was set up in 2015 to campaign for greater autonomy. In September 2020, the Shetland Islands Council voted 18–2 to explore replacing the council with a new system of government which controls a fairer share of the islands revenue streams and has a greater influence over their own affairs, which could include very lucrative oil fields and fishing waters.

In 2022, as part of the Levelling Up White Paper, an &quot;Island Forum&quot; was proposed, which would allow local policymakers and residents in Shetland to work alongside their counterparts in Orkney, the Western Isles, Anglesey and the Isle of Wight on common issues, such as broadband connectivity, and provide a platform for them to communicate directly with the government on the challenges island communities face in terms of levelling up.

== Flag ==
Roy Grönneberg, who founded the local chapter of the Scottish National Party in 1966, designed the flag of Shetland in cooperation with Bill Adams to mark the 500th anniversary of the transfer of the islands from Norway to Scotland. The colours are identical to those of the flag of Scotland, but are shaped in the Nordic cross. After several unsuccessful attempts, including a plebiscite in 1985, the Lord Lyon King of Arms approved it as the official flag of Shetland in 2005.

== Local culture and the arts ==


After the islands were officially transferred from Norway to Scotland in 1472, several Scots families from the Scottish Lowlands emigrated to Shetland in the 16th and 17th centuries. Studies of the genetic makeup of the islands&#x27; population, however, indicate that Shetlanders are just under half Scandinavian in origin, and sizeable amounts of Scandinavian ancestry, both patrilineal and matrilineal, have been reported in Orkney (55%) and Shetland (68%). This combination is reflected in many aspects of local life. For example, almost every place name in use can be traced back to the Vikings. The Lerwick Up Helly Aa is one of several fire festivals held in Shetland annually in the middle of winter, starting on the last Tuesday of January. The festival is just over 100 years old in its present, highly organised form. Originally held to break up the long nights of winter and mark the end of Yule, the festival has become one celebrating the isles&#x27; heritage and includes a procession of men dressed as Vikings and the burning of a replica longship.

Shetland also competes in the biennial International Island Games, which it hosted in 2005.

The cuisine of Shetland is based on locally produced lamb, beef and seafood, some of it organic. The real ale-producing Valhalla Brewery is the most northerly in Britain. The Shetland Black is a variety of blue potato with a dark skin and indigo-coloured flesh markings.

=== Language ===
The Norn language was a form of Old Norse spoken in the Northern Isles, and continued to be spoken until the 18th century. It was gradually replaced in Shetland by an insular dialect of Scots, known as Shetlandic, which is in turn being replaced by Scottish English. Although Norn was spoken for hundreds of years, it is now extinct and few written sources remain, although influences remain in the Insular Scots dialects. The Shetland dialect is used in local radio and dialect writing, and is kept alive by organisations such as Shetland Forwirds, and the Shetland Folk Society.

=== Music ===
Shetland&#x27;s culture and landscapes have inspired a variety of musicians, writers and film-makers. The Forty Fiddlers was formed in the 1950s to promote the traditional fiddle style, which is a vibrant part of local culture today. Notable exponents of Shetland folk music include Aly Bain, Jenna Reid, Fiddlers&#x27; Bid, and the late Tom Anderson and Peerie Willie Johnson. Thomas Fraser was a country musician who never released a commercial recording during his life, but whose work has become popular more than 20 years after his death in 1978.

The annual Shetland Folk Festival began in 1981 and is hosted on the first weekend of May.

=== Writers ===
Walter Scott&#x27;s 1822 novel &quot;The Pirate&quot; is set in &quot;a remote part of Shetland&quot;, and was inspired by his 1814 visit to the islands. The name &quot;Jarlshof&quot; meaning &quot;Earl&#x27;s Mansion&quot; is a coinage of his. Robert Cowie, a doctor born in Lerwick published the 1874 work entitled 

Hugh MacDiarmid, the Scots poet and writer, lived in Whalsay from the mid-1930s through 1942, and wrote many poems there, including a number that directly address or reflect the Shetland environment, such as &quot;On A Raised Beach&quot;, which was inspired by a visit to West Linga. The 1975 novel &quot;North Star&quot; by Hammond Innes is largely set in Shetland and Raman Mundair&#x27;s 2007 book of poetry &quot;A Choreographer&#x27;s Cartography&quot; offers a British Asian perspective on the landscape. The &quot;Shetland Quartet&quot; by Ann Cleeves, who previously lived in Fair Isle, is a series of crime novels set around the islands. In 2013, her novel &quot;Red Bones&quot; became the basis of BBC crime drama television series &quot;Shetland&quot;.

Vagaland, who grew up in Walls, was arguably Shetland&#x27;s finest poet of the 20th century. Haldane Burgess was a Shetland historian, poet, novelist, violinist, linguist and socialist, and Rhoda Bulter (1929–1994) is one of the best-known Shetland poets of recent times. Other 20th- and 21st-century poets and novelists include Christine De Luca, Robert Alan Jamieson who grew up in Sandness, the late Lollie Graham of Veensgarth, Stella Sutherland of Bressay, the late William J. Tait from Yell and Laureen Johnson.

There is one monthly magazine in production: &quot;Shetland&quot;. The quarterly &quot;The New Shetlander&quot;, founded in 1947, is said to be Scotland&#x27;s longest-running literary magazine. For much of the later 20th century, it was the major vehicle for the work of local writers – and of others, including early work by George Mackay Brown.

=== Films and television ===
Michael Powell made &quot;The Edge of the World&quot; in 1937, a dramatisation based on the true story of the evacuation of the last 36 inhabitants of the remote island of St Kilda on 29 August 1930. St Kilda lies in the Atlantic Ocean, west of the Outer Hebrides but Powell was unable to get permission to film there. Undaunted, he made the film over four months during the summer of 1936 in Foula and the film transposes these events to Shetland. Forty years later, the documentary &quot;Return to the Edge of the World&quot; was filmed, capturing a reunion of cast and crew of the film as they revisited the island in 1978.

A number of other films have been made on or about Shetland including &quot;A Crofter&#x27;s Life in Shetland&quot; (1932), &quot;A Shetland Lyric&quot; (1934), &quot;Devil&#x27;s Gate&quot; (2003) and &quot;It&#x27;s Nice Up North&quot; (2006), a comedy documentary by Graham Fellows. The Screenplay film festival takes place annually in Mareel, a cinema, music and education venue.

The BBC One television series &quot;Shetland&quot;, a crime drama, is set in the islands and is based on the book series by Ann Cleeves. The programme is filmed partly in Shetland and partly on the Scottish mainland.

== Wildlife ==
Shetland has three national nature reserves, at the seabird colonies of Hermaness and Noss, and at Keen of Hamar to preserve the serpentine flora. There are a further 81 SSSIs, which cover 66% or more of the land surfaces of Fair Isle, Papa Stour, Fetlar, Noss, and Foula. Mainland has 45 separate sites.

=== Flora ===
The landscape in Shetland is marked by the grazing of sheep and the harsh conditions have limited the total number of plant species to about 400. Native trees such as rowan and crab apple are only found in a few isolated places such as cliffs and loch islands. The flora is dominated by Arctic-alpine plants, wild flowers, moss and lichen. Spring squill, buck&#x27;s-horn plantain, Scots lovage, roseroot and sea campion are abundant, especially in sheltered places. Shetland mouse-ear (&quot;Cerastium nigrescens&quot;) is an endemic flowering plant found only in Shetland. It was first recorded in 1837 by botanist Thomas Edmondston. Although reported from two other sites in the nineteenth century, it currently grows only on two serpentine hills in the island of Unst. The nationally scarce oysterplant is found in several islands and the British Red Listed bryophyte &quot;Thamnobryum alopecurum&quot; has also been recorded. Listed marine algae include: &quot;Polysiphonia fibrillosa&quot; (Dillwyn) Sprengel and &quot;Polysiphonia atlantica&quot; Kapraun and J.Norris, &quot;Polysiphonia brodiaei&quot; (Dillwyn) Sprengel, &quot;Polysiphonia elongata&quot; (Hudson) Sprengel, &quot;Polysiphonia elongella&quot;, Harvey. The Shetland Monkeyflower is unique to Shetland and is a mutation of the Monkeyflower &quot;(mimulus guttatus&quot;) introduced to Shetland in the 19th century.

=== Fauna ===

Shetland has numerous seabird colonies. Birds found in the islands include Atlantic puffin, storm-petrel, red-throated diver, northern gannet and great skua (locally called &quot;bonxie&quot;). Numerous rarities have also been recorded including black-browed albatross and snow goose. A single pair of snowy owls bred in Fetlar from 1967 to 1975. The Shetland wren, Fair Isle wren, and Shetland starling are subspecies endemic to Shetland. There are also populations of various moorland birds such as curlew, lapwing, snipe and golden plover.

One of the early ornithologists that wrote about the wealth of birdlife in Shetland was Edmund Selous (1857–1934) in his book &quot;The Bird Watcher in the Shetlands&quot; (1905). He wrote extensively about the gulls and terns, about the arctic skuas, the black guillemots and many other birds (and the seals) of the islands.

The geographical isolation and recent glacial history of Shetland have resulted in a depleted mammalian fauna and the brown rat and house mouse are two of only three species of rodent present in the islands. The Shetland field mouse is the third and the archipelago&#x27;s fourth endemic subspecies, of which there are three varieties in Yell, Foula, and Fair Isle. They are variants of &quot;Apodemus sylvaticus&quot; and archaeological evidence suggests that this species was present during the Middle Iron Age (around 200 BC to 400 CE). It is possible that &quot;Apodemus&quot; was introduced from Orkney where a population has existed since at the least the Bronze Age.

=== Domesticated animals ===


There is a variety of indigenous breeds, of which the diminutive Shetland pony is probably the best known, as well as being an important part of the Shetland farming tradition. The first written record of the pony was in 1603 in the Court Books of Shetland and, for its size, it is the strongest of all the horse breeds. Others are the Shetland Sheepdog or &quot;Sheltie&quot;, the endangered Shetland cattle and Shetland goose and the Shetland sheep which is believed to have originated prior to 1000 AD. The Grice was a breed of semi-domesticated pig that had a habit of attacking lambs. It became extinct sometime between the middle of the nineteenth century and the 1930s.

== See also ==
=== Lists ===
* List of counties of the United Kingdom
* List of islands in Scotland
* List of populated places in Shetland

=== About Shetland ===
* Mavis Grind
* Udal law

=== Others ===
* Battle of Florvåg
* Rögnvald Kali Kolsson
* Timeline of prehistoric Scotland
* Prehistoric Scotland
* Constitutional status of Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== General references ===

* Armit, I.; (2003), &quot;Towers in the North: The Brochs of Scotland&quot;, Stroud, Tempus, 
* Ballin Smith, B. and Banks, I.; (ed. 2002), &quot;In the Shadow of the Brochs, the Iron Age in Scotland&quot;, Stroud, Tempus, 
* Barrett, James H.; &quot;The Norse in Scotland&quot; in Brink, Stefan, (ed. 2008), &quot;The Viking World&quot;, Abingdon, Routledge, 
* Clapperton, Chalmers M.; (ed. 1983), &quot;Scotland: A New Study&quot;, Newton Abbott, David &amp; Charles
* Gillen, Con; (2003), &quot;Geology and landscapes of Scotland&quot;, Harpenden, Terra Publishing, 
* Graham-Campbell, James; (1999), &quot;Cultural Atlas of the Viking World&quot;, Facts On File, 
* Fleming, Andrew; (2005), &quot;St. Kilda and the Wider World: Tales of an Iconic Island&quot;, Windgather Press, 
* Gammeltoft, Peder; (2010), &quot;Shetland and Orkney Island-Names – A Dynamic Group &quot;, &quot;Northern Lights, Northern Words&quot;, Selected Papers from the FRLSU Conference, Kirkwall 2009, edited by Robert McColl Millar
* 
* Hunter, James; (2000), &quot;Last of the Free: A History of the Highlands and Islands of Scotland&quot;, Edinburgh, Mainstream, 
* Jones, Charles; (ed. 1997), &quot;The Edinburgh history of the Scots language&quot;, Edinburgh University Press, 
* Keay, J. &amp; Keay, J.; (1994), &quot;Collins Encyclopaedia of Scotland&quot;, London, HarperCollins, 
* Noble, Gordon; Poller, Tessa &amp; Verrill, Lucy; (2008), &quot;Scottish Odysseys: The Archaeology of Islands&quot;, Stroud, Tempus, 
* Omand, Donald; (ed. 2003), &quot;The Orkney Book&quot;, Edinburgh, Birlinn, 
* Nicolson, James R.; (1972), &quot;Shetland&quot;, Newton Abbott, David &amp; Charles
* Sandnes, Berit; (2003), &quot;From Starafjall to Starling Hill: An investigation of the formation and development of Old Norse place-names in Orkney &quot;, (pdf), Doctoral Dissertation, NTU Trondheim
* Schei, Liv Kjørsvik; (2006), &quot;The Shetland Isles&quot;, Grantown-on-Spey, Colin Baxter Photography, 
* Scottish Natural Heritage, (2008), &quot;The Story of Hermaness National Nature Reserve&quot;, Lerwick
* Shetland Islands Council, (2005), &quot;Shetland In Statistics 2005&quot;, (pdf), Economic Development Unit, Lerwick, Retrieved 19 March 2011
* Shetland Islands Council, (2010), &quot;Shetland in Statistics 2010&quot;, (pdf), Economic Development Unit, Lerwick, Retrieved 6 March 2011
* Thomson, William P. L.; (2008), &quot;The New History of Orkney&quot;, Edinburgh, Birlinn, 
* Turner, Val; (1998), &quot;Ancient Shetland&quot;, London, B. T. Batsford/Historic Scotland, 
* Watson, William J.; (1994), &quot;The Celtic Place-Names of Scotland&quot;, Edinburgh, Birlinn, , First published 1926.
== Further reading ==
*Shepherd, Mike (2015). &quot;Oil Strike North Sea: A first-hand history of North Sea oil&quot;. Luath Press.

== External links ==


* Shetland Islands Council
* www.shetland.org
* shetlopedia.com, – The Online Shetland Encyclopedia
* HIE Area Profile – Shetland (PDF file) from Highlands and Islands Enterprise
* Shetlink – Shetland&#x27;s Online Community
* National Library of Scotland: Scottish Screen Archive (selection of archive films about Shetland)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="0" end="8" title="Shetland" label="Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="29" end="36" title="Shetland" label="Zetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="55" end="71" title="Shetland" label="Shetland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="79" end="90" title="archipelago" label="archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="94" end="102" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="117" end="123" title="Orkney" label="Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="129" end="142" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="148" end="154" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="193" end="207" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="380" end="389" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278508" start="483" end="504" title="Shetland (Scottish Parliament constituency)" label="Shetland constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="512" end="531" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q461231" start="562" end="575" title="council areas" label="council areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481996" start="616" end="640" title="Shetland Islands Council" label="Shetland Islands Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q254978" start="711" end="716" title="burgh" label="burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q213485" start="720" end="727" title="Lerwick" label="Lerwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014090" start="814" end="823" title="Scalloway" label="Scalloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="999" end="1014" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q738734" start="1115" end="1127" title="The Mainland, Shetland" label="the Mainland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419391" start="1163" end="1176" title="list of the British Isles by area" label="fifth-largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="1191" end="1204" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="1294" end="1304" title="Mesolithic" label="Mesolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q102891" start="1313" end="1318" title="Picts" label="Picts"/>
<link wikidata="Q202763" start="1444" end="1461" title="Early Middle Ages" label="Early Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="1527" end="1544" title="Norway" label="Kingdom of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650523" start="1559" end="1581" title="Parliament of Scotland" label="Parliament of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="1625" end="1644" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Kingdom of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q45803" start="1677" end="1682" title="dowry" label="dowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q222616" start="1695" end="1716" title="James III of Scotland" label="James III of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q233804" start="1745" end="1764" title="Margaret of Denmark, Queen of Scotland" label="Margaret of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="1820" end="1844" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Kingdom of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q27479" start="1885" end="1900" title="Northern Europe" label="Northern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998660" start="1929" end="1942" title="North Sea oil" label="North Sea oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418486" start="2193" end="2204" title="Up Helly Aa" label="Up Helly Aa"/>
<link wikidata="Q510487" start="2279" end="2285" title="fiddle" label="fiddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069598" start="2456" end="2472" title="Shetland dialect" label="Shetland dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="2480" end="2494" title="Scots language" label="Scots language"/>
<link wikidata="Q104021" start="2563" end="2568" title="fauna" label="fauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q131449" start="2573" end="2578" title="flora" label="flora"/>
<link wikidata="Q214720" start="2639" end="2652" title="Shetland pony" label="Shetland pony"/>
<link wikidata="Q39058" start="2657" end="2674" title="Shetland Sheepdog" label="Shetland Sheepdog"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495668" start="2694" end="2716" title="Shetland animal breeds" label="Shetland animal breeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495655" start="2762" end="2776" title="Shetland sheep" label="Shetland sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q17019069" start="2778" end="2781" title="Shetland cattle" label="cow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495662" start="2783" end="2788" title="Shetland goose" label="goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495670" start="2794" end="2798" title="Shetland duck" label="duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546243" start="2821" end="2826" title="grice" label="grice"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="2925" end="2937" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="3018" end="3027" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q844119" start="3058" end="3068" title="Njáls saga" label="Njáls saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q950929" start="3143" end="3158" title="Frostathing Law" label="Frostathing Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="3228" end="3237" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1593696" start="3251" end="3255" title="hilt" label="hilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401464" start="3409" end="3421" title="Celtic tribe" label="Celtic tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q379394" start="3469" end="3478" title="Caledones" label="Caledones"/>
<link wikidata="Q297515" start="3508" end="3522" title="Pomponius Mela" label="Pomponius Mela"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="3596" end="3611" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161" start="3792" end="3799" title="Tacitus" label="Tacitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244446" start="3822" end="3830" title="Agricola (book)" label="Agricola"/>
<link wikidata="Q671008" start="3955" end="3960" title="Thule" label="Thule"/>
<link wikidata="Q35308" start="3976" end="3987" title="Old Irish" label="early Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q944484" start="4295" end="4309" title="Kingdom of Cat" label="Kingdom of Cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q864668" start="4366" end="4375" title="Caithness" label="Caithness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061313" start="4412" end="4422" title="Sutherland" label="Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q193329" start="4647" end="4663" title="Grimm&amp;#x27;s law" label="Grimm&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q102891" start="5068" end="5075" title="Picts" label="Pictish"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="5118" end="5123" title="Old Norse" label="Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q36708" start="5211" end="5224" title="Norn language" label="Norn language"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="5317" end="5322" title="Scots language" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327000" start="5362" end="5374" title="Middle Scots" label="Middle Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q423449" start="5389" end="5393" title="yogh" label="yogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9751" start="5580" end="5581" title="z" label="z"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350181" start="5697" end="5711" title="traditional counties of Scotland" label="county council"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063040" start="5739" end="5750" title="ZE postcode area" label="ZE postcode"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="5807" end="5812" title="Norse language" label="Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q856383" start="5894" end="5901" title="Pictish language" label="Pictish"/>
<link wikidata="Q25293" start="5915" end="5921" title="Celtic languages" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q26793" start="6026" end="6032" title="Bergen" label="Bergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="6034" end="6040" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q213485" start="6090" end="6097" title="Lerwick" label="Lerwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014090" start="6259" end="6268" title="Scalloway" label="Scalloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q738734" start="6453" end="6461" title="Mainland, Shetland" label="Mainland"/>
<link wikidata="Q376068" start="6484" end="6488" title="Yell (island)" label="Yell"/>
<link wikidata="Q754867" start="6490" end="6494" title="Unst" label="Unst"/>
<link wikidata="Q586660" start="6500" end="6506" title="Fetlar" label="Fetlar"/>
<link wikidata="Q565640" start="6536" end="6543" title="Bressay" label="Bressay"/>
<link wikidata="Q552027" start="6548" end="6555" title="Whalsay" label="Whalsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277762" start="6580" end="6584" title="East Burra" label="East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641114" start="6589" end="6599" title="West Burra" label="West Burra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273310" start="6601" end="6611" title="Muckle Roe" label="Muckle Roe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552121" start="6613" end="6623" title="Papa Stour" label="Papa Stour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166859" start="6625" end="6632" title="Trondra" label="Trondra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1600805" start="6638" end="6643" title="Vaila" label="Vaila"/>
<link wikidata="Q932332" start="6721" end="6726" title="Foula" label="Foula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816645" start="6735" end="6740" title="Walls, Shetland" label="Walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q762752" start="6742" end="6751" title="Fair Isle" label="Fair Isle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581063" start="6766" end="6779" title="Sumburgh Head" label="Sumburgh Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551908" start="6789" end="6801" title="Out Skerries" label="Out Skerries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951025" start="6848" end="6853" title="Mousa" label="Mousa"/>
<link wikidata="Q923376" start="6869" end="6883" title="Broch of Mousa" label="Broch of Mousa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="6920" end="6928" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q82137" start="6929" end="6934" title="broch" label="broch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674272" start="6936" end="6940" title="Isle of Noss" label="Noss"/>
<link wikidata="Q565640" start="6956" end="6963" title="Bressay" label="Bressay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3463057" start="7018" end="7039" title="St Ninian&amp;#x27;s Isle" label="St Ninian&amp;#x27;s Isle"/>
<link wikidata="Q498274" start="7085" end="7092" title="tombolo" label="tombolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422297" start="7120" end="7129" title="Out Stack" label="Out Stack"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244628" start="7135" end="7147" title="Extreme points of the United Kingdom" label="northernmost"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="7161" end="7174" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278554" start="7250" end="7256" title="Muness Castle" label="Muness"/>
<link wikidata="Q598075" start="7312" end="7316" title="Skaw, Unst" label="Skaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089" start="7399" end="7405" title="Fault (geology)" label="faults"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7410" end="7419" title="Fold (geology)#Describing folds" label="fold axes"/>
<link wikidata="Q846077" start="7467" end="7485" title="Caledonian orogeny" label="Caledonian orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537363" start="7513" end="7521" title="Lewisian complex" label="Lewisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211598" start="7523" end="7532" title="Dalradian" label="Dalradian"/>
<link wikidata="Q126951324" start="7537" end="7542" title="Moine Supergroup" label="Moine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517523" start="7646" end="7663" title="Old Red Sandstone" label="Old Red Sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="7677" end="7684" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q605396" start="7733" end="7742" title="ophiolite" label="ophiolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q581244" start="7788" end="7801" title="Iapetus Ocean" label="Iapetus Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143398" start="7819" end="7829" title="ultramafic" label="ultrabasic"/>
<link wikidata="Q239918" start="7830" end="7840" title="peridotite" label="peridotite"/>
<link wikidata="Q46947" start="7845" end="7851" title="gabbro" label="gabbro"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070" start="7999" end="8006" title="tsunami" label="tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288535" start="8021" end="8035" title="Storegga Slide" label="Storegga Slide"/>
<link wikidata="Q558116" start="8136" end="8140" title="Firth" label="voes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441622" start="8213" end="8223" title="Ronas Hill" label="Ronas Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="8233" end="8244" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q372934" start="8343" end="8358" title="glacial erratic" label="glacial erratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928111" start="8399" end="8409" title="Lunnasting" label="Lunnasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q747957" start="8459" end="8469" title="stack (geology)" label="sea stacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154336" start="8616" end="8629" title="rock climbing" label="rock climbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978246" start="8662" end="8682" title="National scenic area (Scotland)" label="national scenic area"/>
<link wikidata="Q6976531" start="8795" end="8812" title="Scalloway Islands" label="Scalloway Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4313467" start="8827" end="8836" title="Esha Ness Lighthouse" label="Esha Ness"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579490" start="8852" end="8862" title="Hermaness" label="Herma Ness"/>
<link wikidata="Q35852" start="8916" end="8918" title="hectares" label="ha"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="9479" end="9485" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9579" end="9587" title="Oceanic climate#Subpolar variety (Cfc, Cwc)" label="subpolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581063" start="9939" end="9952" title="Sumburgh Head" label="Sumburgh Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="10095" end="10106" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25257" start="10722" end="10735" title="precipitation (meteorology)" label="precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q37477" start="11069" end="11072" title="Fog" label="Fog"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="11192" end="11200" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q40609" start="11229" end="11244" title="aurora borealis" label="northern lights"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11311" end="11329" title="twilight#Duration" label="perpetual daylight"/>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="11620" end="11633" title="town planning" label="town planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699305" start="11850" end="11854" title="Aith" label="Aith"/>
<link wikidata="Q805562" start="11856" end="11866" title="Baltasound" label="Baltasound"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841058" start="11868" end="11876" title="Mid Yell" label="Mid Yell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417104" start="11878" end="11886" title="Sandwick, Dunrossness" label="Sandwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293028" start="11892" end="11901" title="Symbister" label="Symbister"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="12022" end="12031" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152199" start="12214" end="12220" title="midden" label="midden"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="12328" end="12338" title="Mesolithic" label="Mesolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985431" start="12438" end="12455" title="Scord of Brouster" label="Scord of Brouster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816645" start="12459" end="12464" title="Walls, Shetland" label="Walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662981" start="12574" end="12581" title="felsite" label="felsite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344230" start="12587" end="12598" title="Northmavine" label="Northmavine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683532" start="12647" end="12655" title="Jarlshof" label="Jarlshof"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="12754" end="12764" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q40558" start="12782" end="12788" title="Forge" label="smithy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188014" start="12803" end="12814" title="wheelhouse (archaeology)" label="wheelhouses"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="12916" end="12922" title="Viking" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1593474" start="12930" end="12947" title="Heel-shaped cairn" label="Heel-shaped cairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q585490" start="12965" end="12980" title="chambered cairn" label="chambered cairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3192009" start="13038" end="13046" title="Vementry" label="Vementry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="13089" end="13097" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q923324" start="13151" end="13160" title="Broch of Clickimin" label="Clickimin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255388" start="13162" end="13170" title="Broch of Culswick" label="Culswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242460" start="13172" end="13184" title="Old Scatness" label="Old Scatness"/>
<link wikidata="Q508036" start="13189" end="13204" title="Broch of West Burrafirth" label="West Burrafirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058774" start="13311" end="13325" title="Northern Isles" label="Northern Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588211" start="13432" end="13453" title="Bridei I of the Picts" label="Bridei I of the Picts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520468" start="13741" end="13774" title="The Crucible of Iron Age Shetland" label="The Crucible of Iron Age Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6604289" start="13880" end="13900" title="World Heritage Sites in Scotland" label="World Heritage Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="13980" end="13991" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3733063" start="14078" end="14094" title="Viking expansion" label="Viking expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908400" start="14103" end="14108" title="North Germanic peoples" label="Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="14574" end="14580" title="Viking" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="14618" end="14624" title="pirate" label="pirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q206123" start="14712" end="14727" title="Harald I of Norway" label="Harald Hårfagre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058774" start="14771" end="14785" title="Northern Isles" label="Northern Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367604" start="14827" end="14847" title="Rognvald Eysteinsson" label="Rognvald Eysteinsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4148098" start="14861" end="14878" title="Earldom of Orkney" label="Earldom of Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772419" start="15030" end="15047" title="Sigurd Eysteinsson" label="Sigurd the Mighty"/>
<link wikidata="Q864668" start="15181" end="15190" title="Caithness" label="Caithness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061313" start="15195" end="15205" title="Sutherland" label="Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="15253" end="15265" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q213801" start="15297" end="15315" title="Olaf I of Norway" label="Olaf I Tryggvasson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128240" start="15335" end="15339" title="earl" label="jarl"/>
<link wikidata="Q614802" start="15346" end="15362" title="Sigurd the Stout" label="Sigurd the Stout"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="15655" end="15669" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Scottish crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6912585" start="15876" end="15896" title="Mormaer of Caithness" label="Mormaer of Caithness"/>
<link wikidata="Q532643" start="15981" end="15998" title="Harald Maddadsson" label="Harald Maddadsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q331755" start="16054" end="16071" title="Sverre Sigurdsson" label="Sverre Sigurdsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q317307" start="16087" end="16100" title="Eyjarskeggjar" label="Eyjarskeggjar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888503" start="16172" end="16189" title="Battle of Florvåg" label="Battle of Florvåg"/>
<link wikidata="Q26793" start="16195" end="16201" title="Bergen" label="Bergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q237889" start="16567" end="16579" title="Alexander II of Scotland" label="Alexander II"/>
<link wikidata="Q211109" start="16615" end="16628" title="Alexander III of Scotland" label="Alexander III"/>
<link wikidata="Q316039" start="16689" end="16709" title="Haakon IV of Norway" label="Haakon IV Haakonsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097266" start="16820" end="16835" title="Battle of Largs" label="Battle of Largs"/>
<link wikidata="Q459188" start="17060" end="17077" title="Kingdom of Mann and the Isles" label="Hebrides and Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456646" start="17142" end="17157" title="Treaty of Perth" label="Treaty of Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062304" start="17390" end="17404" title="Jon Haraldsson" label="Jon Haraldsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q526576" start="17426" end="17432" title="Thurso" label="Thurso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277218" start="17553" end="17558" title="Earl of Angus" label="Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233728" start="17563" end="17571" title="Henry I Sinclair, Earl of Orkney" label="St Clair"/>
<link wikidata="Q313015" start="17589" end="17598" title="Haakon VI of Norway" label="Haakon VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q62623" start="17624" end="17639" title="Kalmar Union" label="political union"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="17737" end="17743" title="Orkney" label="Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q819049" start="17761" end="17768" title="pledge (law)" label="pledged"/>
<link wikidata="Q153940" start="17772" end="17783" title="Christian I of Denmark" label="Christian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q45803" start="17859" end="17864" title="dowry" label="dowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q233804" start="17881" end="17889" title="Margaret of Denmark, Queen of Scotland" label="Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q222616" start="17904" end="17925" title="James III of Scotland" label="James III of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568958" start="18025" end="18064" title="William Sinclair, 1st Earl of Caithness" label="William Sinclair, 1st Earl of Caithness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650523" start="18214" end="18236" title="Parliament of Scotland" label="Parliament of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="18402" end="18418" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q11254" start="18516" end="18520" title="salt" label="salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="18522" end="18527" title="cloth" label="cloth"/>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="18529" end="18533" title="beer" label="beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183663" start="18644" end="18658" title="Robert Stewart, 1st Earl of Orkney" label="Robert Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q131412" start="18723" end="18742" title="Mary, Queen of Scots" label="Mary Queen of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246672" start="18756" end="18763" title="Patrick Stewart, 2nd Earl of Orkney" label="Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278591" start="18802" end="18818" title="Scalloway Castle" label="Scalloway Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="18917" end="18926" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617765" start="18943" end="18978" title="William Douglas, 7th Earl of Morton" label="William Douglas, 7th Earl of Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q377335" start="19064" end="19098" title="James Douglas, 14th Earl of Morton" label="James Douglas, 14th Earl of Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016183" start="19102" end="19117" title="Sir Lawrence Dundas, 1st Baronet" label="Laurence Dundas"/>
<link wikidata="Q193515" start="19207" end="19224" title="Acts of Union 1707" label="Act of Union 1707"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="19714" end="19722" title="Smallpox" label="Smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037810" start="19810" end="19818" title="Smallpox vaccine" label="vaccines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066269" start="19904" end="19925" title="Highland Potato Famine" label="potato famine of 1846"/>
<link wikidata="Q55590261" start="20007" end="20029" title="Rear Admiral Robert Craigie" label="Captain Robert Craigie"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="20385" end="20395" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="20426" end="20441" title="Napoleonic wars" label="Napoleonic wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566803" start="20464" end="20475" title="impressment" label="press gangs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140769" start="20742" end="20785" title="Crofters&amp;#x27; Holdings (Scotland) Act 1886" label="Crofters&amp;#x27; Holdings (Scotland) Act 1886"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="20790" end="20797" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="20813" end="20830" title="William Ewart Gladstone" label="William Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q102911" start="21034" end="21041" title="Holland" label="Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127419" start="21122" end="21129" title="herring" label="herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="21379" end="21390" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265327" start="21423" end="21441" title="Gordon Highlanders" label="Gordon Highlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="21942" end="21954" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427618" start="21999" end="22011" title="Shetland bus" label="Shetland bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q240390" start="22041" end="22069" title="Special Operations Executive" label="Special Operations Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q6704418" start="22113" end="22118" title="Lunna House" label="Lunna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088730" start="22446" end="22457" title="Leif Larsen" label="Leif Larsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="22485" end="22491" title="Allies of World War II" label="allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329344" start="22827" end="22846" title="East Shetland Basin" label="East Shetland Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28401218" start="22976" end="22994" title="Shetland Movement" label="Home Rule movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q15916866" start="23027" end="23062" title="constitutional position of Shetland" label="constitutional position of Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="23089" end="23100" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="23152" end="23165" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="23311" end="23322" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q188989" start="23324" end="23335" title="aquaculture" label="aquaculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="23337" end="23344" title="fishing" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q840695" start="23346" end="23362" title="renewable energy in Scotland" label="renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="23368" end="23386" title="petroleum" label="petroleum industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="23388" end="23397" title="crude oil" label="crude oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="23402" end="23413" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q969040" start="23431" end="23450" title="creative industries" label="creative industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="23455" end="23462" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q194188" start="23480" end="23498" title="Spaceport" label="rocket launch site"/>
<link wikidata="Q102180898" start="23506" end="23524" title="SaxaVord Spaceport" label="SaxaVord Spaceport"/>
<link wikidata="Q30153" start="24457" end="24474" title="Atlantic mackerel" label="Atlantic mackerel"/>
<link wikidata="Q202406" start="24583" end="24590" title="haddock" label="haddock"/>
<link wikidata="Q199788" start="24592" end="24595" title="atlantic cod" label="cod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396858" start="24597" end="24604" title="atlantic herring" label="herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q273083" start="24606" end="24613" title="merlangius merlangus" label="whiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q205015" start="24615" end="24623" title="lophius piscatorius" label="monkfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501235" start="24628" end="24637" title="shellfish" label="shellfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q782412" start="25350" end="25360" title="Sullom Voe" label="Sullom Voe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481996" start="25659" end="25683" title="Shetland Islands Council" label="Shetland Islands Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q493854" start="26028" end="26056" title="Scottish and Southern Energy" label="Scottish and Southern Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4141649" start="26065" end="26081" title="Viking Wind Farm" label="Viking Wind Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q194356" start="26097" end="26106" title="wind farm" label="wind farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q12705" start="26130" end="26146" title="renewable energy" label="renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="26179" end="26188" title="watt" label="megawatts"/>
<link wikidata="Q180253" start="26650" end="26659" title="fuel cell" label="fuel cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q13636979" start="26673" end="26686" title="wind-Hydrogen Hybrid Power Systems" label="wind-hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266787" start="26766" end="26783" title="development trust" label="development trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929999" start="27507" end="27511" title="Blue hydrogen" label="blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q99513382" start="27516" end="27530" title="green hydrogen" label="green hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q782412" start="27930" end="27940" title="Sullom Voe" label="Sullom Voe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495655" start="28283" end="28297" title="Shetland (sheep)" label="Shetland sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064518" start="28412" end="28428" title="Fair Isle (technique)" label="Fair Isle design"/>
<link wikidata="Q164666" start="28490" end="28500" title="plagiarism" label="plagiarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15094780" start="28656" end="28664" title="Crofting" label="Crofting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4961880" start="29032" end="29039" title="Bressay transmitting station" label="Bressay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522683" start="29110" end="29128" title="The Shetland Times" label="The Shetland Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876751" start="29213" end="29231" title="BBC Radio Shetland" label="BBC Radio Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481994" start="29265" end="29269" title="SIBC" label="SIBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q17957" start="29357" end="29370" title="Lonely Planet" label="Lonely Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278527" start="29954" end="29969" title="Shetland Museum" label="Shetland Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892802" start="29975" end="29979" title="RSPB" label="RSPB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7980376" start="30025" end="30038" title="Weisdale Mill" label="Weisdale Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535556" start="30053" end="30069" title="Geopark Shetland" label="Geopark Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344240" start="30161" end="30180" title="sustainable tourism" label="sustainable tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934235" start="30504" end="30512" title="Shetland (TV series)" label="Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643246" start="30539" end="30550" title="Ann Cleeves" label="Ann Cleeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q722061" start="30768" end="30784" title="Douglas Henshall" label="Douglas Henshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390286" start="33021" end="33042" title="SIC Ferries" label="inter-island services"/>
<link wikidata="Q36405" start="33109" end="33117" title="Aberdeen" label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783163" start="33197" end="33214" title="NorthLink Ferries" label="NorthLink Ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q208329" start="33243" end="33251" title="Kirkwall" label="Kirkwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q36405" start="33302" end="33310" title="Aberdeen" label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q565640" start="33403" end="33410" title="Bressay" label="Bressay"/>
<link wikidata="Q552027" start="33415" end="33422" title="Whalsay" label="Whalsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432932" start="33498" end="33514" title="Sumburgh Airport" label="Sumburgh Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q934983" start="33599" end="33607" title="Loganair" label="Loganair"/>
<link wikidata="Q208329" start="33698" end="33706" title="Kirkwall" label="Kirkwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q36405" start="33708" end="33716" title="Aberdeen" label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q160493" start="33718" end="33727" title="Inverness" label="Inverness"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="33729" end="33736" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="33741" end="33750" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875973" start="33752" end="33776" title="Tingwall Airport" label="Lerwick/Tingwall Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q30643767" start="33817" end="33829" title="Directflight" label="Directflight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029184" start="33944" end="33953" title="Fair Isle Airport" label="Fair Isle"/>
<link wikidata="Q19420821" start="33958" end="33963" title="Foula Airfield" label="Foula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1915140" start="33966" end="33981" title="Scatsta Airport" label="Scatsta Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q782412" start="34002" end="34012" title="Sullom Voe" label="Sullom Voe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8981" start="34057" end="34065" title="Aberdeen Airport" label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q738734" start="34170" end="34178" title="Mainland, Shetland" label="Mainland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166859" start="34180" end="34187" title="Trondra" label="Trondra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000350" start="34189" end="34194" title="Burra, Shetland" label="Burra"/>
<link wikidata="Q754867" start="34196" end="34200" title="Unst" label="Unst"/>
<link wikidata="Q376068" start="34205" end="34209" title="Yell, Shetland" label="Yell"/>
<link wikidata="Q565640" start="34260" end="34267" title="Bressay" label="Bressay"/>
<link wikidata="Q586660" start="34272" end="34278" title="Fetlar" label="Fetlar"/>
<link wikidata="Q932332" start="34323" end="34328" title="Foula" label="Foula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552121" start="34330" end="34340" title="Papa Stour" label="Papa Stour"/>
<link wikidata="Q552027" start="34346" end="34353" title="Whalsay" label="Whalsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q39715" start="34448" end="34458" title="Lighthouse" label="Lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481996" start="34560" end="34584" title="Shetland Islands Council" label="Shetland Islands Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q28966508" start="35075" end="35105" title="Sheriff of Orkney and Shetland" label="Sheriff of Orkney and Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152837" start="35241" end="35264" title="Commissioners of Supply" label="Commissioners of Supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350181" start="35351" end="35356" title="Shires of Scotland" label="shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178407" start="35537" end="35553" title="Court of Session" label="Court of Session"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679633" start="35705" end="35716" title="Lord Lieutenant of Orkney and Shetland" label="lieutenancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18161712" start="35722" end="35750" title="Orkney and Shetland (Parliament of Scotland constituency)" label="parliamentary constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664029" start="35868" end="35904" title="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1889" label="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1889"/>
<link wikidata="Q17852154" start="36234" end="36259" title="County Buildings, Lerwick" label="County Buildings, Lerwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664037" start="36455" end="36491" title="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973" label="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q254978" start="36534" end="36539" title="burgh" label="burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6626641" start="36545" end="36562" title="landward district" label="landward district"/>
<link wikidata="Q6083725" start="36694" end="36706" title="Islands council areas of Scotland" label="island areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q80967" start="36745" end="36758" title="Western Isles" label="Western Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6612187" start="37356" end="37374" title="List of community council areas in Scotland" label="Community councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q4754090" start="38171" end="38191" title="Anderson High School, Lerwick" label="Anderson High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470817" start="38256" end="38295" title="University of the Highlands and Islands" label="University of the Highlands and Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q18378325" start="38814" end="38843" title="Shetland Football Association" label="Shetland Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437617" start="38939" end="38976" title="Scottish Amateur Football Association" label="Scottish Amateur Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q567979" start="39048" end="39070" title="Shetland football team" label="Shetland football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q845262" start="39104" end="39116" title="Island Games" label="Island Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="39151" end="39162" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q769691" start="39533" end="39549" title="Methodist Church of Great Britain" label="Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q922480" start="39705" end="39723" title="Church of Scotland" label="Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192203" start="39730" end="39740" title="Presbyterian polity" label="Presbytery"/>
<link wikidata="Q15242259" start="39767" end="39792" title="Lerwick and Bressay Parish Church" label="St. Columba&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="40108" end="40116" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205829" start="40253" end="40278" title="Scottish Episcopal Church" label="Scottish Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q193312" start="40292" end="40310" title="Anglican Communion" label="Anglican Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552585" start="40493" end="40525" title="Society of Our Lady of the Isles" label="Society of Our Lady of the Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4065176" start="40557" end="40581" title="Anglican religious order" label="Anglican religious order"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="40592" end="40639" title="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="40784" end="40808" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="40904" end="40920" title="British House of Commons" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050931" start="40936" end="40955" title="Orkney and Shetland (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Orkney and Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064521" start="40956" end="40968" title="United Kingdom constituencies" label="constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="40987" end="41007" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q590740" start="41040" end="41044" title="2001 UK general election" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q269124" start="41056" end="41075" title="Alistair Carmichael" label="Alistair Carmichael"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="41128" end="41145" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="41172" end="41185" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q748667" start="41192" end="41196" title="1950 UK general election" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="41256" end="41275" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278508" start="41280" end="41288" title="Shetland (Scottish Parliament constituency)" label="Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711695" start="41313" end="41346" title="Member of the Scottish Parliament" label="Member of the Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211577" start="41360" end="41379" title="plurality voting system" label="first past the post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339371" start="41388" end="41400" title="Tavish Scott" label="Tavish Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250438" start="41408" end="41434" title="Scottish Liberal Democrats" label="Scottish Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="41479" end="41498" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q66825436" start="41508" end="41524" title="Beatrice Wishart" label="Beatrice Wishart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250438" start="41542" end="41568" title="Scottish Liberal Democrats" label="Scottish Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549306" start="41650" end="41671" title="Highlands and Islands (Scottish Parliament electoral region)" label="Highlands and Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437892" start="41672" end="41688" title="scottish Parliament constituencies and regions" label="electoral region"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="41779" end="41791" title="Independent politician" label="Independents"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="41798" end="41821" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458570" start="41831" end="41895" title="2014 Scottish independence referendum" label="2014 referendum on Scottish independence from the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q21812812" start="42057" end="42113" title="2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum" label="2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="42154" end="42156" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q185441" start="42157" end="42169" title="Member state of the European Union" label="member state"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="42326" end="42328" title="EU" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q28950386" start="42335" end="42347" title="Wir Shetland" label="Wir Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42738" end="42762" title="Levelling up policy of the Boris Johnson government#White paper" label="Levelling Up White Paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="42909" end="42915" title="Orkney" label="Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q80967" start="42921" end="42934" title="Outer Hebrides" label="Western Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q168159" start="42936" end="42944" title="Anglesey" label="Anglesey"/>
<link wikidata="Q9679" start="42953" end="42966" title="Isle of Wight" label="Isle of Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="43226" end="43249" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q369618" start="43272" end="43288" title="flag of Shetland" label="flag of Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q102392" start="43448" end="43464" title="flag of Scotland" label="flag of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q208324" start="43488" end="43500" title="Nordic cross" label="Nordic cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="43551" end="43561" title="referendum" label="plebiscite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523599" start="43575" end="43597" title="Lord Lyon King of Arms" label="Lord Lyon King of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q654252" start="43799" end="43816" title="Scottish Lowlands" label="Scottish Lowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418486" start="44301" end="44312" title="Up Helly Aa" label="Up Helly Aa"/>
<link wikidata="Q211945" start="44591" end="44595" title="Yule" label="Yule"/>
<link wikidata="Q897611" start="44743" end="44751" title="longship" label="longship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659014" start="44793" end="44819" title="International Island Games Association" label="International Island Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669349" start="44840" end="44844" title="2005 Island Games" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778821" start="44851" end="44858" title="cuisine" label="cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q380778" start="44935" end="44942" title="organic food" label="organic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751476" start="44948" end="44956" title="real ale" label="real ale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7911566" start="44967" end="44983" title="Valhalla Brewery" label="Valhalla Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="45053" end="45064" title="blue potato" label="blue potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q36708" start="45140" end="45153" title="Norn language" label="Norn language"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="45168" end="45177" title="Old Norse language" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058774" start="45192" end="45206" title="Northern Isles" label="Northern Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="45322" end="45327" title="Scots language" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069598" start="45338" end="45348" title="Shetland dialect" label="Shetlandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553250" start="45385" end="45401" title="Scottish English" label="Scottish English"/>
<link wikidata="Q16919205" start="45535" end="45548" title="Insular Scots" label="Insular Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495660" start="45694" end="45715" title="Shetland Folk Society" label="Shetland Folk Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495659" start="45834" end="45852" title="The Forty Fiddlers" label="The Forty Fiddlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q450214" start="46015" end="46023" title="Aly Bain" label="Aly Bain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6177775" start="46025" end="46035" title="Jenna Reid" label="Jenna Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446699" start="46037" end="46055" title="Fiddlers&amp;#x27; Bid" label="Fiddlers&amp;#x27; Bid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814781" start="46070" end="46082" title="Tom Anderson (fiddler)" label="Tom Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7160439" start="46087" end="46108" title="Peerie Willie Johnson" label="Peerie Willie Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789800" start="46110" end="46123" title="Thomas Fraser (singer)" label="Thomas Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="46130" end="46143" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="46393" end="46405" title="Walter Scott" label="Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q3225628" start="46430" end="46440" title="The Pirate (novel)" label="The Pirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q18546754" start="46638" end="46650" title="Robert Cowie" label="Robert Cowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q981981" start="46712" end="46727" title="Hugh MacDiarmid" label="Hugh MacDiarmid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731959" start="46984" end="46994" title="West Linga" label="West Linga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334230" start="47037" end="47050" title="Hammond Innes" label="Hammond Innes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7288876" start="47082" end="47095" title="Raman Mundair" label="Raman Mundair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643246" start="47259" end="47270" title="Ann Cleeves" label="Ann Cleeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q762752" start="47296" end="47305" title="Fair Isle" label="Fair Isle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="47420" end="47423" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934235" start="47460" end="47468" title="Shetland (TV series)" label="Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7908449" start="47477" end="47485" title="Vagaland" label="Vagaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q14948891" start="47571" end="47586" title="Haldane Burgess" label="Haldane Burgess"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320839" start="47668" end="47680" title="Rhoda Bulter" label="Rhoda Bulter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110992" start="47807" end="47824" title="Christine De Luca" label="Christine De Luca"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341398" start="47826" end="47846" title="Robert Alan Jamieson" label="Robert Alan Jamieson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416433" start="47862" end="47870" title="Sandness" label="Sandness"/>
<link wikidata="Q6668948" start="47881" end="47894" title="Lollie Graham" label="Lollie Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q9368332" start="47898" end="47908" title="Veensgarth" label="Veensgarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q16089990" start="47910" end="47927" title="Stella Sutherland" label="Stella Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q565640" start="47931" end="47938" title="Bressay" label="Bressay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753748" start="48084" end="48102" title="The New Shetlander" label="The New Shetlander"/>
<link wikidata="Q639647" start="48324" end="48343" title="George Mackay Brown" label="George Mackay Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q55234" start="48375" end="48389" title="Michael Powell" label="Michael Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605272" start="48401" end="48422" title="The Edge of the World" label="The Edge of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q166479" start="48547" end="48555" title="St Kilda, Scotland" label="St Kilda"/>
<link wikidata="Q80967" start="48624" end="48638" title="Outer Hebrides" label="Outer Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605272" start="48865" end="48896" title="Return to the Edge of the World" label="Return to the Edge of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267152" start="49170" end="49187" title="Devil&amp;#x27;s Gate (2004 film)" label="Devil&amp;#x27;s Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6090398" start="49211" end="49234" title="It&amp;#x27;s Nice Up North" label="It&amp;#x27;s Nice Up North"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113246" start="49273" end="49287" title="Graham Fellows" label="Graham Fellows"/>
<link wikidata="Q85847171" start="49293" end="49317" title="Screenplay film festival" label="Screenplay film festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q6758777" start="49342" end="49348" title="Mareel" label="Mareel"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="49392" end="49399" title="BBC One" label="BBC One"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934235" start="49424" end="49432" title="Shetland (TV series)" label="Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643246" start="49512" end="49523" title="Ann Cleeves" label="Ann Cleeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974560" start="49640" end="49664" title="national nature reserve (United Kingdom)" label="national nature reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579490" start="49693" end="49702" title="Hermaness" label="Hermaness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674272" start="49707" end="49711" title="Isle of Noss" label="Noss"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382856" start="49720" end="49733" title="Keen of Hamar" label="Keen of Hamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455132" start="49750" end="49760" title="Serpentine soil" label="serpentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q422211" start="49791" end="49796" title="SSSIs" label="SSSIs"/>
<link wikidata="Q762752" start="49846" end="49855" title="Fair Isle" label="Fair Isle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552121" start="49857" end="49867" title="Papa Stour" label="Papa Stour"/>
<link wikidata="Q586660" start="49869" end="49875" title="Fetlar" label="Fetlar"/>
<link wikidata="Q932332" start="49887" end="49892" title="Foula" label="Foula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="49995" end="50000" title="sheep" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="50094" end="50098" title="tree" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q146198" start="50108" end="50113" title="sorbus aucuparia" label="rowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q47161" start="50118" end="50128" title="malus sylvestris" label="crab apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q25347" start="50264" end="50268" title="moss" label="moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q43142" start="50273" end="50279" title="lichen" label="lichen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3034404" start="50281" end="50294" title="Scilla verna" label="Spring squill"/>
<link wikidata="Q164030" start="50296" end="50321" title="plantago coronopus" label="buck&amp;#x27;s-horn plantain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257294" start="50323" end="50335" title="Scots lovage" label="Scots lovage"/>
<link wikidata="Q161665" start="50337" end="50345" title="rhodiola rosea" label="roseroot"/>
<link wikidata="Q951322" start="50350" end="50361" title="silene uniflora" label="sea campion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695264" start="50434" end="50454" title="Cerastium nigrescens" label="Cerastium nigrescens"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="50468" end="50475" title="endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q379035" start="50558" end="50575" title="Thomas Edmondston" label="Thomas Edmondston"/>
<link wikidata="Q765547" start="50736" end="50747" title="mertensia" label="oysterplant"/>
<link wikidata="Q32059" start="50792" end="50802" title="IUCN Red List" label="Red Listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q29993" start="50803" end="50812" title="bryophyte" label="bryophyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408974" start="50819" end="50841" title="Thamnobryum" label="Thamnobryum alopecurum"/>
<link wikidata="Q30686928" start="50907" end="50930" title="Polysiphonia fibrillosa" label="Polysiphonia fibrillosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q25095718" start="50966" end="50988" title="Polysiphonia atlantica" label="Polysiphonia atlantica"/>
<link wikidata="Q28431609" start="51023" end="51044" title="Polysiphonia brodiaei" label="Polysiphonia brodiaei"/>
<link wikidata="Q30594174" start="51077" end="51098" title="Polysiphonia elongata" label="Polysiphonia elongata"/>
<link wikidata="Q30594992" start="51130" end="51152" title="Polysiphonia elongella" label="Polysiphonia elongella"/>
<link wikidata="Q17745902" start="51241" end="51253" title="Erythranthe" label="Monkeyflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q26685" start="51420" end="51435" title="Atlantic puffin" label="Atlantic puffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q27461" start="51437" end="51449" title="European storm-petrel" label="storm-petrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q26691" start="51451" end="51469" title="red-throated diver" label="red-throated diver"/>
<link wikidata="Q26675" start="51471" end="51486" title="northern gannet" label="northern gannet"/>
<link wikidata="Q207760" start="51491" end="51501" title="great skua" label="great skua"/>
<link wikidata="Q602598" start="51591" end="51613" title="black-browed albatross" label="black-browed albatross"/>
<link wikidata="Q27074540" start="51618" end="51628" title="snow goose" label="snow goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q170177" start="51647" end="51656" title="snowy owl" label="snowy owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495667" start="51696" end="51709" title="Shetland wren" label="Shetland wren"/>
<link wikidata="Q4051795" start="51711" end="51725" title="Fair Isle wren" label="Fair Isle wren"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51731" end="51748" title="Shetland starling" label="Shetland starling"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="51764" end="51771" title="endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18854" start="51846" end="51852" title="Eurasian curlew" label="curlew"/>
<link wikidata="Q25392" start="51854" end="51861" title="Northern lapwing" label="lapwing"/>
<link wikidata="Q25692" start="51863" end="51868" title="common snipe" label="snipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q21148" start="51873" end="51886" title="eurasian golden plover" label="golden plover"/>
<link wikidata="Q44703" start="51906" end="51919" title="ornithologist" label="ornithologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048134" start="51977" end="51990" title="Edmund Selous" label="Edmund Selous"/>
<link wikidata="Q203053" start="52127" end="52138" title="arctic skua" label="arctic skua"/>
<link wikidata="Q212055" start="52145" end="52160" title="black guillemot" label="black guillemot"/>
<link wikidata="Q184224" start="52334" end="52343" title="brown rat" label="brown rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q83310" start="52348" end="52359" title="house mouse" label="house mouse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52428" end="52448" title="Shetland field mouse" label="Shetland field mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q212185" start="52609" end="52628" title="Wood mouse" label="Apodemus sylvaticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="52720" end="52728" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="52878" end="52888" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q214720" start="52987" end="53000" title="Shetland pony" label="Shetland pony"/>
<link wikidata="Q39058" start="53258" end="53275" title="Shetland Sheepdog" label="Shetland Sheepdog"/>
<link wikidata="Q17019069" start="53315" end="53330" title="Shetland cattle" label="Shetland cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495662" start="53335" end="53349" title="Shetland goose" label="Shetland goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495655" start="53358" end="53372" title="Shetland sheep" label="Shetland sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546243" start="53432" end="53437" title="Grice" label="Grice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310366" start="53631" end="53669" title="List of counties of the United Kingdom" label="List of counties of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q587046" start="53672" end="53699" title="List of islands in Scotland" label="List of islands in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634420" start="53702" end="53738" title="List of populated places in Shetland" label="List of populated places in Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q958492" start="53765" end="53776" title="Mavis Grind" label="Mavis Grind"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876900" start="53779" end="53787" title="Udal law" label="Udal law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888503" start="53806" end="53823" title="Battle of Florvåg" label="Battle of Florvåg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2109400" start="53826" end="53847" title="Rögnvald Kali Kolsson" label="Rögnvald Kali Kolsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806158" start="53850" end="53882" title="Timeline of prehistoric Scotland" label="Timeline of prehistoric Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249814" start="53885" end="53905" title="Prehistoric Scotland" label="Prehistoric Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15916866" start="53908" end="53971" title="Constitutional status of Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles" label="Constitutional status of Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q54915910" start="54604" end="54626" title="James Graham-Campbell" label="Graham-Campbell, James"/>
<link wikidata="Q6136429" start="55049" end="55062" title="James Hunter (historian)" label="Hunter, James"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537425" start="56015" end="56040" title="NatureScot" label="Scottish Natural Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3200853" start="56597" end="56615" title="William J. Watson" label="Watson, William J."/>
<link wikidata="Q5759437" start="57019" end="57051" title="Highlands and Islands Enterprise" label="Highlands and Islands Enterprise"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28917" wikidata="Q1297438" url="?curid=28917" title="Soay, Inner Hebrides">
<text>Soay (, ) is an island just off the coast of Skye, in the Inner Hebrides of Scotland.

==Geography==
Soay lies to the west of Loch Scavaig on the south-west coast of Skye, from which it is separated by Soay Sound. Unlike its neighbours Skye and Rùm, Soay is low-lying, reaching at Beinn Bhreac. The dumb-bell shaped island is virtually cut in half by inlets that form Soay Harbour (north) and the main bay, Camas nan Gall (to the south). The main settlement, Mol-chlach, is on the shore of Camas nan Gall. It is normally reached by boat from Elgol. The island is part of the Cuillin Hills National Scenic Area, one of 40 in Scotland.

==History==

The name derives from Old Norse &quot;Sauða-ey&quot; meaning &quot;Sheep Island&quot;. Camas nan Gall (G: &quot;Bay of Foreigners&quot;) is probably named after the Norse invaders, after whom the Hebrides (&quot;Na h-Innse Gall&quot;) are also named.

The population peaked at 158 in 1851, following eviction of crofters from Skye in the Highland Clearances.

In 1946, author Gavin Maxwell bought the island and established a factory to process shark oil from basking sharks. The enterprise was unsuccessful, lasting just three years. Maxwell wrote about it in his book &quot;Harpoon at a Venture&quot;. After the failure of the business the island was sold on to Maxwell&#x27;s business partner&#x27;s wife (Jeanne Geddes), Tex Geddes. The island had the first solar-powered telephone exchange in the world.

Previously mainly Scottish Gaelic-speaking, most of the population was evacuated, at their request, to Mull on 20 June 1953 due to the poor ferry schedule in the winter when it was frequently cancelled due to bad weather , since then the island has been sparsely populated. In 2001 the population was 7. By 2003 this had dwindled to 2 and the usually resident population in 2011 were three people.

==Stamps==
Local stamps were issued for Soay between 1965 and 1967, all on the Europa theme, some being overprinted to commemorate Sir Winston Churchill. As the stamps were produced without the owner&#x27;s permission, they are regarded as bogus.

==See also==

* List of islands of Scotland

==Footnotes==
==References==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1297438" start="0" end="4" title="Soay, Inner Hebrides" label="Soay"/>
<link wikidata="Q107393" start="45" end="49" title="Skye" label="Skye"/>
<link wikidata="Q81052" start="58" end="72" title="Inner Hebrides" label="Inner Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="76" end="84" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="126" end="138" title="Loch Scavaig" label="Loch Scavaig"/>
<link wikidata="Q278082" start="245" end="248" title="Rùm" label="Rùm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875342" start="542" end="547" title="Elgol" label="Elgol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143317" start="575" end="588" title="Cuillin" label="Cuillin Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978246" start="589" end="609" title="National Scenic Area (Scotland)" label="National Scenic Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="670" end="679" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="813" end="827" title="Viking" label="Norse invaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368217" start="986" end="1005" title="Highland Clearances" label="Highland Clearances"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496427" start="1024" end="1037" title="Gavin Maxwell" label="Gavin Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4380845" start="1093" end="1102" title="shark oil" label="shark oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q185260" start="1108" end="1121" title="basking shark" label="basking shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q17198932" start="1373" end="1383" title="Tex Geddes" label="Tex Geddes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="1476" end="1491" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q111444" start="1561" end="1565" title="Isle of Mull" label="Mull"/>
<link wikidata="Q914901" start="2097" end="2102" title="Philatelic fakes and forgeries" label="bogus"/>
<link wikidata="Q587046" start="2121" end="2148" title="List of islands of Scotland" label="List of islands of Scotland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28918" wikidata="Q7620492" url="?curid=28918" title="Storytelling game">
<text>A storytelling game is a game where multiple players collaborate on telling a story. Some games primarily feature spoken storytelling, while others primarily feature collaborative writing. In some storytelling games, such as many tabletop role-playing games, each player represents one or more characters in the developing story. Others involve more third-person narrative.

==Collaborative writing games==
Collaborative fiction is a form of storytelling which uses collaborative writing as the primary medium. A group of authors share creative control of a story. Exquisite Corpse, a Surrealist parlour game, is an example of a collaborative writing game. The parlour game Consequences is similar.

== Storytelling card games ==
In storytelling card games, players use cards containing narrative prompts or plot details to tell a collaborative story. Examples include &quot;Once Upon a Time&quot; and &quot;For the Queen&quot;.

==Tabletop role-playing games==

Storytelling TTRPGs take various forms. Some require one participant (a gamemaster or narrator) to describe the setting and take supporting character roles, while others distribute this function among multiple players. White Wolf Game Studio&#x27;s Storyteller System, which is used in World of Darkness role-playing games such as &quot;&quot;, is a well-known TTRPG described as a &quot;storytelling game.&quot; These use a narrator. Other storytelling TTRPGs distribute narrative authority equally among all players. Examples include &quot;The Quiet Year&quot;, &quot;Fall of Magic&quot;, and &quot;Companions&#x27; Tale&quot;.

In contrast to improvisational theatre and live action role-playing games, TTRPG players describe the actions of their characters rather than acting them out, except during dialogue or, in some games, monologue.

==History of storytelling TTRPGs==

&quot;Matrix Game&quot; (c. 1988) by Chris Engle was an early collaborative storytelling game not based in simulation. In this system, a referee decides the likeliness of the facts proposed by the players, and events happen or not according to a dice roll. Players can propose counter-arguments that are resolved in a dice rolling contest. A conflict round can follow to resolve any inconsistencies or further detail new plot points. 

In 1999, game designer Ian Millington&#x27;s &quot;Ergo&quot; offered a collaborative role-playing system. It was based on the rules of the Fudge universal role-playing system, but eliminated the need for a gamemaster, distributing the responsibility for the game and story equally among all players and undoing the equivalence between player and character. 

The coin system in Universalis (2002) relies less on randomness and more on collaboration between players.

Starting in the mid-00s, storytelling TTRPGs based upon historical events began to emerge in indie role-playing game design communities. Examples include &quot;Grey Ranks&quot; (2007) by Jason Morningstar, which takes place during the 1944 Warsaw Uprising, and &quot;Montsegur 1244&quot; (2008) by Frederik Jensen, in which players tell a collaborative story about the Cathars.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7620492" start="2" end="19" title="Storytelling game" label="storytelling game"/>
<link wikidata="Q11410" start="25" end="29" title="game" label="game"/>
<link wikidata="Q989963" start="68" end="83" title="Storytelling" label="telling a story"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643932" start="230" end="257" title="Tabletop role-playing game" label="tabletop role-playing games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062345" start="294" end="304" title="player character" label="characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q33005760" start="350" end="372" title="third-person narrative" label="third-person narrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762292" start="466" end="487" title="collaborative writing" label="collaborative writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q989963" start="558" end="563" title="Storytelling" label="story"/>
<link wikidata="Q691389" start="565" end="581" title="Exquisite corpse" label="Exquisite Corpse"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="585" end="595" title="Surrealism" label="Surrealist"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947863" start="596" end="608" title="parlour game" label="parlour game"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162887" start="674" end="686" title="Consequences (game)" label="Consequences"/>
<link wikidata="Q3148583" start="869" end="897" title="Once Upon a Time (game)" label="&amp;quot;Once Upon a Time&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q130050696" start="902" end="927" title="For the Queen (game)" label="&amp;quot;For the Queen&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q930701" start="1035" end="1045" title="gamemaster" label="gamemaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433597" start="1182" end="1204" title="White Wolf, Inc." label="White Wolf Game Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851660" start="1212" end="1230" title="Storyteller System" label="Storyteller System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506136" start="1249" end="1266" title="World of Darkness" label="World of Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q67892082" start="1505" end="1519" title="The Quiet Year" label="The Quiet Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q117715726" start="1533" end="1546" title="Fall of Magic" label="Fall of Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q130271329" start="1564" end="1585" title="Companions&amp;#x27; Tale" label="Companions&amp;#x27; Tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140700" start="1609" end="1632" title="improvisational theatre" label="improvisational theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q216749" start="1637" end="1667" title="Live action role-playing game" label="live action role-playing games"/>
<link wikidata="Q131395" start="1767" end="1775" title="dialogue" label="dialogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q261197" start="1795" end="1804" title="monologue" label="monologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q940304" start="2419" end="2424" title="Fudge (role-playing game system)" label="Fudge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894174" start="2658" end="2669" title="Universalis" label="Universalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q336522" start="2840" end="2863" title="indie role-playing game" label="indie role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608233" start="2901" end="2923" title="Grey Ranks (role-playing game)" label="&amp;quot;Grey Ranks&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q16730211" start="2934" end="2951" title="Jason Morningstar" label="Jason Morningstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402078" start="2987" end="3002" title="Warsaw Uprising" label="Warsaw Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q161696" start="3116" end="3123" title="Catharism" label="Cathars"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28922" wikidata="Q19125" url="?curid=28922" title="Scorpion">
<text>Scorpions are predatory arachnids of the order Scorpiones. They have eight legs and are easily recognized by a pair of grasping pincers and a narrow, segmented tail, often carried in a characteristic forward curve over the back and always ending with a stinger. The evolutionary history of scorpions goes back 435 million years. They mainly live in deserts but have adapted to a wide range of environmental conditions, and can be found on all continents except Antarctica. There are over 2,500 described species, with 22 extant (living) families recognized to date. Their taxonomy is being revised to account for 21st-century genomic studies.

Scorpions primarily prey on insects and other invertebrates, but some species hunt vertebrates. They use their pincers to restrain and kill prey, or to prevent their own predation. The venomous sting is used for offense and defense. During courtship, the male and female grasp each other&#x27;s pincers and dance while he tries to move her onto his sperm packet. All known species give live birth and the female cares for the young as their exoskeletons harden, transporting them on her back. The exoskeleton contains fluorescent chemicals and glows under ultraviolet light.

The vast majority of species do not seriously threaten humans, and healthy adults usually do not need medical treatment after a sting. About 25 species (fewer than one percent) have venom capable of killing a human, which happens frequently in the parts of the world where they live, primarily where access to medical treatment is unlikely.

Scorpions appear in art, folklore, mythology, and commercial brands. Scorpion motifs are woven into kilim carpets for protection from their sting. Scorpius is the name of a constellation; the corresponding astrological sign is Scorpio. A classical myth about Scorpius tells how the giant scorpion and its enemy Orion became constellations on opposite sides of the sky.

==Etymology==

The word &quot;scorpion&quot; originated in Middle English between 1175 and 1225 AD from Old French &#x27;, or from Italian &#x27;, both derived from the Latin &#x27;, equivalent to &#x27;, which is the romanization of the Greek  – &quot;&quot;, with no native IE etymology (cfr. Arabic &quot;ʕaqrab&quot; &#x27;scorpion&#x27;, Proto-Germanic &quot;*krabbô&quot; &#x27;crab&#x27;).

==Evolution==

===Fossil record===

Scorpion fossils have been found in many strata, including marine Silurian and estuarine Devonian deposits, coal deposits from the Carboniferous Period and in amber. Whether the early scorpions were marine or terrestrial has been debated, and while they had book lungs like modern terrestrial species, the most basal such as &quot;Eramoscorpius&quot; were originally considered as still aquatic, although later study found that &quot;Eramoscorpius&quot; also had book lungs. Over 100 fossil species of scorpion have been described. The oldest found as of 2021 is &quot;Dolichophonus loudonensis&quot;, which lived during the Silurian, in present-day Scotland. &quot;Gondwanascorpio&quot; from the Devonian is among the earliest-known terrestrial animals on the Gondwana supercontinent. Some Palaeozoic scorpions possessed compound eyes similar to those of eurypterids. The Triassic fossils &quot;Protochactas&quot; and &quot;Protobuthus&quot; belong to the modern clades Chactoidea and Buthoidea respectively, indicating that the crown group of modern scorpions had emerged by this time.

===Phylogeny===

The Scorpiones are a clade within the pulmonate Arachnida (those with book lungs). Arachnida is placed within the Chelicerata, a subphylum of Arthropoda that contains sea spiders and horseshoe crabs, alongside terrestrial animals without book lungs such as ticks and harvestmen. The extinct Eurypterida, sometimes called sea scorpions, though they were not all marine, are not scorpions; their grasping pincers were chelicerae, not homologous with the pincers (second appendages) of scorpions. Scorpiones is sister to the Tetrapulmonata, a terrestrial group of pulmonates containing the spiders and whip scorpions. This 2019 cladogram summarizes:

Recent studies place pseudoscorpions as the sister group of scorpions in the clade Panscorpiones, which together with Tetrapulmonata makes up the clade Arachnopulmonata.

The internal phylogeny of the scorpions has been debated, but genomic analysis consistently places the Bothriuridae as sister to a clade consisting of Scorpionoidea and Chactoidea. The scorpions diversified between the Devonian and the early Carboniferous. The main division is into the clades Buthida and Iurida. The Bothriuridae diverged starting before temperate Gondwana broke up into separate land masses, completed by the Jurassic. The Iuroidea and Chactoidea are both seen not to be single clades, and are shown as &quot;paraphyletic&quot; (with quotation marks) in this 2018 cladogram.

===Taxonomy===

Carl Linnaeus described six species of scorpion in his genus &quot;Scorpio&quot; in 1758 and 1767; three of these are now considered valid and are called &quot;Scorpio maurus&quot;, &quot;Androctonus australis&quot;, and &quot;Euscorpius carpathicus&quot;; the other three are dubious names. He placed the scorpions among his &quot;Insecta aptera&quot; (wingless insects), a group that included Crustacea, Arachnida and Myriapoda. In 1801, Jean-Baptiste Lamarck divided up the &quot;Insecta aptera&quot;, creating the taxon Arachnides for spiders, scorpions, and acari (mites and ticks), though it also contained the Thysanura, Myriapoda and parasites such as lice. German arachnologist Carl Ludwig Koch created the order Scorpiones in 1837. He divided it into four families, the six-eyed scorpions &quot;Scorpionides&quot;, the eight-eyed scorpions &quot;Buthides&quot;, the ten-eyed scorpions &quot;Centrurides&quot;, and the twelve-eyed scorpions &quot;Androctonides&quot;.

More recently, some twenty-two families containing over 2,500 species of scorpions have been described, with many additions and much reorganization of taxa in the 21st century. There are over 100 described taxa of fossil scorpions. This classification is based on Soleglad and Fet (2003), which replaced Stockwell&#x27;s older, unpublished classification. Further taxonomic changes are from papers by Soleglad et al. (2005).

The extant taxa to the rank of family (numbers of species in parentheses) are:

; Order Scorpiones



* Parvorder Pseudochactida 

** Superfamily Pseudochactoidea 
*** Family Pseudochactidae (1 sp.) (Central Asian scorpions of semi-savanna habitats)

* Parvorder Buthida 

** Superfamily Buthoidea 
*** Family Buthidae (1209 spp.) (thick-tailed scorpions, including the most dangerous species)
*** Family Microcharmidae (17 spp.) (African scorpions of humid forest leaf litter)

* Parvorder Chaerilida 

** Superfamily Chaeriloidea 
*** Family Chaerilidae (51 spp.) (South and Southeast Asian scorpions of non-arid places)
* Parvorder Iurida 

** Superfamily Chactoidea 
*** Family Akravidae (1 sp.) (cave-dwelling scorpions of Israel)
*** Family Belisariidae (3 spp.) (cave-related scorpions of Southern Europe)
*** Family Chactidae (209 spp.) (New World scorpions, membership under revision)
*** Family Euscorpiidae (170 spp.) (harmless scorpions of the Americas, Eurasia, and North Africa)
*** Family Superstitioniidae (1 sp.) (cave scorpions of Mexico and Southwestern United States)
*** Family Troglotayosicidae (4 spp.) (cave-related scorpions of South America)
*** Family Typhlochactidae (11 spp.) (cave-related scorpions of Eastern Mexico)
*** Family Vaejovidae (222 spp.) (New World scorpions)

** Superfamily Iuroidea 
*** Family Caraboctonidae (23 spp.) (hairy scorpions)
*** Family Hadruridae (9 spp.) (large North American scorpions)
*** Family Iuridae (21 spp.) (scorpions with a large tooth on inner side of moveable claw)

** Superfamily Scorpionoidea 
*** Family Bothriuridae (158 spp.) (Southern hemisphere tropical and temperate scorpions)
*** Family Hemiscorpiidae (16 spp.) (rock, creeping, or tree scorpions of the Middle East)
*** Family Hormuridae (92 spp.) (flattened, crevice-living scorpions of Southeast Asia and Australia)
*** Family Rugodentidae (1 sp.) (burrowing scorpions of India)
*** Family Scorpionidae (183 spp.) (burrowing or pale-legged scorpions)
*** Family Diplocentridae (134 spp.) (closely related to and sometimes placed in Scorpionidae, but have spine on telson)
*** Family Heteroscorpionidae (6 spp.) (scorpions of Madagascar)

== Geographical distribution ==

Scorpions are found on all continents except Antarctica. The diversity of scorpions is greatest in subtropical areas; it decreases toward the poles and equator, though scorpions are found in the tropics. Scorpions did not occur naturally in Great Britain but were accidentally introduced by humans, and have now established a population. New Zealand, and some of the islands in Oceania, have in the past had small populations of introduced scorpions, but they were exterminated. Five colonies of &quot;Euscorpius flavicaudis&quot; have established themselves since the late 19th century in Sheerness in England at 51°N, while &quot;Paruroctonus boreus&quot; lives as far north as Red Deer, Alberta, at 52°N. A few species are on the IUCN Red List; &quot;Afrolychas braueri&quot; is classed as critically endangered (2012), &quot;Isometrus deharvengi&quot; as endangered (2016) and &quot;Chiromachus ochropus&quot; as vulnerable (2014).

Scorpions are xerocoles, meaning they primarily live in deserts, but they can be found in virtually every terrestrial habitat including high-elevation mountains, caves, and intertidal zones. They are largely absent from boreal ecosystems such as the tundra, high-altitude taiga, and mountain tops. The highest altitude reached by a scorpion is in the Andes, for &quot;Orobothriurus crassimanus&quot;.

As regards microhabitats, scorpions may be ground-dwelling, tree-loving, rock-loving or sand-loving. Some species, such as &quot;Vaejovis janssi&quot;, are versatile and are found in all habitats on Socorro Island, Baja California, while others such as &quot;Euscorpius carpathicus&quot;, endemic to the littoral zone of rivers in Romania, occupy specialized niches.

==Morphology==

Scorpions range in size from the &quot;Typhlochactas mitchelli&quot; of Typhlochactidae, to the &quot;Heterometrus swammerdami&quot; of Scorpionidae. The body of a scorpion is divided into two parts or tagmata: the cephalothorax or prosoma, and the abdomen or opisthosoma. The opisthosoma is subdivided into a broad anterior portion, the mesosoma or pre-abdomen, and a narrow tail-like posterior, the metasoma or post-abdomen. External differences between the sexes are not obvious in most species. In some, the metasoma is more elongated in males than females.

===Cephalothorax===

The cephalothorax comprises the carapace, eyes, chelicerae (mouth parts), pedipalps (which have chelae, commonly called claws or pincers) and four pairs of walking legs. Scorpions have two eyes on the top of the cephalothorax, and usually two to five pairs of eyes along the front corners of the cephalothorax. While unable to form sharp images, their central eyes are amongst the most light sensitive in the animal kingdom, especially in dim light, which makes it possible for nocturnal species to use starlight to navigate at night. The chelicerae are at the front and underneath the carapace. They are pincer-like and have three segments and sharp &quot;teeth&quot;. The brain of a scorpion is in the back of the cephalothorax, just above the esophagus. As in other arachnids, the nervous system is highly concentrated in the cephalothorax, but has a long ventral nerve cord with segmented ganglia which may be a primitive trait.

The pedipalp is a segmented, clawed appendage used for prey immobilization, defense and sensory purposes. The segments of the pedipalp (from closest to the body outward) are coxa, trochanter, femur, patella, tibia (including the fixed claw and the manus) and tarsus (moveable claw). A scorpion has darkened or granular raised linear ridges, called &quot;keels&quot; or &quot;carinae&quot; on the pedipalp segments and on other parts of the body; these are useful as taxonomic characters. Unlike those of some other arachnids, the legs have not been modified for other purposes, though they may occasionally be used for digging, and females may use them to catch emerging young. The legs are covered in proprioceptors, bristles and sensory setae. Depending on the species, the legs may have spines and spurs.

===Mesosoma===

The mesosoma or preabdomen is the broad part of the opisthosoma. In the early stages of embryonic development the mesosoma consist of eight segments, but the first segment disappear before birth, so the mesosoma in scorpions actually consist of segments 2-8. These anterior seven somites (segments) of the opisthosoma are each covered dorsally by a sclerotized plate called the tergite. Ventrally, somites 3 to 7 are armored with matching plates called sternites. The ventral side of somite 1 has a pair of genital opercula covering the gonopore. Sternite 2 forms the basal plate bearing the pectines, which function as sensory organs.

The next four somites, 3 to 6, all bear pairs of spiracles. They serve as openings for the scorpion&#x27;s respiratory organs, known as book lungs. The spiracle openings may be slits, circular, elliptical or oval according to the species. There are thus four pairs of book lungs; each consists of some 140 to 150 thin lamellae filled with air inside a pulmonary chamber, connected on the ventral side to an atrial chamber which opens into a spiracle. Bristles hold the lamellae apart. A muscle opens the spiracle and widens the atrial chamber; dorsoventral muscles contract to compress the pulmonary chamber, forcing air out, and relax to allow the chamber to refill. The 7th and last somite does not bear appendages or any other significant external structures.

The mesosoma contains the heart or &quot;dorsal vessel&quot; which is the center of the scorpion&#x27;s open circulatory system. The heart is continuous with a deep arterial system which spreads throughout the body. Sinuses return deoxygenated blood (hemolymph) to the heart; the blood is re-oxygenated by cardiac pores. The mesosoma also contains the reproductive system. The female gonads are made of three or four tubes that run parallel to each other and are connected by two to four transverse anastomoses. These tubes are the sites for both oocyte formation and embryonic development. They connect to two oviducts which connect to a single atrium leading to the genital orifice. Males have two gonads made of two cylindrical tubes with a ladder-like configuration; they contain cysts which produce spermatozoa. Both tubes end in a spermiduct, one on each side of the mesosoma. They connect to glandular symmetrical structures called paraxial organs, which end at the genital orifice. These secrete chitin-based structures which come together to form the spermatophore.

===Metasoma===

The &quot;tail&quot; or metasoma consists of five segments and the telson, which is not strictly a segment. The five segments are merely body rings; they lack apparent sterna or terga, and become larger distally. These segments have keels, setae and bristles which may be used for taxonomic classification. The anus is at the distal and ventral end of the last segment, and is encircled by four anal papillae and the anal arch. The tails of some species contain light receptors.

The telson includes the vesicle, which contains a symmetrical pair of venom glands. Externally it bears the curved stinger, the hypodermic aculeus, equipped with sensory hairs. Each of the venom glands has its own duct to convey its secretion along the aculeus from the bulb of the gland to immediately near of the tip, where each of the paired ducts has its own venom pore. An extrinsic muscle system in the tail moves it forward and propels and penetrates with the aculeus, while an intrinsic muscle system attached to the glands pumps venom through the stinger into the intended victim. The stinger contains metalloproteins with zinc, hardening the tip. The optimal stinging angle is around 30 degrees relative to the tip.

==Biology==

Most scorpion species are nocturnal or crepuscular, finding shelter during the day in burrows, cracks in rocks and tree bark. Many species dig a shelter underneath stones a few centimeters long. Some may use burrows made by other animals including spiders, reptiles and small mammals. Other species dig their own burrows which vary in complexity and depth. &quot;Hadrurus&quot; species dig burrows as over deep. Digging is done using the mouth parts, claws and legs. In several species, particularly of the family Buthidae, individuals may gather in the same shelter; bark scorpions may aggregate up to 30 individuals. In some species, families of females and young sometimes aggregate.

Scorpions prefer areas where the temperature remains in the range of , but may survive temperatures from well below freezing to desert heat. Scorpions can withstand intense heat: &quot;Leiurus quinquestriatus&quot;, &quot;Scorpio maurus&quot; and &quot;Hadrurus arizonensis&quot; can live in temperatures of if they are sufficiently hydrated. Desert species must deal with the extreme changes in temperature from day to night or between seasons; &quot;Pectinibuthus birulai&quot; lives in a temperature range of . Scorpions that live outside deserts prefer lower temperatures. The ability to resist cold may be related to the increase in the sugar trehalose when the temperature drops. Some species hibernate. Scorpions appear to have resistance to ionizing radiation. This was discovered in the early 1960s when scorpions were found to be among the few animals to survive nuclear tests at Reggane, Algeria.

Desert scorpions have several adaptations for water conservation. They excrete insoluble compounds such as xanthine, guanine, and uric acid, not requiring water for their removal from the body. Guanine is the main component and maximizes the amount of nitrogen excreted. A scorpion&#x27;s cuticle holds in moisture via lipids and waxes from epidermal glands, and protects against ultraviolet radiation. Even when dehydrated, a scorpion can tolerate high osmotic pressure in its blood. Desert scorpions get most of their moisture from the food they eat but some can absorb water from the humid soil. Species that live in denser vegetation and in more moderate temperatures will drink water on plants and in puddles.

A scorpion uses its stinger both for killing prey and defense. Some species make direct, quick strikes with their tails while others make slower, more circular strikes which can more easily return the stinger to a position where it can strike again. &quot;Leiurus quinquestriatus&quot; can whip its tail at a speed of up to in a defensive strike.

===Mortality and defense===

Scorpions may be attacked by other arthropods like ants, spiders, solifugids and centipedes. Major predators include frogs, lizards, snakes, birds, and mammals. Meerkats are somewhat specialized in preying on scorpions, biting off their stingers and being immune to their venom. Other predators adapted for hunting scorpions include the grasshopper mouse and desert long-eared bat, which are also immune to their venom. In one study, 70% of the latter&#x27;s droppings contained scorpion fragments. Scorpions host parasites including mites, scuttle flies, nematodes and some bacteria. The immune system of scorpions gives them resistance to infection by many types of bacteria.

When threatened, a scorpion raises its claws and tail in a defensive posture. Some species stridulate to warn off predators by rubbing certain hairs, the stinger or the claws. Certain species have a preference for using either the claws or stinger as defense, depending on the size of the appendages. A few scorpions, such as &quot;Parabuthus&quot;, &quot;Centruroides margaritatus&quot;, and &quot;Hadrurus arizonensis&quot;, squirt venom in a narrow jet as far as to warn off potential predators, possibly injuring them in the eyes. Some &quot;Ananteris&quot; species can shed parts of their tail to escape predators. The parts do not grow back, leaving them unable to sting and defecate, but they can still catch small prey and reproduce for at least eight months afterward.

===Diet and feeding===

Scorpions generally prey on insects, particularly grasshoppers, crickets, termites, beetles and wasps. Other prey include spiders, solifugids, woodlice and even small vertebrates including lizards, snakes and mammals. Species with large claws may prey on earthworms and mollusks. The majority of species are opportunistic and consume a variety of prey though some may be highly specialized; &quot;Isometroides vescus&quot; specializes on burrowing spiders. Prey size depends on the size of the species. Several scorpion species are sit-and-wait predators, which involves them waiting for prey at or near the entrance to their burrow. Others actively seek them out. Scorpions detect their prey with mechanoreceptive and chemoreceptive hairs on their bodies and capture them with their claws. Small animals are merely killed with the claws, particularly by large-clawed species. Larger and more aggressive prey is given a sting.

Scorpions, like other arachnids, digest their food externally. The chelicerae, which are very sharp, are used to pull small amounts of food off the prey item into a pre-oral cavity below the chelicerae and carapace. The digestive juices from the gut are egested onto the food, and the digested food is then sucked into the gut in liquid form. Any solid indigestible matter (such as exoskeleton fragments) is trapped by setae in the pre-oral cavity and ejected. The sucked-in food is pumped into the midgut by the pharynx, where it is further digested. The waste passes through the hindgut and out of the anus. Scorpions can consume large amounts of food during one meal. They have an efficient food storage organ and a very low metabolic rate, and a relatively inactive lifestyle. This enables some to survive six to twelve months of starvation.

===Mating===

Most scorpions reproduce sexually, with male and female individuals; species in some genera, such as &quot;Hottentotta&quot; and &quot;Tityus&quot;, and the species &quot;Centruroides gracilis&quot;, &quot;Liocheles australasiae&quot;, and &quot;Ananteris coineaui&quot; have been reported, not necessarily reliably, to reproduce through parthenogenesis, in which unfertilized eggs develop into living embryos. Receptive females produce pheromones which are picked up by wandering males using their pectines to comb the substrate. Males begin courtship by moving their bodies back and forth, without moving the legs, a behavior known as juddering. This appears to produce ground vibrations that are picked up by the female.

The pair then make contact using their pedipalps, and perform a dance called the &quot;promenade à deux&quot; (French for &quot;a walk for two&quot;). In this dance, the male and female move back and forth while facing each other, as the male searches for a suitable place to deposit his spermatophore. The courtship ritual can involve several other behaviors such as a cheliceral kiss, in which the male and female grasp each other&#x27;s mouth-parts, &quot;arbre droit&quot; (&quot;upright tree&quot;) where the partners elevate their posteriors and rub their tails together, and sexual stinging, in which the male stings the female in the chelae or mesosoma to subdue her. The dance can last from a few minutes to several hours.

When the male has located a suitably stable substrate, such as hard ground, agglomerated sand, rock, or tree bark, he deposits the spermatophore and guides the female over it. This allows the spermatophore to enter her genital opercula, which triggers release of the sperm, thus fertilizing the female. A mating plug then forms in the female to prevent her from mating again before the young are born. The male and female then abruptly separate. Sexual cannibalism after mating has only been reported anecdotally in scorpions.

===Birth and development===

Gestation in scorpions can last for over a year in some species. They have two types of embryonic development; apoikogenic and katoikogenic. In the apoikogenic system, which is mainly found in the Buthidae, embryos develop in yolk-rich eggs inside follicles. The katoikogenic system is documented in Hemiscorpiidae, Scorpionidae and Diplocentridae, and involves the embryos developing in a diverticulum which has a teat-like structure for them to feed through. Unlike the majority of arachnids, which are oviparous, hatching from eggs, scorpions seem to be universally viviparous, with live births. They are unusual among terrestrial arthropods in the amount of care a female gives to her offspring. The size of a brood varies by species, from 3 to over 100. The body size of scorpions is not correlated either with brood size or with life cycle length.

Before giving birth, the female elevates the front of her body and positions her pedipalps and front legs under her to catch the young (&quot;birth basket&quot;). The young emerge one by one from the genital opercula, expel the embryonic membrane, if any, and are placed on the mother&#x27;s back where they remain until they have gone through at least one molt. The period before the first molt is called the pro-juvenile stage; the young are unable to feed or sting, but have suckers on their tarsi, used to hold on to their mother. This period lasts 5 to 25 days, depending on the species. The brood molt for the first time simultaneously in a process that lasts 6 to 8 hours, marking the beginning of the juvenile stage.

Juvenile stages or instars generally resemble smaller versions of adults, with fully developed pincers, hairs and stingers. They are still soft and lack pigments, and thus continue to ride on their mother&#x27;s back for protection. They become harder and more pigmented over the next couple of days. They may leave their mother temporarily, returning when they sense potential danger. Once the exoskeleton is fully hardened, the young can hunt prey on their own and may soon leave their mother. A scorpion may molt six times on average before reaching maturity, which may not occur until it is 6 to 83 months old, depending on the species. Some species may live up to 25 years.

===Fluorescence===

Scorpions glow a vibrant blue-green when exposed to certain wavelengths of ultraviolet light, such as that produced by a black light, due to fluorescent chemicals such as beta-carboline in the cuticle. Accordingly, a hand-held ultraviolet lamp has long been a standard tool for nocturnal field surveys of these animals. Fluorescence occurs as a result of sclerotization and increases in intensity with each successive instar. This fluorescence may have an active role in the scorpion&#x27;s ability to detect light.

==Relationship with humans==

===Stings===

Scorpion venom serves to kill or paralyze prey rapidly. The stings of many species are uncomfortable, but only 25 species have venom that is deadly to humans. Those species belong to the family Buthidae, including &quot;Leiurus quinquestriatus&quot;, &quot;Hottentotta&quot; spp., &quot;Centruroides&quot; spp., and &quot;Androctonus&quot; spp. People with allergies are especially at risk; otherwise, first aid is symptomatic, with analgesia. Cases of very high blood pressure are treated with medications that relieve anxiety and relax the blood vessels. Scorpion envenomation with high morbidity and mortality is usually due to either excessive autonomic activity and cardiovascular toxic effects, or neuromuscular toxic effects. Antivenom is the specific treatment for scorpion envenomation combined with supportive measures including vasodilators in patients with cardiovascular toxic effects, and benzodiazepines when there is neuromuscular involvement. Although rare, severe hypersensitivity reactions including anaphylaxis to scorpion antivenin are possible.&lt;ref name=&quot;10.4103/0972-5229.164807&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

Scorpion stings are a public health problem, particularly in the tropical and subtropical regions of the Americas, North Africa, the Middle East and India. Around 1.5 million scorpion envenomations occur each year with around 2,600 deaths. Mexico is one of the most affected countries, with the highest biodiversity of scorpions in the world, some 200,000 envenomations per year and at least 300 deaths.

Efforts are made to prevent envenomation and to control scorpion populations. Prevention encompasses personal activities such as checking shoes and clothes before putting them on, not walking in bare feet or sandals, and filling in holes and cracks where scorpions might nest. Street lighting reduces scorpion activity. Control may involve the use of insecticides such as pyrethroids, or gathering scorpions manually with the help of ultraviolet lights. Domestic predators of scorpions, such as chickens and turkeys, can help to reduce the risk to a household.

===Potential medical use===

Scorpion venom is a mixture of neurotoxins; most of these are peptides, chains of amino acids. Many of them interfere with membrane channels that transport sodium, potassium, calcium, or chloride ions. These channels are essential for nerve conduction, muscle contraction and many other biological processes. Some of these molecules may be useful in medical research and might lead to the development of new disease treatments. Among their potential therapeutic uses are as analgesic, anti-cancer, antibacterial, antifungal, antiviral, antiparasitic, bradykinin-potentiating, and immunosuppressive drugs. As of 2020, no scorpion toxin-based drug is for sale, though chlorotoxin is being trialled for use against glioma, a brain cancer.

===Consumption===

Scorpions are eaten by people in West Africa, Myanmar and East Asia. Fried scorpion is traditionally eaten in Shandong, China. There, scorpions can be cooked and eaten in a variety of ways, including roasting, frying, grilling, raw, or alive. The stingers are typically not removed, since direct and sustained heat negates the harmful effects of the venom. In Thailand, scorpions are not eaten as often as other arthropods, such as grasshoppers, but they are sometimes fried as street food. They are used in Vietnam to make snake wine (scorpion wine).

===Pets===

Scorpions are often kept as pets. They are relatively simple to keep, the main requirements being a secure enclosure such as a glass terrarium with a lockable lid and the appropriate temperature and humidity for the chosen species, which typically means installing a heating mat and spraying regularly with a little water. The substrate needs to resemble that of the species&#x27; natural environment, such as peat for forest species, or lateritic sand for burrowing desert species. Scorpions in the genera &quot;Pandinus&quot; and &quot;Heterometrus&quot; are docile enough to handle. A large &quot;Pandinus&quot; may consume up to three crickets each week. Cannibalism is more common in captivity than in the wild and can be minimized by providing many small shelters within the enclosure and ensuring there is plenty of prey. The pet trade has threatened wild populations of some scorpion species, particularly &quot;Androctonus australis&quot; and &quot;Pandinus imperator&quot;.

===Culture===

The scorpion is a culturally significant animal, appearing as a motif in art, especially in Islamic art in the Middle East.
A scorpion motif is often woven into Turkish kilim flatweave carpets, for protection from their sting. The scorpion is perceived both as an embodiment of evil and as a protective force such as a dervish&#x27;s powers to combat evil. In Muslim folklore, the scorpion portrays human sexuality. Scorpions are used in folk medicine in South Asia, especially in antidotes for scorpion stings.

One of the earliest occurrences of the scorpion in culture is its inclusion, as &quot;Scorpio&quot;, in the 12 signs of the Zodiac by Babylonian astronomers during the Chaldean period. This was then taken up by western astrology; in astronomy the corresponding constellation is named Scorpius.
In ancient Egypt, the goddess Serket, who protected the Pharaoh, was often depicted as a scorpion.
In ancient Greece, a warrior&#x27;s shield sometimes carried a scorpion device, as seen in red-figure pottery from the 5th century BC. In Greek mythology, Artemis or Gaia sent a giant scorpion to kill the hunter Orion, who had said he would kill all the world&#x27;s animals. Orion and the scorpion both became constellations; as enemies they were placed on opposite sides of the world, so when one rises in the sky, the other sets. Scorpions are mentioned in the Bible and the Talmud as symbols of danger and maliciousness.

The fable of &quot;The Scorpion and the Frog&quot; has been interpreted as showing that vicious people cannot resist hurting others, even when it is not in their interests. More recently, the action in John Steinbeck&#x27;s 1947 novella &quot;The Pearl&quot; centers on a poor pearl fisherman&#x27;s attempts to save his infant son from a scorpion sting, only to lose him to human violence. Scorpions have equally appeared in western artforms including film and poetry: the surrealist filmmaker Luis Buñuel made symbolic use of scorpions in his 1930 classic &quot;L&#x27;Age d&#x27;or&quot; (&quot;The Golden Age&quot;), while Stevie Smith&#x27;s last collection of poems was entitled &quot;Scorpion and other Poems&quot;. A variety of martial arts films and video games have been entitled &quot;Scorpion King&quot;.
Since classical times, the scorpion with its powerful stinger has been used to provide a name for weapons. In the Roman army, the scorpio was a torsion siege engine used to shoot a projectile. The British Army&#x27;s FV101 Scorpion was an armored reconnaissance vehicle or light tank in service from 1972 to 1994. A version of the Matilda II tank, fitted with a flail to clear mines, was named the Matilda Scorpion.
Several ships of the Royal Navy and of the US Navy have been named &quot;Scorpion&quot; including an 18-gun sloop in 1803, a turret ship in 1863, a patrol yacht in 1898, a destroyer in 1910, and a nuclear submarine in 1960.

The scorpion has served as the name or symbol of products and brands including Italy&#x27;s Abarth racing cars and a Montesa scrambler motorcycle.
A hand- or forearm-balancing asana in modern yoga as exercise with the back arched and one or both legs pointing forward over the head in the manner of the scorpion&#x27;s tail is called Scorpion pose.

==Notes==

==References==

==Further reading==
* 

== External links ==

* American Museum of Natural History - Scorpion Systematics Research Group
* CDC – Insects and Scorpions – NIOSH Workplace Safety and Health Topic</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q19125" start="0" end="9" title="Scorpion" label="Scorpions"/>
<link wikidata="Q170430" start="14" end="23" title="predatory" label="predatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358" start="24" end="32" title="arachnid" label="arachnid"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="41" end="46" title="Order (biology)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q19125" start="47" end="57" title="Scorpion" label="Scorpiones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069045" start="119" end="135" title="Chela (organ)" label="grasping pincers"/>
<link wikidata="Q657076" start="253" end="260" title="stinger" label="stinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q62412" start="310" end="327" title="Silurian" label="435 million years"/>
<link wikidata="Q8514" start="349" end="355" title="desert" label="desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="461" end="471" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="504" end="511" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="572" end="580" title="Taxonomy (biology)" label="taxonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q222046" start="626" end="633" title="genomic" label="genomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="672" end="678" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q43806" start="690" end="702" title="invertebrate" label="invertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="727" end="737" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400924" start="829" end="843" title="Scorpion sting" label="venomous sting"/>
<link wikidata="Q901728" start="993" end="1005" title="sperm packet" label="sperm packet"/>
<link wikidata="Q120446" start="1030" end="1040" title="viviparous" label="live birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q191944" start="1085" end="1096" title="exoskeleton" label="exoskeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q191807" start="1162" end="1173" title="fluorescent" label="fluorescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="1200" end="1211" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11229" start="1388" end="1395" title="percent" label="percent"/>
<link wikidata="Q24913551" start="1631" end="1645" title="Scorpion motif" label="Scorpion motif"/>
<link wikidata="Q585358" start="1662" end="1667" title="kilim" label="kilim"/>
<link wikidata="Q8865" start="1709" end="1717" title="Scorpius" label="Scorpius"/>
<link wikidata="Q134398" start="1768" end="1796" title="Scorpio (astrology)" label="astrological sign is Scorpio"/>
<link wikidata="Q201261" start="1873" end="1878" title="Orion (mythology)" label="Orion"/>
<link wikidata="Q36395" start="1991" end="2005" title="Middle English" label="Middle English"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="2036" end="2046" title="Old French" label="Old French"/>
<link wikidata="Q976327" start="2150" end="2162" title="romanization" label="romanization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2240" end="2246" title=":wikt:العقرب" label="ʕaqrab"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2296" end="2303" title=":wikt:crab#Etymology_1" label="*krabbô"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="2375" end="2381" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q12758989" start="2407" end="2413" title="strata" label="strata"/>
<link wikidata="Q62412" start="2432" end="2440" title="Silurian" label="Silurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q65955" start="2455" end="2463" title="Devonian" label="Devonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q133738" start="2497" end="2517" title="Carboniferous Period" label="Carboniferous Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q25381" start="2525" end="2530" title="amber" label="amber"/>
<link wikidata="Q998676" start="2624" end="2633" title="book lung" label="book lung"/>
<link wikidata="Q111968597" start="2697" end="2710" title="Eramoscorpius" label="Eramoscorpius"/>
<link wikidata="Q94142022" start="2935" end="2960" title="Dolichophonus" label="Dolichophonus loudonensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q14834038" start="3032" end="3047" title="Gondwanascorpio" label="Gondwanascorpio"/>
<link wikidata="Q80583" start="3127" end="3135" title="Gondwana" label="Gondwana"/>
<link wikidata="Q942537" start="3188" end="3200" title="compound eye" label="compound eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q47158" start="3239" end="3247" title="Triassic" label="Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3262" end="3274" title="Protochactas" label="Protochactas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3291" end="3302" title="Protobuthus" label="Protobuthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q19125" start="3337" end="3347" title="Chactoidea" label="Chactoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q37167988" start="3352" end="3361" title="Buthoidea" label="Buthoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462809" start="3396" end="3407" title="crown group" label="crown group"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="3493" end="3498" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358" start="3520" end="3529" title="Arachnida" label="Arachnida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359" start="3586" end="3597" title="Chelicerata" label="Chelicerata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360" start="3614" end="3624" title="Arthropoda" label="Arthropoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q19106" start="3639" end="3649" title="sea spider" label="sea spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329239" start="3655" end="3669" title="horseshoe crab" label="horseshoe crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q10304508" start="3729" end="3733" title="tick" label="tick"/>
<link wikidata="Q19116" start="3739" end="3749" title="harvestmen" label="harvestmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q19436" start="3763" end="3774" title="Eurypterida" label="Eurypterida"/>
<link wikidata="Q843142" start="3888" end="3898" title="chelicerae" label="chelicerae"/>
<link wikidata="Q224180" start="3904" end="3914" title="Homology (biology)" label="homologous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567633" start="3980" end="3986" title="Sister taxon" label="sister"/>
<link wikidata="Q3821682" start="3994" end="4008" title="Tetrapulmonata" label="Tetrapulmonata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357" start="4059" end="4065" title="spider" label="spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333562" start="4097" end="4106" title="cladogram" label="cladogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q19119" start="4141" end="4155" title="pseudoscorpion" label="pseudoscorpion"/>
<link wikidata="Q242125" start="4304" end="4313" title="phylogeny" label="phylogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q222046" start="4353" end="4360" title="genomic" label="genomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q134892" start="4394" end="4406" title="Bothriuridae" label="Bothriuridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q19125" start="4460" end="4470" title="Chactoidea" label="Chactoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q133738" start="4533" end="4546" title="Carboniferous" label="Carboniferous"/>
<link wikidata="Q45805" start="4719" end="4727" title="Jurassic" label="Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q208755" start="4819" end="4831" title="paraphyletic" label="paraphyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="4902" end="4915" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342956" start="5035" end="5040" title="Valid name (zoology)" label="valid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627701" start="5062" end="5076" title="Scorpio maurus" label="Scorpio maurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q136953" start="5090" end="5111" title="Androctonus australis" label="Androctonus australis"/>
<link wikidata="Q430796" start="5129" end="5151" title="Euscorpius carpathicus" label="Euscorpius carpathicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="5297" end="5306" title="Crustacean" label="Crustacea"/>
<link wikidata="Q25823" start="5322" end="5331" title="Myriapoda" label="Myriapoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q82122" start="5342" end="5363" title="Jean-Baptiste Lamarck" label="Jean-Baptiste Lamarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q16521" start="5420" end="5425" title="taxon" label="taxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441993" start="5465" end="5488" title="Mite" label="acari (mites and ticks)"/>
<link wikidata="Q226951" start="5519" end="5528" title="Thysanura" label="Thysanura"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481228" start="5562" end="5566" title="lice" label="lice"/>
<link wikidata="Q190979" start="5575" end="5588" title="arachnologist" label="arachnologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q32355" start="5589" end="5605" title="Carl Ludwig Koch" label="Carl Ludwig Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361864" start="5973" end="5982" title="Species description" label="described"/>
<link wikidata="Q427626" start="6329" end="6333" title="taxonomic rank" label="rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="6337" end="6343" title="family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942030" start="6420" end="6434" title="Pseudochactida" label="Pseudochactida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942030" start="6452" end="6468" title="Pseudochactoidea" label="Pseudochactoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942030" start="6481" end="6496" title="Pseudochactidae" label="Pseudochactidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="6538" end="6545" title="savanna" label="savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q37167988" start="6569" end="6576" title="Buthida" label="Buthida"/>
<link wikidata="Q37167988" start="6594" end="6603" title="Buthoidea" label="Buthoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q132129" start="6616" end="6624" title="Buthidae" label="Buthidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q132129" start="6711" end="6725" title="Microcharmidae" label="Microcharmidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2947474" start="6797" end="6807" title="Chaerilida" label="Chaerilida"/>
<link wikidata="Q660844" start="6825" end="6837" title="Chaeriloidea" label="Chaeriloidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2947474" start="6850" end="6861" title="Chaerilidae" label="Chaerilidae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6941" end="6947" title="Iurida" label="Iurida"/>
<link wikidata="Q19125" start="6965" end="6975" title="Chactoidea" label="Chactoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q19839528" start="6988" end="6997" title="Akravidae" label="Akravidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q90155475" start="7053" end="7065" title="Belisariidae" label="Belisariidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q135360" start="7130" end="7139" title="Chactidae" label="Chactidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q135121" start="7211" end="7223" title="Euscorpiidae" label="Euscorpiidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q16948489" start="7310" end="7327" title="Superstitioniidae" label="Superstitioniidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3539855" start="7405" end="7422" title="Troglotayosicidae" label="Troglotayosicidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546150" start="7485" end="7500" title="Typhlochactidae" label="Typhlochactidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q136927" start="7565" end="7575" title="Vaejovidae" label="Vaejovidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q19125" start="7625" end="7633" title="Iuroidea" label="Iuroidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q137388" start="7646" end="7660" title="Caraboctonidae" label="Caraboctonidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q96257566" start="7700" end="7710" title="Hadruridae" label="Hadruridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q140687" start="7764" end="7771" title="Iuridae" label="Iuridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q19125" start="7860" end="7873" title="Scorpionoidea" label="Scorpionoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q134892" start="7886" end="7898" title="Bothriuridae" label="Bothriuridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q134711" start="7976" end="7990" title="Hemiscorpiidae" label="Hemiscorpiidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q15778529" start="8067" end="8077" title="Hormuridae" label="Hormuridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q20675144" start="8169" end="8181" title="Rugodentidae" label="Rugodentidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q133410" start="8232" end="8244" title="Scorpionidae" label="Scorpionidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q9207682" start="8304" end="8318" title="Diplocentridae" label="Diplocentridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4554649" start="8425" end="8443" title="Heteroscorpionidae" label="Heteroscorpionidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="8558" end="8568" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="8754" end="8767" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065449" start="8790" end="8800" title="Introduced species" label="introduced"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="8851" end="8862" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="8891" end="8898" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q311825" start="9015" end="9037" title="Euscorpius flavicaudis" label="Euscorpius flavicaudis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003196" start="9103" end="9112" title="Sheerness" label="Sheerness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3367042" start="9145" end="9164" title="Paruroctonus boreus" label="Paruroctonus boreus"/>
<link wikidata="Q23025" start="9193" end="9210" title="Red Deer, Alberta" label="Red Deer, Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q32059" start="9246" end="9259" title="IUCN Red List" label="IUCN Red List"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268351" start="9267" end="9285" title="Afrolychas braueri" label="Afrolychas braueri"/>
<link wikidata="Q219127" start="9306" end="9327" title="critically endangered" label="critically endangered"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9342" end="9362" title="Isometrus deharvengi" label="Isometrus deharvengi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11394" start="9372" end="9382" title="endangered" label="endangered"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9400" end="9420" title="Chiromachus ochropus" label="Chiromachus ochropus"/>
<link wikidata="Q278113" start="9430" end="9440" title="Vulnerable species" label="vulnerable"/>
<link wikidata="Q8043801" start="9464" end="9472" title="xerocole" label="xerocole"/>
<link wikidata="Q8514" start="9506" end="9512" title="desert" label="desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="9568" end="9575" title="habitat" label="habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q421069" start="9623" end="9638" title="intertidal zone" label="intertidal zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q893476" start="9670" end="9686" title="boreal ecosystem" label="boreal ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q43262" start="9700" end="9706" title="tundra" label="tundra"/>
<link wikidata="Q69564" start="9722" end="9727" title="taiga" label="taiga"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9818" end="9843" title="Orobothriurus crassimanus" label="Orobothriurus crassimanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="9863" end="9875" title="microhabitat" label="microhabitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q767024" start="9912" end="9923" title="arboreal" label="tree-loving"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115619" start="9940" end="9951" title="psammophile" label="sand-loving"/>
<link wikidata="Q3553202" start="9981" end="9996" title="Vaejovis janssi" label="Vaejovis janssi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361324" start="10051" end="10065" title="Socorro Island" label="Socorro Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q58731" start="10067" end="10082" title="Baja California" label="Baja California"/>
<link wikidata="Q430796" start="10111" end="10133" title="Euscorpius carpathicus" label="Euscorpius carpathicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="10141" end="10148" title="endemic" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q506894" start="10156" end="10169" title="littoral zone" label="littoral zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013163" start="10275" end="10298" title="Typhlochactas mitchelli" label="Typhlochactas mitchelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939901" start="10338" end="10362" title="Heterometrus swammerdami" label="Heterometrus swammerdami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402830" start="10438" end="10445" title="Tagma (biology)" label="tagmata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137335" start="10451" end="10464" title="cephalothorax" label="cephalothorax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137335" start="10468" end="10475" title="prosoma" label="prosoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307449" start="10496" end="10507" title="opisthosoma" label="opisthosoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461105" start="10574" end="10582" title="mesosoma" label="mesosoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q602075" start="10637" end="10645" title="metasoma" label="metasoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q666115" start="10852" end="10860" title="carapace" label="carapace"/>
<link wikidata="Q932179" start="10894" end="10902" title="pedipalp" label="pedipalp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069045" start="10916" end="10922" title="chelae" label="chelae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133438" start="10976" end="10987" title="walking leg" label="walking leg"/>
<link wikidata="Q173710" start="11566" end="11575" title="esophagus" label="esophagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q108158" start="11713" end="11720" title="ganglia" label="ganglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243545" start="11736" end="11745" title="Primitive (phylogenetics)" label="primitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415392" start="11790" end="11799" title="appendage" label="appendage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211967" start="12230" end="12240" title="phenotypic trait" label="characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129066" start="12456" end="12469" title="proprioceptor" label="proprioceptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q894231" start="12472" end="12479" title="bristle" label="bristle"/>
<link wikidata="Q126780" start="12493" end="12498" title="setae" label="setae"/>
<link wikidata="Q488415" start="12844" end="12852" title="anterior" label="anterior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427600" start="12859" end="12865" title="somite" label="somite"/>
<link wikidata="Q488415" start="12914" end="12922" title="Anatomical terms of location" label="dorsally"/>
<link wikidata="Q652546" start="12957" end="12964" title="tergite" label="tergite"/>
<link wikidata="Q488415" start="12966" end="12973" title="Ventral" label="Ventral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777684" start="13032" end="13041" title="sternites" label="sternites"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097854" start="13094" end="13102" title="Operculum (animal)" label="opercula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184080" start="13116" end="13124" title="gonopore" label="gonopore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7158817" start="13171" end="13179" title="pectines" label="pectines"/>
<link wikidata="Q31060267" start="13265" end="13274" title="Spiracle (arthropods)" label="spiracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q998676" start="13352" end="13362" title="book lungs" label="book lungs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247568" start="13534" end="13542" title="lamella (surface anatomy)" label="lamellae"/>
<link wikidata="Q11068" start="14084" end="14107" title="open circulatory system" label="open circulatory system"/>
<link wikidata="Q485675" start="14231" end="14240" title="hemolymph" label="hemolymph"/>
<link wikidata="Q213456" start="14364" end="14369" title="gonad" label="gonad"/>
<link wikidata="Q15177" start="14479" end="14490" title="anastomoses" label="anastomoses"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246226" start="14527" end="14533" title="oocyte" label="oocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q36857" start="14591" end="14598" title="oviduct" label="oviduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q74560" start="14784" end="14795" title="spermatozoa" label="spermatozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063420" start="14817" end="14827" title="spermiduct" label="spermiduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q161219" start="14984" end="14990" title="chitin" label="chitin"/>
<link wikidata="Q901728" start="15040" end="15053" title="spermatophore" label="spermatophore"/>
<link wikidata="Q952557" start="15139" end="15145" title="telson" label="telson"/>
<link wikidata="Q189206" start="15576" end="15583" title="vesicle (biology and chemistry)" label="vesicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q130258307" start="15622" end="15633" title="venom gland" label="venom gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q423350" start="16163" end="16177" title="metalloprotein" label="metalloprotein"/>
<link wikidata="Q309179" start="16318" end="16327" title="nocturnal" label="nocturnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3255068" start="16331" end="16342" title="crepuscular" label="crepuscular"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125635" start="16655" end="16663" title="Hadrurus" label="Hadrurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q773744" start="17165" end="17188" title="Leiurus quinquestriatus" label="Leiurus quinquestriatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566546" start="17233" end="17253" title="Hadrurus arizonensis" label="Hadrurus arizonensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17432" end="17453" title="Pectinibuthus birulai" label="Pectinibuthus birulai"/>
<link wikidata="Q421773" start="17628" end="17637" title="trehalose" label="trehalose"/>
<link wikidata="Q159408" start="17679" end="17688" title="hibernate" label="hibernate"/>
<link wikidata="Q186161" start="17729" end="17747" title="ionizing radiation" label="ionizing radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q582905" start="17870" end="17877" title="Reggane" label="Reggane"/>
<link wikidata="Q50980" start="17996" end="18004" title="xanthine" label="xanthine"/>
<link wikidata="Q169313" start="18006" end="18013" title="guanine" label="guanine"/>
<link wikidata="Q105522" start="18019" end="18028" title="uric acid" label="uric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11367" start="18208" end="18213" title="lipid" label="lipid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="18269" end="18290" title="ultraviolet radiation" label="ultraviolet radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q193135" start="18343" end="18359" title="osmotic pressure" label="osmotic pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q19126" start="19048" end="19058" title="solifugids" label="solifugids"/>
<link wikidata="Q43447" start="19063" end="19072" title="centipede" label="centipede"/>
<link wikidata="Q170430" start="19081" end="19089" title="predator" label="predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q134015" start="19143" end="19150" title="Meerkat" label="Meerkat"/>
<link wikidata="Q369761" start="19319" end="19336" title="grasshopper mouse" label="grasshopper mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623443" start="19341" end="19362" title="desert long-eared bat" label="desert long-eared bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441993" start="19516" end="19520" title="mite" label="mite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4043921" start="19523" end="19536" title="scuttle flies" label="scuttle flies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185" start="19538" end="19546" title="nematode" label="nematode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059" start="19571" end="19584" title="immune system" label="immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q610560" start="19752" end="19762" title="stridulate" label="stridulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q146377" start="19993" end="20003" title="Parabuthus" label="Parabuthus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20017" end="20042" title="Centruroides margaritatus" label="Centruroides margaritatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q671530" start="20207" end="20216" title="Ananteris" label="Ananteris"/>
<link wikidata="Q465891" start="20235" end="20259" title="autotomy" label="shed parts of their tail"/>
<link wikidata="Q18398431" start="20514" end="20525" title="grasshopper" label="grasshopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776776" start="20528" end="20535" title="Cricket (insect)" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q546583" start="20538" end="20545" title="termite" label="termite"/>
<link wikidata="Q22671" start="20548" end="20554" title="beetle" label="beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458574" start="20560" end="20564" title="wasp" label="wasp"/>
<link wikidata="Q19126" start="20595" end="20604" title="solifugid" label="solifugid"/>
<link wikidata="Q216191" start="20607" end="20615" title="woodlice" label="woodlice"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="20631" end="20641" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155542" start="20861" end="20880" title="Isometroides vescus" label="Isometroides vescus"/>
<link wikidata="Q445478" start="20996" end="21017" title="sit-and-wait predator" label="sit-and-wait predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348853" start="21162" end="21178" title="mechanoreceptive" label="mechanoreceptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069641" start="21183" end="21197" title="chemoreceptive" label="chemoreceptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q191944" start="21774" end="21785" title="exoskeleton" label="exoskeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q126780" start="21811" end="21815" title="seta" label="seta"/>
<link wikidata="Q174778" start="21905" end="21912" title="pharynx" label="pharynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q623293" start="22120" end="22134" title="metabolic rate" label="metabolic rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141170" start="22360" end="22371" title="Hottentotta" label="Hottentotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933958" start="22388" end="22394" title="Tityus (genus)" label="Tityus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946372" start="22424" end="22445" title="Centruroides gracilis" label="Centruroides gracilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241745" start="22459" end="22481" title="Liocheles australasiae" label="Liocheles australasiae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22499" end="22517" title="Ananteris coineaui" label="Ananteris coineaui"/>
<link wikidata="Q183236" start="22591" end="22606" title="parthenogenesis" label="parthenogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q33196" start="22655" end="22661" title="embryo" label="embryo"/>
<link wikidata="Q167377" start="22690" end="22699" title="pheromone" label="pheromone"/>
<link wikidata="Q11639" start="23042" end="23047" title="dance" label="dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q786329" start="24016" end="24027" title="mating plug" label="mating plug"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030332" start="24157" end="24175" title="Sexual cannibalism" label="Sexual cannibalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q28627" start="24268" end="24277" title="Gestation" label="Gestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q28962" start="24356" end="24377" title="embryonic development" label="embryonic development"/>
<link wikidata="Q953556" start="24516" end="24525" title="Ovarian follicle" label="follicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141055" start="24658" end="24670" title="diverticulum" label="diverticulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q212306" start="24773" end="24782" title="oviparous" label="oviparous"/>
<link wikidata="Q120446" start="24837" end="24847" title="viviparous" label="viviparous"/>
<link wikidata="Q13389887" start="25480" end="25484" title="ecdysis" label="molt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923890" start="25601" end="25608" title="Sucker (zoology)" label="suckers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179631" start="25868" end="25874" title="instar" label="instar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="26624" end="26635" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q961734" start="26670" end="26681" title="black light" label="black light"/>
<link wikidata="Q191807" start="26690" end="26701" title="fluorescent" label="fluorescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q414226" start="26720" end="26734" title="beta-carboline" label="beta-carboline"/>
<link wikidata="Q3475960" start="26904" end="26918" title="sclerotization" label="sclerotization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400924" start="27170" end="27175" title="Scorpion sting" label="sting"/>
<link wikidata="Q773744" start="27330" end="27353" title="Leiurus quinquestriatus" label="Leiurus quinquestriatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702846" start="27397" end="27409" title="Centruroides" label="Centruroides"/>
<link wikidata="Q593236" start="27432" end="27443" title="Androctonus" label="Androctonus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42982" start="27467" end="27476" title="allergies" label="allergies"/>
<link wikidata="Q133981" start="27512" end="27521" title="first aid" label="first aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q621558" start="27525" end="27536" title="Symptomatic treatment" label="symptomatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q173235" start="27543" end="27552" title="Analgesic" label="analgesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q116275739" start="27554" end="27587" title="Hypertensive emergency" label="Cases of very high blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q62903" start="27622" end="27637" title="anxiolytic" label="relieve anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q14859627" start="27642" end="27665" title="Vasodilation" label="relax the blood vessels"/>
<link wikidata="Q171064" start="27758" end="27776" title="Autonomic nervous system" label="autonomic activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q424427" start="27843" end="27852" title="Antivenom" label="Antivenom"/>
<link wikidata="Q83871" start="28013" end="28027" title="benzodiazepine" label="benzodiazepine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5958765" start="28092" end="28117" title="hypersensitivity reaction" label="hypersensitivity reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q168800" start="28129" end="28140" title="anaphylaxis" label="anaphylaxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="28546" end="28558" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q181322" start="28999" end="29010" title="insecticide" label="insecticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q745766" start="29020" end="29031" title="pyrethroids" label="pyrethroids"/>
<link wikidata="Q172847" start="29301" end="29308" title="peptide" label="peptide"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="29321" end="29331" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q408619" start="29362" end="29378" title="membrane channel" label="membrane channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q424960" start="29385" end="29401" title="Sodium channel" label="transport sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q423778" start="29403" end="29412" title="Potassium channel" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q15322916" start="29414" end="29421" title="calcium channel" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q106916978" start="29426" end="29434" title="Chloride channel" label="chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q194277" start="29474" end="29490" title="nerve conduction" label="nerve conduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q127006" start="29492" end="29510" title="muscle contraction" label="muscle contraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="29724" end="29735" title="anti-cancer" label="anti-cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="29737" end="29750" title="antibacterial" label="antibacterial"/>
<link wikidata="Q578726" start="29752" end="29762" title="antifungal" label="antifungal"/>
<link wikidata="Q846227" start="29764" end="29773" title="antiviral" label="antiviral"/>
<link wikidata="Q581102" start="29775" end="29788" title="antiparasitic" label="antiparasitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q24745328" start="29790" end="29800" title="bradykinin" label="bradykinin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455316" start="29819" end="29836" title="immunosuppressive" label="immunosuppressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3680957" start="29905" end="29916" title="chlorotoxin" label="chlorotoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365309" start="29951" end="29957" title="glioma" label="glioma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038209" start="30105" end="30113" title="Shandong cuisine" label="Shandong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255155" start="30519" end="30529" title="snake wine" label="snake wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131243" start="30693" end="30702" title="terrarium" label="terrarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q184624" start="30970" end="30974" title="peat" label="peat"/>
<link wikidata="Q622845" start="30998" end="31007" title="lateritic" label="lateritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q292181" start="31073" end="31081" title="Pandinus" label="Pandinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776776" start="31199" end="31207" title="crickets" label="crickets"/>
<link wikidata="Q44595" start="31219" end="31230" title="Cannibalism" label="Cannibalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q136953" start="31480" end="31501" title="Androctonus australis" label="Androctonus australis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142349" start="31518" end="31536" title="Pandinus imperator" label="Pandinus imperator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229071" start="31624" end="31629" title="Motif (visual arts)" label="motif"/>
<link wikidata="Q189594" start="31652" end="31663" title="Islamic art" label="Islamic art"/>
<link wikidata="Q24913551" start="31686" end="31700" title="scorpion motif" label="scorpion motif"/>
<link wikidata="Q585358" start="31729" end="31734" title="kilim" label="kilim"/>
<link wikidata="Q487865" start="31879" end="31886" title="dervish" label="dervish"/>
<link wikidata="Q154136" start="31959" end="31974" title="human sexuality" label="human sexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q771035" start="31998" end="32011" title="folk medicine" label="folk medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q194168" start="32041" end="32049" title="antidote" label="antidote"/>
<link wikidata="Q134398" start="32159" end="32166" title="Scorpio (astrology)" label="Scorpio"/>
<link wikidata="Q40540" start="32184" end="32203" title="signs of the Zodiac" label="signs of the Zodiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q787929" start="32207" end="32229" title="Babylonian astronomers" label="Babylonian astronomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q624887" start="32241" end="32256" title="Neo-Babylonian" label="Chaldean period"/>
<link wikidata="Q34362" start="32292" end="32301" title="astrology" label="astrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8865" start="32357" end="32365" title="Scorpius" label="Scorpius"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="32370" end="32383" title="ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q207636" start="32397" end="32403" title="Serket" label="Serket"/>
<link wikidata="Q37110" start="32423" end="32430" title="Pharaoh" label="Pharaoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="32469" end="32483" title="ancient Greece" label="ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q633683" start="32557" end="32575" title="red-figure pottery" label="red-figure pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="32604" end="32619" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q39503" start="32621" end="32628" title="Artemis" label="Artemis"/>
<link wikidata="Q93172" start="32632" end="32636" title="Gaia" label="Gaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q201261" start="32678" end="32683" title="Orion (mythology)" label="Orion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="32930" end="32935" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="32944" end="32950" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2516435" start="32996" end="33001" title="Animal tale" label="fable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202969" start="33011" end="33036" title="The Scorpion and the Frog" label="The Scorpion and the Frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q39212" start="33194" end="33208" title="John Steinbeck" label="John Steinbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215393" start="33235" end="33244" title="The Pearl (novel)" label="The Pearl"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="33466" end="33476" title="surrealist" label="surrealist"/>
<link wikidata="Q932586" start="33477" end="33486" title="filmmaker" label="filmmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q51545" start="33487" end="33498" title="Luis Buñuel" label="Luis Buñuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q946849" start="33556" end="33576" title="L&amp;#x27;Age d&amp;#x27;or" label="L&amp;#x27;Age d&amp;#x27;or"/>
<link wikidata="Q468344" start="33619" end="33631" title="Stevie Smith" label="Stevie Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q11417" start="33728" end="33740" title="martial arts" label="martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="33815" end="33830" title="classical times" label="classical times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114493" start="33923" end="33933" title="Roman army" label="Roman army"/>
<link wikidata="Q19782" start="33939" end="33946" title="Scorpio (weapon)" label="scorpio"/>
<link wikidata="Q610358" start="34026" end="34040" title="FV101 Scorpion" label="FV101 Scorpion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12876" start="34088" end="34092" title="tank" label="tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q502412" start="34140" end="34150" title="Matilda II" label="Matilda II"/>
<link wikidata="Q119440032" start="34171" end="34176" title="mine flail" label="flail"/>
<link wikidata="Q178795" start="34186" end="34191" title="Land mine" label="mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125103" start="34239" end="34256" title="HMS Scorpion" label="of the Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471100" start="34261" end="34275" title="USS Scorpion" label="of the US Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5634247" start="34323" end="34338" title="HMS Scorpion (1803)" label="an 18-gun sloop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5634246" start="34348" end="34361" title="HMS Scorpion (1863)" label="a turret ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873924" start="34371" end="34385" title="USS Scorpion (PY-3)" label="a patrol yacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q4351315" start="34395" end="34406" title="HMS Scorpion (1910)" label="a destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757204" start="34420" end="34439" title="USS Scorpion (SSN-589)" label="a nuclear submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q26823" start="34542" end="34548" title="Abarth" label="Abarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946170" start="34567" end="34574" title="Montesa Honda" label="Montesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q34493" start="34585" end="34595" title="motorcycle" label="motorcycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q466797" start="34626" end="34631" title="asana" label="asana"/>
<link wikidata="Q65091595" start="34642" end="34658" title="yoga as exercise" label="yoga as exercise"/>
<link wikidata="Q25345230" start="34784" end="34797" title="Scorpion pose" label="Scorpion pose"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28923" wikidata="Q1934902" url="?curid=28923" title="Shriners">
<text>Shriners International, formally known as the Ancient Arabic Order of the Nobles of the Mystic Shrine (AAONMS), is an American Masonic society. Founded in 1872 in New York City, it is headquartered in Tampa, Florida, and has over 200 chapters across nine countries, with a global membership of nearly 1.7 million &quot;Shriners&quot;. The organization is known for its colorful Middle Eastern theme, elaborate participation in parades and festivals, and the Shriners Children&#x27;s network of nonprofit pediatric medical facilities.

Shriners International describes itself as a global fraternity &quot;based on fun, fellowship, and the Masonic principles of brotherly love, relief, and truth&quot;. As an appendant body within Freemasonry, membership is open to men who have been initiated as Master Masons in a Masonic rite; various partner organizations accept women and youth. Shriners are obliged to uphold the fraternity&#x27;s mission and values, which include self-improvement, service and leadership to the community, and active involvement in social and philanthropic causes.

Shriners International is recognizable for its Middle Eastern-inspired iconography, ceremonies, and motif: Shriners wear distinctive red fezzes as their official headgear, while fraternal regalia often features camels, pyramids, the Sphinx and other ancient Egyptian and Arabian symbols. The headquarters of local chapters, formally known as Shrine Centers, are sometimes called &quot;Temples&quot; or even &quot;Mosques&quot;; most have names such as Egypt, Sahara, Morocco, and Oasis, and many are built in the Moorish Revival style. The organization is governed by the &quot;Imperial Divan&quot;—referring to the traditional government councils of the Near East—composed of 12 &quot;Imperial Officers&quot; who serve as a board of directors. However, Shriners International has no connection with the region nor with Islam. 

Previously known as Shriners North America, the fraternity adopted its current name in 2010 in recognition of its increasingly global membership; as of 2024, there are Shrine Centers in Canada (since 1888), Mexico (1907) and Panama (1918), Puerto Rico, the Philippines (2010), Germany (2011), Brazil (2015) and Bolivia (2018).

Notable American Shriners include FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover, actors Mel Blanc, John Wayne, Ernest Borgnine, and Roy Rogers, Supreme Court chief justice Earl Warren, General Douglas MacArthur, and presidents Gerald Ford and Harry Truman.

==History==
In 1870, there were several thousand Freemasons in Manhattan, many of whom lunched at the Knickerbocker Cottage at a special table on the second floor. There, the idea of a new fraternity for Masons, stressing fun and fellowship, was discussed. Together, Walter M. Fleming and William J. Florence established a separate fellowship to fulfill those ideals.

While on tour in Marseille, Florence, an actor, was invited to a party given by an Arab diplomat. The entertainment was a musical comedy. At its conclusion, the guests became members of a secret society. Florence took notes and drawings at his initial viewing and on two other occasions, once in Algiers and once in Cairo. When he returned to New York in 1870, he showed his material to Fleming.

Fleming created the ritual, emblem and costumes. Florence and Fleming were initiated August 13, 1870, and they initiated 11 men on June 16, 1871.

The group adopted a Middle Eastern theme and soon established Temple, although the term Temple has now been replaced by Shrine Auditorium or Shrine Center. The first Temple established was Mecca Temple, established at the New York City Masonic Hall on September 26, 1872. Fleming was the first potentate.

In 1875, there were 43 Shriners in the organization. To encourage membership, the Imperial Grand Council of the Ancient Order of the Nobles of the Mystic Shrine for North America was created at the June 6, 1876 meeting of Mecca Temple. Fleming was elected the first imperial potentate. By 1878, there were 425 members in 13 temples in eight states, and by 1888, there were 7,210 members in 48 temples in the United States and Canada. By the Imperial Session held in Washington, D.C., in 1900, there were 55,000 members and 82 Temples. 

=== Black Shrine ===
Historically, the Shrine was open to only white men. In 1893, a black counterpart to the Shriners movement was initiated by John G. Jones and other Prince Hall masons, initially called The Ancient Egyptian Arabic Order Nobles Mystic Shrine of North and South America and Its Jurisdictions. Early in the group&#x27;s history, there was legal conflict between the white and black orders, with a white order from Texas filing suit against a local black order for infringement of white Shriners regalia and traditions. The white order was initially successful in quashing the black temple until the ruling was overturned in appeals in 1929, protecting the right of black Shriners to continue practicing and fundraising nationwide. The Worldwide Fraternal Shrine Family counts 35,000 members in 227 shrines, with its own women&#x27;s auxiliary organizations. Their primary recipients of charitable donations are the NAACP, the National Urban League, the UNCF, and various hospitals and universities.

=== Syria mosque ===
In 1911, the Syria Mosque was completed in Pittsburgh and inaugurated in 1916. This 3,700-seat performance venue, originally for Shriners, later became significant as the &quot;birthplace of network television.&quot; An example of Exotic Revival architecture, it was never used as a mosque but featured religious Arabic iconography and inscriptions, partly based on the Alhambra. Architect Gulzar Haider was &quot;fascinated&quot; by its design, but criticized the &quot;insensitive and callous misuse of another religion’s artistic vocabulary and symbolic grammar,&quot; claiming it was part of the &quot;&#x27;oriental obsession&#x27; of the otherwise &#x27;puritanical&#x27; Europeans and Americans.&quot; 

Musicians who have performed at the Syria Mosque include Bruce Springsteen, Louis Armstrong, Bob Dylan, Pink Floyd, Jimmy Buffett, and The Beach Boys. Political event hosts included Reagan, Nixon, Truman, and Kennedy. Despite efforts to conserve the building as a historic landmark, the Syria Mosque was torn down in 1991.

===Women&#x27;s auxiliaries===
The Ladies Oriental Shrine of North America was founded in 1903 in Wheeling, West Virginia, and the Daughters of the Nile was founded in 1913 in Seattle, Washington. Both are for women only and they support the Shriners Hospitals and promote sociability. Membership in either organization is open to any woman 18 years of age and older who is related to a Shriner or Master Mason by birth or marriage. The latter organization has local branches called &quot;Temples,&quot; and there were ten of these in 1922. Among the famous members of the Daughters of the Nile was First Lady Florence Harding, wife of Warren G. Harding.

=== Growth ===
By 1938 there were about 340,000 members in the United States. That year, &quot;Life&quot; published photographs of the Shriners&#x27; rites. It described the Shriners as being the first in prestige, wealth and show among secret societies, and that Shriners organizations typically include a town&#x27;s most prominent citizens.

=== Organizational rebranding ===
In 2002, following the September 11 attacks, the &quot;faux-Middle Eastern practices and trappings&quot; led Shriners to be &quot;mistaken for a Muslim organization, leading to harassment and vandalism.&quot; This included threatening phone calls and harassment of Rhode Island Shriners (formerly known as Palestine Temple Shriners) driving a Shriners van to transport sick children to Shriner hospitals.By 2011, Shriners removed much of the Middle Eastern theming, both locally and within the broader organization. This was in continued response to &quot;the events of Sept. 11, 2001 and subsequent military conflicts.&quot; Changes included renaming the organization from &quot;Ancient Arabic Order of the Nobles of the Mystic Shrine&quot; to &quot;Shriners International;&quot; renaming the &quot;Arabic Patrol&quot; to &quot;The Patrol&quot; and removing the word Syria from Syria Shriners vanity plates. Despite these changes, the Illustrious Potentate of Pittsburgh&#x27;s Syria Shrine chapter stated that &quot;pretty much all non-atheists are welcome, including Muslims.&quot;

==Membership==
Historically, a Mason had to complete either the Scottish Rite or York Rite systems to be eligible for membership in the Shrine.

In 1991, brick-mason Michael G. Vaughan filed a lawsuit against the Oleika Shrine Temple in Lexington, Kentucky, for hazing practices to which he said he was subjected in his efforts to become a Shriner. In court, Vaughan told jurors that in June 1989, he was blindfolded and received a jolt of electricity that was applied to his bare buttocks as part of the Shriners&#x27; initiation rites. He said he was forced to walk on an electric mat that was meant to simulate the hot sands of the Sahara, and that he was knocked unconscious and received other injuries during his initiation. Vaughan said the initiation left him humiliated and embarrassed, and caused him to suffer anxiety, nightmares, and a sleep disorder. After two hours of deliberation, the jury rejected the claim.
==Architecture==
Some of the earliest Shrine Centers often chose a Moorish Revival style for their Temples. Architecturally notable Shriners Temples include: the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles; the former Mecca Temple, now called New York City Center and used primarily as a concert hall; Medinah Temple in Chicago; Newark Symphony Hall; the Landmark Theater (formerly The Mosque) in Richmond, Virginia; the Tripoli Shrine Temple in Milwaukee, Wisconsin; the Polly Rosenbaum Building (formerly the El Zaribah Shrine Auditorium) in Phoenix; the Helena Civic Center (Montana) (formerly the Algeria Shrine Temple); Abou Ben Adhem Shrine Mosque in Springfield, Missouri; Murat Shrine Temple (now Old National Center) in Indianapolis; the Fox Theatre in Atlanta, Georgia, which was jointly built between the Atlanta Shriners and movie mogul William Fox; and the Syria Mosque in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

==Philanthropy==

===Shriners Hospitals for Children===

The Shrine&#x27;s charitable arm is the Shriners Hospitals for Children, a network of 22 healthcare facilities in the United States, Mexico, and Canada.

In June 1920, the Imperial Council Session voted to establish a Shriners Hospital for Crippled Children to treat orthopedic injuries and conditions, diseases, burns, spinal cord injuries, and birth defects, such as cleft lip and palate, in children. The first hospital opened in 1922 in Shreveport, Louisiana. By the end of the decade 13 more hospitals were operational.

Any child under the age of 18 can be admitted to the hospital if a doctor determines the child can be treated. There is no requirement for religion, race or relationship to a Shriner.

Until June 2012, all care at Shriners Hospitals was provided without charge to patients and their families. At that time, because the size of their endowment had decreased due to losses in the stock market, Shriners Hospitals started billing patients&#x27; insurance companies, but continued to offer free care to children without insurance. Shriners hospitals waive all costs insurance does not cover. Shriners Hospitals for Children is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization.

Shriners Hospitals for Children are located in these cities:
* Boston, Massachusetts
* Chicago, Illinois
* Dayton, Ohio
* Erie, Pennsylvania*
* Galveston, Texas
* Greenville, South Carolina
* Honolulu, Hawaii
* Houston, Texas
* Lexington, Kentucky*
* Mexico City, DF, Mexico
* Minneapolis, Minnesota
* Montreal, Quebec, Canada
* Pasadena, California*
* Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
* Portland, Oregon
* Sacramento, California
* Salt Lake City, Utah
* Shreveport, Louisiana
* Spokane, Washington
* Springfield, Massachusetts
* St. Louis, Missouri

*This location is an outpatient, ambulatory care center.

==Events==

Shriners host the annual East–West Shrine Game, a college football all-star game.

The Shriners originally hosted a golf tournament in association with singer/actor Justin Timberlake, called the Justin Timberlake Shriners Hospitals for Children Open, a PGA Tour golf tournament played in Las Vegas, Nevada. The relationship between Timberlake and the Shriners ended in 2012, when the Shriners reported that Timberlake was interested in being involved with the organization only when television cameras were present. In July 2012, the PGA Tour and Shriners Hospitals for Children announced a five-year title sponsorship extension, carrying the commitment to the Shriners Hospitals for Children Open through 2017. The name was changed to The Shriners Hospitals for Children Open and is played in Las Vegas, Nevada.

Many Shrine Centers also hold a yearly Shrine Circus as a fundraiser.

Once a year, the fraternity meets for the Imperial Session in a North American city.

=== Shriners International Imperial Sessions ===

==Controversies==
In 2008, an investigative committee established by the joint boards of the Shriners of North America fraternity and the Shriners Hospitals for Children found that Ralph Semb, chairman of the Shriners Hospitals Board of Trustees, had unilaterally tried to fire fund-raising executive Edgar McGonigal. McGonigal had declined to hire a direct-mail company indirectly linked to Gene Bracewell, the imperial treasurer of the fraternal organization. McGonigal said he did not hire the company because of its ties to a financial company that had performed poorly in previous dealings. The committee found that Semb and Bracewell had violated the organizations&#x27; conflict of interest policy and their ethics code and recommended that Semb and Bracewell be reprimanded. The report included accusations of financial improprieties within the organization, including not reporting benefits Shriners leaders received as income and knowingly filing incorrect tax forms for the hospitals. Other Shriners came forward with additional complaints, including the mixing of charitable and noncharitable assets and the disappearance of money raised for the hospitals.

Shriners International has drawn criticism from animal welfare organizations for allowing member clubs to host circuses featuring animals. Since approximately 2013, People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) has staged protests during circus performances, expressing concern over the poor treatment animals receive in the care of the companies that the Shriners lease from, such as Carson &amp; Barnes. The Pittsburgh Shrine Circus stopped using animals in 2019, and the Moolah Shrine Circus in Missouri stopped using elephants in 2023.

== See also ==

* Iowa Corn Song
* Masonic bodies
* Military Order of the Cootie
* Order of Quetzalcoatl
* Royal Order of Jesters
* &quot;Shriner&#x27;s Convention&quot;, a country-and-western novelty song

==References==
== External links ==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1934902" start="0" end="22" title="Shriners" label="Shriners International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934902" start="46" end="101" title="Shriners" label="Ancient Arabic Order of the Nobles of the Mystic Shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934902" start="103" end="109" title="Shriners" label="AAONMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297317" start="127" end="142" title="Masonic body" label="Masonic society"/>
<link wikidata="Q49255" start="201" end="215" title="Tampa, Florida" label="Tampa, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q984212" start="378" end="398" title="Middle East and North Africa" label="Middle Eastern theme"/>
<link wikidata="Q7504109" start="458" end="482" title="Shriners Hospitals for Children" label="Shriners Children&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q996839" start="587" end="597" title="fraternity" label="fraternity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="707" end="740" title="Masonic bodies#Appendant bodies" label="appendant body within Freemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="795" end="808" title="Master Mason" label="Master Masons"/>
<link wikidata="Q131154844" start="814" end="826" title="Masonic rites" label="Masonic rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q189862" start="1225" end="1231" title="Fez (hat)" label="fezzes"/>
<link wikidata="Q74156" start="1601" end="1616" title="Moorish Revival architecture" label="Moorish Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q830104" start="1666" end="1680" title="Divan" label="Imperial Divan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188628" start="1813" end="1831" title="board of directors" label="board of directors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934902" start="1937" end="1959" title="Shriners" label="Shriners North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q210435" start="2292" end="2307" title="J. Edgar Hoover" label="J. Edgar Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q349690" start="2316" end="2325" title="Mel Blanc" label="Mel Blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q40531" start="2327" end="2337" title="John Wayne" label="John Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q102551" start="2339" end="2354" title="Ernest Borgnine" label="Ernest Borgnine"/>
<link wikidata="Q367129" start="2360" end="2370" title="Roy Rogers" label="Roy Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q311197" start="2400" end="2411" title="Earl Warren" label="Earl Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q127417" start="2421" end="2438" title="Douglas MacArthur" label="Douglas MacArthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="2455" end="2466" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="2471" end="2483" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="2535" end="2545" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="2549" end="2558" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565821" start="2753" end="2770" title="Walter M. Fleming" label="Walter M. Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568728" start="2775" end="2794" title="William J. Florence" label="William J. Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="2872" end="2881" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="2938" end="2942" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561" start="3151" end="3158" title="Algiers" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="3171" end="3176" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="3198" end="3206" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="3419" end="3432" title="Middle East" label="Middle Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q731437" start="3519" end="3536" title="Shrine Auditorium" label="Shrine Auditorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q16237969" start="3621" end="3647" title="Masonic Hall (Manhattan)" label="New York City Masonic Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q16238196" start="4411" end="4429" title="Prince Hall Freemasonry" label="Prince Hall masons"/>
<link wikidata="Q502044" start="5174" end="5179" title="NAACP" label="NAACP"/>
<link wikidata="Q777636" start="5185" end="5206" title="National Urban League" label="National Urban League"/>
<link wikidata="Q735469" start="5208" end="5216" title="United Negro College Fund" label="the UNCF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663129" start="5293" end="5305" title="Syria Mosque" label="Syria Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="5323" end="5333" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147380" start="5511" end="5538" title="Exotic Revival architecture" label="Exotic Revival architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q47476" start="5650" end="5658" title="Alhambra" label="Alhambra"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="5940" end="5951" title="Puritans" label="puritanical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225" start="6048" end="6065" title="Bruce Springsteen" label="Bruce Springsteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779" start="6067" end="6082" title="Louis Armstrong" label="Louis Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="6084" end="6093" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306" start="6095" end="6105" title="Pink Floyd" label="Pink Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q726071" start="6107" end="6120" title="Jimmy Buffett" label="Jimmy Buffett"/>
<link wikidata="Q183048" start="6126" end="6140" title="The Beach Boys" label="The Beach Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="6173" end="6179" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="6181" end="6186" title="Richard Nixon" label="Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="6188" end="6194" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="6200" end="6207" title="John F. Kennedy" label="Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q838112" start="6413" end="6436" title="Wheeling, West Virginia" label="Wheeling, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="6491" end="6498" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166256" start="6914" end="6924" title="First Lady of the United States" label="First Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q233634" start="6925" end="6941" title="Florence Harding" label="Florence Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q35286" start="6951" end="6968" title="Warren G. Harding" label="Warren G. Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="7066" end="7070" title="Life (magazine)" label="Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="7373" end="7393" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764682" start="8500" end="8513" title="Scottish Rite" label="Scottish Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q131621834" start="8517" end="8526" title="York Rite" label="York Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q327321" start="8590" end="8601" title="Bricklayer" label="brick-mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q49241" start="8673" end="8692" title="Lexington, Kentucky" label="Lexington, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q74156" start="9428" end="9443" title="Moorish Revival" label="Moorish Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q731437" start="9523" end="9540" title="Shrine Auditorium" label="Shrine Auditorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="9544" end="9555" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q535631" start="9593" end="9613" title="New York City Center" label="New York City Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q14687867" start="9652" end="9666" title="Medinah Temple" label="Medinah Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016757" start="9679" end="9699" title="Newark Symphony Hall" label="Newark Symphony Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484803" start="9705" end="9721" title="Landmark Theater (Richmond, Virginia)" label="Landmark Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="9747" end="9765" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254048" start="9771" end="9792" title="Tripoli Shrine Temple" label="Tripoli Shrine Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="9796" end="9816" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225826" start="9822" end="9846" title="Polly Rosenbaum Building" label="Polly Rosenbaum Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724048" start="9907" end="9926" title="Helena Civic Center" label="Helena Civic Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668525" start="9975" end="10003" title="Abou Ben Adhem Shrine Mosque" label="Abou Ben Adhem Shrine Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q135615" start="10007" end="10028" title="Springfield, Missouri" label="Springfield, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q14688664" start="10055" end="10074" title="Old National Centre" label="Old National Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440190" start="10097" end="10108" title="Fox Theatre (Atlanta, Georgia)" label="Fox Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="10112" end="10128" title="Atlanta, Georgia" label="Atlanta, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q134382" start="10199" end="10210" title="William Fox (producer)" label="William Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663129" start="10220" end="10232" title="Syria Mosque" label="Syria Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="10236" end="10246" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="10248" end="10260" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q708676" start="10338" end="10348" title="Charitable organization" label="charitable"/>
<link wikidata="Q80517" start="10761" end="10782" title="Shreveport, Louisiana" label="Shreveport, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5331047" start="12146" end="12167" title="East–West Shrine Game" label="East–West Shrine Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="12179" end="12187" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q43432" start="12286" end="12303" title="Justin Timberlake" label="Justin Timberlake"/>
<link wikidata="Q910409" start="12374" end="12382" title="PGA Tour" label="PGA Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="12409" end="12418" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7504040" start="12974" end="12987" title="Shrine Circus" label="Shrine Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q151888" start="14477" end="14520" title="People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals" label="People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q111943951" start="14876" end="14890" title="Iowa Corn Song" label="Iowa Corn Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297317" start="14893" end="14907" title="Masonic bodies" label="Masonic bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q21015822" start="14910" end="14938" title="Military Order of the Cootie" label="Military Order of the Cootie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355510" start="14941" end="14962" title="Order of Quetzalcoatl" label="Order of Quetzalcoatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374646" start="14965" end="14987" title="Royal Order of Jesters" label="Royal Order of Jesters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7504093" start="14996" end="15021" title="Shriner&amp;#x27;s Convention" label="Shriner&amp;#x27;s Convention"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28925" wikidata="Q3085171" url="?curid=28925" title="Science fiction fandom">
<text>Science fiction fandom or SF fandom is a community or fandom of people interested in science fiction in contact with one another based upon that interest. SF fandom has a life of its own, but not much in the way of formal organization (although formal clubs such as the Futurians (1937–1945) and the Los Angeles Science Fantasy Society (1934–present) are recognized examples of organized fandom).

Most often called simply &quot;fandom&quot; within the community, it can be viewed as a distinct subculture, with its own literature and jargon; marriages and other relationships among fans are common, as are multi-generational fan families.

==Origins and history==

Science fiction fandom started through the letter column of Hugo Gernsback&#x27;s fiction magazines. Not only did fans write comments about the stories—they sent their addresses, and Gernsback published them. Soon, fans were writing letters directly to each other, and meeting in person when they lived close together, or when one of them could manage a trip. In New York City, David Lasser, Gernsback&#x27;s managing editor, nurtured the birth of a small local club called the Scienceers, which held its first meeting in a Harlem apartment on 11 December 1929. Almost all the members were adolescent boys. Around this time, a few other small local groups began to spring up in metropolitan areas around the United States, many of them connecting with fellow enthusiasts via the Science Correspondence Club. In May 1930 the first science-fiction fan magazine, &quot;The Comet&quot;, was produced by the Chicago branch of the Science Correspondence Club under the editorship of Raymond A. Palmer (later a noted, and notorious, sf magazine editor) and Walter Dennis. In January 1932, the New York City circle, which by then included future comic-book editors Julius Schwartz and Mort Weisinger, brought out the first issue of their own publication, &quot;The Time Traveller&quot;, with Forrest J Ackerman of the embryonic Los Angeles group as a contributing editor.

In 1934, Gernsback established a correspondence club for fans called the Science Fiction League, the first fannish organization. Local groups across the nation could join by filling out an application. A number of clubs came into being around this time. LASFS (the Los Angeles Science Fantasy Society) was founded at this time as a local branch of the SFL, while several competing local branches sprang up in New York City and immediately began feuding among themselves.

In 1935, PSFS (the Philadelphia Science Fiction Society, 1935–present) was formed. The next year, half a dozen fans from NYC came to Philadelphia to meet with the PSFS members, as the first Philadelphia Science Fiction Conference, which some claim as the world&#x27;s first science fiction convention.

Soon after the fans started to communicate directly with each other came the creation of science fiction fanzines. These amateur publications might or might not discuss science fiction and were generally traded rather than sold. They ranged from the utilitarian or inept to professional-quality printing and editing. In recent years, Usenet newsgroups such as rec.arts.sf.fandom, websites and blogs have somewhat supplanted printed fanzines as an outlet for expression in fandom, though many popular fanzines continue to be published. Science-fiction fans have been among the first users of computers, email, personal computers and the Internet.

Many professional science fiction authors started their interest in science fiction as fans, and some still publish their own fanzines or contribute to those published by others.

A widely regarded (though by no means error-free) history of fandom in the 1930s can be found in Sam Moskowitz&#x27;s &quot;The Immortal Storm: A History of Science Fiction Fandom&quot; (Hyperion Press, 1988, ; original edition The Atlanta Science Fiction Organization Press, Atlanta, Georgia 1954). Moskowitz was himself involved in some of the incidents chronicled and has his own point of view, which has often been criticized.

==By country==

===Sweden===
Organized fandom in Sweden (&quot;Sverifandom&quot;) emerged during the early 1950s. The first Swedish science fiction fanzine was started in the early 1950s. The oldest still existing club, in Gothenburg, was formed in 1954, and the first Swedish science-fiction convention, LunCon, was held in Lund in 1956.

Today, there are a number of science fiction clubs in the country, including (whose club fanzine, &quot;Science Fiction Forum&quot;, was once edited by Stieg Larsson, a board member and one-time chairman thereof), Linköpings Science Fiction-Förening and Sigma Terra Corps. Between one and four science-fiction conventions are held each year in Sweden, among them Swecon, the annual national Swedish con. An annual prize is awarded to someone that has contributed to the national fandom by the Fund.

===UK===
SF fandom in the UK has close ties with that in the US. In the UK there are multiple conventions. The largest regular convention for literary SF (book-focused) fandom is the British National convention or Eastercon. Strangely enough this is held over the Easter weekend. Committee membership and location changes year-to-year. The license to use the Eastercon name for a year is awarded by votes of the business meeting of the Eastercon two years previously. There are a variety of other local or intermittent conventions run by fandom, such as the series of Mexicons that ran from 1984 to 1994.

There are substantially larger events run by UK media fandom and commercial organisations also run &quot;gate shows&quot; (for-profit operations with paid staff.) The UK has also hosted the Worldcon several times, most recently in 2014. News of UK events appears in the fanzine &quot;Ansible&quot; produced by David Langford each month.

===Italy===
The beginning of an Italian science fiction fandom can be located between the late 1950s and early 1960s, when magazines such as &quot;Oltre il Cielo&quot; and &quot;Futuro&quot; started to publish readers’ letters and promote correspondences and the setting-up of clubs in various cities. Among the first fanzines, &quot;Futuria Fantasia&quot; was cyclostyled in Milan in 1963 by Luigi Cozzi (later to become a filmmaker), its title paid homage to Ray Bradbury&#x27;s fanzine by the same name; &quot;L’Aspidistra&quot;, edited by Riccardo Leveghi in Trento starting in 1965 featured contributions by Gianfranco de Turris, Gian Luigi Staffilano, and Sebastiano Fusco, future editors of professional magazines and book series; also Luigi Naviglio, editor in 1965 of the fanzine &quot;Nuovi Orizzonti&quot;, was soon to become a writer for &quot;I Romanzi del Cosmo&quot;. During subsequent years fanzines continued to function as training grounds for future editors and writers, and the general trend was towards improved quality and life expectancy (e.g. &quot;The Time Machine&quot; run for 50 issues starting in 1975, &quot;Intercom&quot; for 149 issues between 1979 and 1999, before its migration to the web as an e-zine until 2003, then as a website).

In 1963, the first Trieste Festival of Science Fiction Cinema took place, anticipating the first conventions as an opportunity for a nationwide social gathering. Informal meetings were organized in Milan, Turin and Carrara between 1965 and 1967. In 1972, the first European convention, Eurocon, was organized in Trieste, during which an Italia Award was also created. Eurocon was back in Italy in 1980 and 2009 (in 1989 a Eurocon was held in San Marino).

Since its foundation in 2013, the association &quot;World SF Italia&quot; coordinates the organization the annual national convention (Italcon) and awards (Premio Italia – with thirty- two categories across media – and Premio Vegetti – best Italian novel and essay).

==Conventions==
Since the late 1930s, SF fans have organized conventions, non-profit gatherings where the fans (some of whom are also professionals in the field) meet to discuss SF and generally enjoy themselves. (A few fannish couples have held their weddings at conventions.) The 1st World Science Fiction Convention or Worldcon was held in conjunction with the 1939 New York World&#x27;s Fair, and has been held annually since the end of World War II. Worldcon has been the premier convention in fandom for over half a century; it is at this convention that the Hugo Awards are bestowed, and attendance can approach 8,000 or more.

SF writer Cory Doctorow calls science fiction &quot;perhaps the most social of all literary genres&quot;, and states, &quot;Science fiction is driven by organized fandom, volunteers who put on hundreds of literary conventions in every corner of the globe, every weekend of the year.&quot;

SF conventions can vary from minimalist &quot;relaxacons&quot; with a hundred or so attendees to heavily programmed events with four to six or more simultaneous tracks of programming, such as WisCon and Worldcons.

Commercial shows dealing with SF-related fields are sometimes billed as &#x27;science fiction conventions,&#x27; but are operated as for-profit ventures, with an orientation towards passive spectators, rather than involved fans, and a tendency to neglect or ignore written SF in favor of television, film, comics, video games, etc. One of the largest of these is the annual Dragon*Con in Atlanta, Georgia with an attendance of more than 20,000 since 2000.

==Science-fiction societies==
In the United States, many science-fiction societies were launched as chapters of the Science Fiction League and, when it faded into history, several of the original League chapters remained viable and were subsequently incorporated as independent organizations. Most notable among the former League chapters which were spun off was the Philadelphia Science Fiction Society, which served as a model for subsequent SF societies formed independent of the League history.

Science-fiction societies, more commonly referred to as &quot;clubs&quot; except on the most formal of occasions, form a year-round base of activities for science-fiction fans. They are often associated with an SF convention or group of conventions, but maintain a separate existence as cultural institutions within specific geographic regions. Several have purchased property and maintain ongoing collections of SF literature available for research, as in the case of the Los Angeles Science Fantasy Society, the New England Science Fiction Association, and the Baltimore Science Fiction Society. Other SF Societies maintain a more informal existence, meeting at general public facilities or the homes of individual members, such as the Bay Area Science Fiction Association.

==Offshoots and subcommunities==

As a community devoted to discussion and exploration of new ideas, fandom has become an incubator for many groups that started out as special interests within fandom, some of which have partially separated into independent intentional communities not directly associated with science fiction. Among these groups are comic book fandom, media fandom, the Society for Creative Anachronism, gaming, and furry fandom, sometimes referred to collectively as &quot;fringe fandoms&quot; with the implication that the original fandom centered on science-fiction texts (magazines and later books and fanzines) is the &quot;true&quot; or &quot;core&quot; fandom. Fandom also welcomes and shares interest with other groups including LGBT communities, libertarians, neo-pagans, and space activist groups like the L5 Society, among many others. Some groups exist almost entirely within fandom but are distinct and cohesive subcultures in their own rights, such as filkers, costumers, and convention runners (sometimes called &quot;SMOFs&quot;).

Fandom encompasses subsets of fans that are principally interested in a single writer or subgenre, such as Tolkien fandom, and &quot;Star Trek&quot; fandom (&quot;Trekkies&quot;). Even short-lived television series may have dedicated followings, such as the fans of Joss Whedon&#x27;s &quot;Firefly&quot; television series and movie &quot;Serenity&quot;, known as Browncoats.

Participation in science fiction fandom often overlaps with other similar interests, such as fantasy role-playing games, comic books and anime, and in the broadest sense fans of these activities are felt to be part of the greater community of SF fandom.

There are active SF fandoms around the world. Fandom in non-Anglophone countries is based partially on local literature and media, with cons and other elements resembling those of English-speaking fandom, but with distinguishing local features. For example, Finland&#x27;s national gathering Finncon is funded by the government, while all conventions and fan activities in Japan are heavily influenced by anime and manga.

==Fanspeak==
Science fiction and fantasy fandom has its own slang or jargon, sometimes called &quot;fanspeak&quot; (the term has been in use since at least 1962).

Fanspeak is made up of acronyms, blended words, obscure in-jokes, and standard terms used in specific ways. Some terms used in fanspeak have spread to members of the Society for Creative Anachronism (&quot;Scadians&quot;), Renaissance Fair participants (&quot;Rennies&quot;), hacktivists, and internet gaming and chat fans, due to the social and contextual intersection between the communities. Examples of fanspeak used in these broader fannish communities include gafiate, a term meaning to drop out of SF related community activities, with the implication to Get A Life. The word is derived via the acronym for &quot;get away from it all&quot;. A related term is fafiate, for &quot;forced away from it all&quot;. The implication is that one would really rather still be involved in fandom, but circumstances make it impossible.

Two other acronyms commonly used in the community are FIAWOL (Fandom Is A Way Of Life) and its opposite FIJAGH (Fandom Is Just A Goddamned Hobby) to describe two ways of looking at the place of fandom in one&#x27;s life.

Science-fiction fans often refer to themselves using the irregular plural &quot;fen&quot;: man/men, fan/fen.

==In fiction==
As science fiction fans became professional writers, they started slipping the names of their friends into stories. Wilson &quot;Bob&quot; Tucker slipped so many of his fellow fans and authors into his works that doing so is called tuckerization.

The subgenre of &quot;recursive science fiction&quot; has a fan-maintained bibliography at the New England Science Fiction Association&#x27;s website; some of it is about science fiction fandom, some not.

In Robert Bloch&#x27;s 1956 short story, &quot;A Way Of Life&quot;, science-fiction fandom is the only institution to survive a nuclear holocaust and eventually becomes the basis for the reconstitution of civilization. The science-fiction novel &quot;Gather in the Hall of the Planets&quot;, by K.M. O&#x27;Donnell (aka Barry N. Malzberg), 1971, takes place at a New York City science-fiction convention and features broad parodies of many SF fans and authors. A pair of SF novels by Gene DeWeese and Robert &quot;Buck&quot; Coulson, &quot;Now You See It/Him/Them&quot; and &quot;Charles Fort Never Mentioned Wombats&quot; are set at Worldcons; the latter includes an in-character &quot;introduction&quot; by Wilson Tucker (himself a character in the novel) which is a sly self-parody verging on a self-tuckerization.

The 1991 SF novel &quot;Fallen Angels&quot; by Larry Niven, Jerry Pournelle and Michael Flynn constitutes a tribute to SF fandom. The story includes a semi-illegal fictional Minneapolis Worldcon in a post-disaster world where science, and thus fandom, is disparaged. Many of the characters are barely tuckerized fans, mostly from the Greater Los Angeles area.

Mystery writer Sharyn McCrumb&#x27;s &quot;Bimbos of the Death Sun&quot; and &quot;Zombies of the Gene Pool&quot; are murder mysteries set at a science-fiction convention and within the broader culture of fandom respectively. While containing mostly nasty caricatures of fans and fandom, some fans take them with good humor; others consider them vicious and cruel.

In 1994 and 1996, two anthologies of alternate history science fiction involving World Science Fiction Conventions, titled &quot;Alternate Worldcons&quot; and &quot;Again, Alternate Worldcons&quot;, edited by Mike Resnick were published.

===Fans are slans===
A.E. van Vogt&#x27;s 1940 novel &quot;Slan&quot; was about a mutant variety of humans who are superior to regular humanity and are therefore hunted down and killed by the normal human population. While the story has nothing to do with fandom, many science-fiction fans felt very close to the protagonists, feeling their experience as bright people in a mundane world mirrored that of the mutants; hence, the rallying cry, &quot;Fans Are Slans!&quot;; and the tradition that a building inhabited primarily by fans can be called a slan shack.

===Figures in the history of fandom===

==See also==
==References==
==Further reading==
*Kozinets, Robert V. (2007), &quot;Inno-tribes: Star Trek as Wikimedia&quot; in Cova, Bernard, Robert V. Kozinets, and Avi Shankar Consumer Tribes, Oxford and Burlington, MA: Butterworth-Heinemann, 194–211.
*Kozinets, Robert V. (2001), &quot;Utopian Enterprise: Articulating the Meanings of Star Trek&#x27;s Culture of Consumption,&quot; Journal of Consumer Research, 28 (June), 67–88.
* &quot;In Memory Yet Green&quot; by Isaac Asimov (1979)
* &quot;The Futurians&quot; by Damon Knight (1977)
* &quot;The Way the Future Was&quot; by Frederik Pohl (1978)
* &quot;All Our Yesterdays&quot; by Harry Warner Jr. (1969)
* &quot;The Immortal Storm: A History of Science Fiction Fandom&quot; by Sam Moskowitz. Hyperion Press 1988 (original edition The Atlanta Science Fiction Organization Press, Atlanta, Georgia 1954)
* Hansen, Rob THEN Science Fiction Fandom in the U (Ansible Editions, 2016)K: 1930–1980

==External links==
* eFanzines – SF fanzines and other fannish projects
* Trufen.net, dedicated to &quot;conversations between science fiction fans on all subjects&quot;
* The Fanac fan history project
* The Fancyclopedia 3 project
* Fanzine Bibliography
* &quot;The Women Were Always There: The Obligatory History Lesson&quot;
* &quot;THEN: A History of UK Fandom 1930–80&quot; by Rob Hansen
* &quot;The Neo-Fan&#x27;s Guide&quot; (1955) edited by Bob Tucker
* Who&#x27;s Who in SF Fandom
* &quot;The Voices Of Fandom – Rare Historic &amp; New Recordings from the World of SF Fandom&quot;
* Articles from &quot;Mimosa&quot; by David Kyle about old Fandom
* David Langford Home Page
* Fandom-related Special Collections at the University of Iowa Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3085171" start="0" end="22" title="Science fiction fandom" label="Science fiction fandom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085171" start="26" end="35" title="Science fiction fandom" label="SF fandom"/>
<link wikidata="Q773944" start="54" end="60" title="fandom" label="fandom"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="85" end="100" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q848452" start="270" end="279" title="Futurians" label="Futurians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682330" start="300" end="335" title="Los Angeles Science Fantasy Society" label="Los Angeles Science Fantasy Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q264965" start="495" end="505" title="subculture" label="subculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q17951" start="535" end="541" title="jargon" label="jargon"/>
<link wikidata="Q312242" start="726" end="740" title="Hugo Gernsback" label="Hugo Gernsback"/>
<link wikidata="Q193432" start="780" end="784" title="fan (aficionado)" label="fans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4254806" start="1044" end="1056" title="David Lasser" label="David Lasser"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1445" end="1472" title="Science Correspondence Club" label="Science Correspondence Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726933" start="1532" end="1541" title="The Comet (fanzine)" label="The Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025311" start="1643" end="1660" title="Raymond A. Palmer" label="Raymond A. Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760610" start="1804" end="1814" title="comic-book" label="comic-book"/>
<link wikidata="Q282102" start="1823" end="1838" title="Julius Schwartz" label="Julius Schwartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235693" start="1843" end="1857" title="Mort Weisinger" label="Mort Weisinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769338" start="1919" end="1937" title="The Time Traveller (fanzine)" label="The Time Traveller"/>
<link wikidata="Q18227" start="1950" end="1968" title="Forrest J Ackerman" label="Forrest J Ackerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18356064" start="2104" end="2126" title="Science Fiction League" label="Science Fiction League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682330" start="2296" end="2331" title="Los Angeles Science Fantasy Society" label="Los Angeles Science Fantasy Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182809" start="2522" end="2558" title="Philadelphia Science Fiction Society" label="Philadelphia Science Fiction Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1958056" start="2777" end="2803" title="science fiction convention" label="science fiction convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433680" start="2895" end="2918" title="science fiction fanzine" label="science fiction fanzine"/>
<link wikidata="Q193162" start="3140" end="3146" title="Usenet" label="Usenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q657881" start="3147" end="3157" title="newsgroups" label="newsgroups"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3166" end="3184" title="rec.arts.sf.fandom" label="rec.arts.sf.fandom"/>
<link wikidata="Q30849" start="3199" end="3204" title="blogs" label="blogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136807" start="3471" end="3494" title="science fiction authors" label="science fiction authors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276490" start="3730" end="3743" title="Sam Moskowitz" label="Sam Moskowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="4114" end="4120" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q25287" start="4288" end="4298" title="Gothenburg" label="Gothenburg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4370" end="4376" title="LunCon" label="LunCon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167" start="4390" end="4394" title="Lund" label="Lund"/>
<link wikidata="Q186317" start="4557" end="4570" title="Stieg Larsson" label="Stieg Larsson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4619" end="4654" title="Linköpings Science Fiction-Förening" label="Linköpings Science Fiction-Förening"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512395" start="4659" end="4676" title="Sigma Terra Corps" label="Sigma Terra Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4175709" start="4768" end="4774" title="Swecon" label="Swecon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329928" start="5119" end="5128" title="Eastercon" label="Eastercon"/>
<link wikidata="Q720787" start="5795" end="5802" title="Ansible (magazine)" label="Ansible"/>
<link wikidata="Q720787" start="5821" end="5835" title="David Langford" label="David Langford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1958056" start="7903" end="7914" title="science-fiction convention" label="conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596690" start="8124" end="8160" title="1st World Science Fiction Convention" label="1st World Science Fiction Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q617378" start="8164" end="8172" title="Worldcon" label="Worldcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q207420" start="8206" end="8237" title="1939 New York World&amp;#x27;s Fair" label="1939 New York World&amp;#x27;s Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8283" end="8295" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q188914" start="8407" end="8417" title="Hugo Award" label="Hugo Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q110436" start="8487" end="8500" title="Cory Doctorow" label="Cory Doctorow"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027085" start="8959" end="8965" title="WisCon" label="WisCon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305076" start="9356" end="9366" title="Dragon Con" label="Dragon*Con"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="9370" end="9386" title="Atlanta, Georgia" label="Atlanta, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18356064" start="9555" end="9577" title="Science Fiction League" label="Science Fiction League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182809" start="9806" end="9842" title="Philadelphia Science Fiction Society" label="Philadelphia Science Fiction Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682330" start="10412" end="10447" title="Los Angeles Science Fantasy Society" label="Los Angeles Science Fantasy Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007376" start="10453" end="10492" title="New England Science Fiction Association" label="New England Science Fiction Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852927" start="10502" end="10535" title="Baltimore Science Fiction Society" label="Baltimore Science Fiction Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873927" start="10677" end="10713" title="Bay Area Science Fiction Association" label="Bay Area Science Fiction Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760610" start="11066" end="11076" title="comic book" label="comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q773944" start="11085" end="11097" title="media fandom" label="media fandom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414697" start="11103" end="11135" title="Society for Creative Anachronism" label="Society for Creative Anachronism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276395" start="11137" end="11143" title="gamer" label="gaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q599853" start="11149" end="11161" title="furry fandom" label="furry fandom"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="11470" end="11474" title="LGBT" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q178598" start="11488" end="11500" title="libertarians" label="libertarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q189753" start="11502" end="11512" title="neo-paganism" label="neo-pagans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3205870" start="11549" end="11559" title="L5 Society" label="L5 Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414130" start="11699" end="11706" title="filkers" label="filkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q9053464" start="11708" end="11717" title="costuming" label="costumers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391264" start="11766" end="11770" title="SMOF" label="SMOF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963025" start="11888" end="11902" title="Tolkien fandom" label="Tolkien fandom"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11908" end="11936" title=":Category:Star Trek fandom" label="&amp;quot;Star Trek&amp;quot; fandom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412961" start="11944" end="11951" title="Trekkie" label="Trekkie"/>
<link wikidata="Q298025" start="12047" end="12058" title="Joss Whedon" label="Joss Whedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11622" start="12072" end="12079" title="Firefly (TV series)" label="Firefly"/>
<link wikidata="Q691611" start="12120" end="12128" title="Serenity (2005 film)" label="Serenity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11622" start="12145" end="12154" title="Browncoat" label="Browncoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q160738" start="12259" end="12277" title="role-playing games" label="role-playing games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760610" start="12279" end="12289" title="comic book" label="comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="12295" end="12300" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="12671" end="12678" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879007" start="12705" end="12712" title="Finncon" label="Finncon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="12786" end="12791" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="12828" end="12833" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q24947067" start="12869" end="12883" title="fantasy fandom" label="fantasy fandom"/>
<link wikidata="Q8102" start="12896" end="12901" title="slang" label="slang"/>
<link wikidata="Q17951" start="12905" end="12911" title="jargon" label="jargon"/>
<link wikidata="Q101244" start="13023" end="13030" title="acronym" label="acronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414697" start="13166" end="13198" title="Society for Creative Anachronism" label="Society for Creative Anachronism"/>
<link wikidata="Q673514" start="13223" end="13239" title="Renaissance Fair" label="Renaissance Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q22685" start="13276" end="13287" title="hacktivists" label="hacktivists"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="13293" end="13301" title="internet" label="internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="13302" end="13308" title="Video game" label="gaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q287198" start="13313" end="13317" title="Online chat" label="chat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815035" start="13562" end="13572" title="Get a life (idiom)" label="Get A Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q101244" start="13602" end="13609" title="acronym" label="acronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q637455" start="14295" end="14324" title="Wilson Tucker (writer)" label="Wilson &amp;quot;Bob&amp;quot; Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851102" start="14411" end="14424" title="tuckerization" label="tuckerization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14449" end="14458" title="self-reference#In popular culture" label="recursive"/>
<link wikidata="Q355879" start="14636" end="14648" title="Robert Bloch" label="Robert Bloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q620562" start="14761" end="14778" title="nuclear holocaust" label="nuclear holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q113554" start="14953" end="14970" title="Barry N. Malzberg" label="Barry N. Malzberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="14996" end="15009" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100445" start="15117" end="15129" title="Gene DeWeese" label="Gene DeWeese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343137" start="15134" end="15165" title="Buck Coulson" label="Robert &amp;quot;Buck&amp;quot; Coulson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15301" end="15313" title="in-character" label="in-character"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15476" end="15489" title="Fallen Angels (science-fiction novel)" label="Fallen Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q316610" start="15499" end="15510" title="Larry Niven" label="Larry Niven"/>
<link wikidata="Q578031" start="15512" end="15527" title="Jerry Pournelle" label="Jerry Pournelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577687" start="15532" end="15545" title="Michael Flynn (author)" label="Michael Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="15626" end="15637" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q617378" start="15638" end="15646" title="Worldcon" label="Worldcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050826" start="15786" end="15810" title="Greater Los Angeles area" label="Greater Los Angeles area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152905" start="15828" end="15842" title="Sharyn McCrumb" label="Sharyn McCrumb"/>
<link wikidata="Q224989" start="16216" end="16233" title="alternate history" label="alternate history"/>
<link wikidata="Q913403" start="16388" end="16400" title="Mike Resnick" label="Mike Resnick"/>
<link wikidata="Q315059" start="16439" end="16452" title="A.E. van Vogt" label="A.E. van Vogt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266733" start="16477" end="16481" title="Slan" label="Slan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248485" start="16500" end="16506" title="mutant (fiction)" label="mutant"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145158" start="16792" end="16799" title="mundane" label="mundane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266733" start="16968" end="16978" title="slan shack" label="slan shack"/>
<link wikidata="Q637455" start="18419" end="18429" title="Wilson Tucker (writer)" label="Bob Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q182973" start="18697" end="18715" title="University of Iowa" label="University of Iowa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28926" wikidata="Q229949" url="?curid=28926" title="Spin">
<text>Spin or spinning most often refers to:
* Spin (physics) or particle spin, a fundamental property of elementary particles
* Spin quantum number, a number which defines the value of a particle&#x27;s spin
* Spinning (textiles), the creation of yarn or thread by twisting fibers together, traditionally by hand spinning
* Spin (geometry), the rotation of an object around an internal axis
* Spin (propaganda), an intentionally biased portrayal of something

Spin, spinning or spinnin may also refer to:

==Physics and mathematics==
* Spin group, Spin(&quot;n&quot;), a particular double cover of the special orthogonal group SO(&quot;n&quot;)
** the corresponding spin algebra, formula_1
* Spin tensor, a tensor quantity for describing spinning motion in special relativity and general relativity
* Spin (aerodynamics), autorotation of an aerodynamically stalled aeroplane
* SPIN bibliographic database, an indexing and abstracting service focusing on physics research

== Textile arts ==
* Spinning (polymers), a process for creating polymer fibres
** Hand spinning, textile art to create yarn by hand 

==Sports==
* Spin imparted on a ball in sports such as;
** Cue sports
** Pickleball
** Table tennis
** Tennis
* Indoor cycling, often called spinning, a form of exercise
**Spinning (cycling), an indoor cycling brand
* Spinning (motorsport), a South African motorsport
* Figure skating spins, a number of different skating moves
* Poi spinning, a form of juggling
* Spin bowling, a type of bowling technique in cricket
* Spin fishing
* Pen spinning
* Spinning, a vertical-axis style of delivery in ten-pin bowling

==Technology==
* Metal spinning, the process of forming metal over a mandrel while rotating on a lathe
* Chevrolet Spin, a mini multi-purpose vehicle
* Fokker Spin, an aeroplane built by Anthony Fokker

==Computing==
* SPIN model checker, Gerard Holzmann&#x27;s tool for formal verification of distributed software systems
* SPIN (operating system), a Mach-like OS written in Modula-3
* Spin (programming language), a high-level programming language
* SPIN (software process), a Software Process Improvement Network
* Busy waiting or spinning

==Books and publications==
* &quot;Spin&quot; (magazine), an American music website and former print magazine, 1985–present
* &quot;Spin&quot; (novel), a 2005 novel by Robert Charles Wilson
* &quot;Spinning&quot; (comics), a 2017 graphic novel memoir by Tillie Walden
* &quot;Spin&quot;, a 2004 novel by Martin Sixsmith
* Spin (DC Comics), a fictional villain from DC Comics

==Businesses==
* SPIN (cable system) or South Pacific Island Network
* Spin (company), an American scooter-sharing system
* SPiN, a chain of table tennis lounges

==Film and TV==
===Films===
* &quot;Spin&quot; (1995 film), a documentary film
* &quot;Spin&quot; (2003 film), a film by James Redford
* &quot;Spin&quot;, a 2010 short film by Max Hattler
* &quot;Spin&quot; (2015 film), a short film directed by Noah Workman and written by Wilson Cleveland
* &quot;Spin&quot; (2021 film), a film starring Avantika Vandanapu and directed by Manjari Makijany

===Television===
* &quot;Spin&quot; (TV series) or &quot;&quot;, a 2012 French political drama series
* &quot;Spin&quot; (&quot;Charlie Jade&quot;), a 2005 episode of the science fiction television program &quot;Charlie Jade&quot;
* &quot;Spin&quot; (&quot;House&quot;), a 2005 episode of the American medical drama television series &quot;House&quot;
* Spin, an anthropomorphic globe character that narrates the &quot;Really Wild Animals&quot; television series, 1993–1996
* Spin City, a 1996–2002 American sitcom television
* Miles Morales, also known as Spin in the 2021 television series &quot;Spidey and His Amazing Friends&quot;

==Music==
* Spin (radio), a single play of a song
* Spinnin&#x27; Records, a Dutch electronic music label

===Groups===
* SPiN (band), an American alternative rock / power pop band
* Sp!n, a British rock band
* Spin, a Dutch funk band, an offshoot of Ekseption

===Albums===
* &quot;Spin&quot; (Darren Hayes album), 2002
* &quot;Spin&quot; (Tigers Jaw album), 2017
* &quot;Spin&quot;, a 1976 album by Spin, an offshoot band of Ekseption
* &quot;Spin&quot;, a 1985 album by Scullion
* &quot;Spin&quot;, a 2001 album by Eric Roche
* &quot;The Spin&quot;, a 1989 album by Yellowjackets

===Songs===
* &quot;Spin&quot; (song), a 2002 song by Lifehouse
* &quot;Spin&quot;, a song by Trey Anastasio from the album &quot;Shine&quot;, 2005
* &quot;Spin&quot;, a song by Taking Back Sunday from the album &quot;Louder Now&quot;, 2006

* &quot;Spinning&quot; (song), a 2021 song by No Rome, Charli XCX and the 1975
* &quot;Spinning&quot;, a song by Christopher Cross and Valerie Carter from the album &quot;Christopher Cross&quot;, 1979
* &quot;Spinning&quot;, a song by Jack&#x27;s Mannequin from the album &quot;The Glass Passenger&quot;, 2008
* &quot;Spinning&quot;, a song by Transatlantic from the album &quot;The Whirlwind&quot;, 2009
* &quot;Spinnin, a song by Soul Asylum from the album &quot;And the Horse They Rode In On&quot;, 1990

==Other uses==
* Spin (b-boy move)
* Spinning (IPO), a form of financial bribery used by brokerages to gain corporate business
* Spins, a state of dizziness and disorientation due to intoxication (&quot;the spins&quot;)
* Social Phobia Inventory or SPIN, a psychological test of social anxiety disorder
* Article spinning, a SEO approach of using equivalent phrases to rewrite articles
* Road agent&#x27;s spin or &quot;Curly Bill spin&quot;, a gunfighting maneuver utilized as a ruse when forced to surrender a side arm to an unfriendly party
* Wheelspin, spinning the wheels of a vehicle in place
* Spinnerbait, a type of fishing lure
* Sufi spinning, a twirling meditation

== See also ==
* Flat spin (disambiguation)
* Spin-off (disambiguation)
* Spun (disambiguation)
* Tailspin (disambiguation)
* Twirling
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q229949" start="0" end="4" title="Spin" label="Spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q229949" start="8" end="16" title="Spin" label="spinning"/>
<link wikidata="Q133673" start="41" end="55" title="Spin (physics)" label="Spin (physics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3879445" start="123" end="142" title="Spin quantum number" label="Spin quantum number"/>
<link wikidata="Q59172" start="205" end="224" title="Spinning (textiles)" label="Spinning (textiles)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4140198" start="303" end="316" title="hand spinning" label="hand spinning"/>
<link wikidata="Q107617" start="319" end="334" title="Spin (geometry)" label="Spin (geometry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12776523" start="388" end="405" title="Spin (propaganda)" label="Spin (propaganda)"/>
<link wikidata="Q229949" start="455" end="459" title="Spin" label="Spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q229949" start="461" end="469" title="Spin" label="spinning"/>
<link wikidata="Q229949" start="473" end="480" title="Spin" label="spinnin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031467" start="531" end="541" title="Spin group" label="Spin group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031467" start="661" end="673" title="spin algebra" label="spin algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577419" start="687" end="698" title="Spin tensor" label="Spin tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q910917" start="796" end="815" title="Spin (aerodynamics)" label="Spin (aerodynamics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7392581" start="872" end="899" title="SPIN bibliographic database" label="SPIN bibliographic database"/>
<link wikidata="Q453762" start="988" end="1007" title="Spinning (polymers)" label="Spinning (polymers)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4140198" start="1050" end="1063" title="Hand spinning" label="Hand spinning"/>
<link wikidata="Q764884" start="1161" end="1171" title="Spin (cue sports)" label="Cue sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q112169174" start="1175" end="1185" title="Spin (pickleball)" label="Pickleball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930" start="1189" end="1201" title="Spin (table tennis)" label="Table tennis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1205" end="1211" title="Glossary of tennis terms#Spin" label="Tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424010" start="1214" end="1228" title="Indoor cycling" label="Indoor cycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q60738861" start="1274" end="1292" title="Spinning (cycling)" label="Spinning (cycling)"/>
<link wikidata="Q97056044" start="1320" end="1341" title="Spinning (motorsport)" label="Spinning (motorsport)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11085408" start="1372" end="1392" title="Figure skating spins" label="Figure skating spins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163742" start="1432" end="1444" title="Poi spinning" label="Poi spinning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684170" start="1467" end="1479" title="Spin bowling" label="Spin bowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998454" start="1522" end="1534" title="Spin fishing" label="Spin fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q844472" start="1537" end="1549" title="Pen spinning" label="Pen spinning"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1599" end="1614" title="Ten-pin bowling#Spinner, helicopter, UFO" label="ten-pin bowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261779" start="1633" end="1647" title="Metal spinning" label="Metal spinning"/>
<link wikidata="Q29856" start="1721" end="1735" title="Chevrolet Spin" label="Chevrolet Spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435251" start="1768" end="1779" title="Fokker Spin" label="Fokker Spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q959513" start="1835" end="1853" title="SPIN model checker" label="SPIN model checker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4588721" start="1855" end="1870" title="Gerard Holzmann" label="Gerard Holzmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q16314510" start="1941" end="1964" title="SPIN (operating system)" label="SPIN (operating system)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051580" start="2003" end="2030" title="Spin (programming language)" label="Spin (programming language)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7392579" start="2068" end="2091" title="SPIN (software process)" label="SPIN (software process)"/>
<link wikidata="Q423003" start="2134" end="2146" title="Busy waiting" label="Busy waiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025912" start="2189" end="2216" title="Spin (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Spin&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301398" start="2286" end="2310" title="Spin (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Spin&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55633700" start="2352" end="2381" title="Spinning (comics)" label="&amp;quot;Spinning&amp;quot; (comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776602" start="2464" end="2479" title="Martin Sixsmith" label="Martin Sixsmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6568347" start="2482" end="2498" title="Spin (DC Comics)" label="Spin (DC Comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248959" start="2553" end="2572" title="SPIN (cable system)" label="SPIN (cable system)"/>
<link wikidata="Q39089708" start="2607" end="2621" title="Spin (company)" label="Spin (company)"/>
<link wikidata="Q31202656" start="2660" end="2664" title="SPiN" label="SPiN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577358" start="2729" end="2757" title="Spin (1995 film)" label="&amp;quot;Spin&amp;quot; (1995 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3225613" start="2780" end="2808" title="Spin (2003 film)" label="&amp;quot;Spin&amp;quot; (2003 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6794839" start="2875" end="2886" title="Max Hattler" label="Max Hattler"/>
<link wikidata="Q52440279" start="2889" end="2917" title="Spin (2015 film)" label="&amp;quot;Spin&amp;quot; (2015 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q108184943" start="2991" end="3019" title="Spin (2021 film)" label="&amp;quot;Spin&amp;quot; (2021 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233213" start="3109" end="3137" title="Spin (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Spin&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566715" start="3194" end="3237" title="Spin (Charlie Jade)" label="&amp;quot;Spin&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Charlie Jade&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5222754" start="3323" end="3359" title="Spin (House)" label="&amp;quot;Spin&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;House&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096084" start="3509" end="3528" title="Really Wild Animals" label="Really Wild Animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q256527" start="3566" end="3575" title="Spin City" label="Spin City"/>
<link wikidata="Q59826" start="3618" end="3631" title="Miles Morales" label="Miles Morales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246718" start="3738" end="3750" title="Spin (radio)" label="Spin (radio)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310883" start="3778" end="3799" title="Spinnin&amp;#x27; Records" label="Spinnin&amp;#x27; Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q16962239" start="3848" end="3859" title="SPiN (band)" label="SPiN (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100438" start="3909" end="3913" title="Sp!n" label="Sp!n"/>
<link wikidata="Q173976" start="3977" end="3986" title="Ekseption" label="Ekseption"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739244" start="4003" end="4040" title="Spin (Darren Hayes album)" label="&amp;quot;Spin&amp;quot; (Darren Hayes album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48835290" start="4049" end="4084" title="Spin (Tigers Jaw album)" label="&amp;quot;Spin&amp;quot; (Tigers Jaw album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439429" start="4199" end="4207" title="Scullion (group)" label="Scullion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351596" start="4244" end="4254" title="Eric Roche" label="Eric Roche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632876" start="4295" end="4308" title="Yellowjackets (band)" label="Yellowjackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577363" start="4324" end="4347" title="Spin (song)" label="&amp;quot;Spin&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7497352" start="4440" end="4445" title="Shine (Trey Anastasio album)" label="Shine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748724" start="4528" end="4538" title="Louder Now" label="Louder Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q106311237" start="4554" end="4581" title="Spinning (song)" label="&amp;quot;Spinning&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086616" start="4723" end="4740" title="Christopher Cross (album)" label="Christopher Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521055" start="4830" end="4849" title="The Glass Passenger" label="The Glass Passenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754947" start="4931" end="4944" title="The Whirlwind (album)" label="The Whirlwind"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314586" start="5017" end="5046" title="And the Horse They Rode In On" label="And the Horse They Rode In On"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577366" start="5077" end="5094" title="Spin (b-boy move)" label="Spin (b-boy move)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577611" start="5097" end="5111" title="Spinning (IPO)" label="Spinning (IPO)"/>
<link wikidata="Q112078332" start="5189" end="5194" title="Spins" label="Spins"/>
<link wikidata="Q16606900" start="5282" end="5305" title="Social Phobia Inventory" label="Social Phobia Inventory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800909" start="5365" end="5381" title="Article spinning" label="Article spinning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339477" start="5448" end="5470" title="Road agent&amp;#x27;s spin" label="Road agent&amp;#x27;s spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q21148966" start="5606" end="5615" title="Wheelspin" label="Wheelspin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915878" start="5661" end="5672" title="Spinnerbait" label="Spinnerbait"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120716" start="5699" end="5712" title="Sufi spinning" label="Sufi spinning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457849" start="5754" end="5780" title="Flat spin (disambiguation)" label="Flat spin (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q283308" start="5783" end="5808" title="Spin-off (disambiguation)" label="Spin-off (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q61787337" start="5811" end="5832" title="Spun (disambiguation)" label="Spun (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7676134" start="5835" end="5860" title="Tailspin (disambiguation)" label="Tailspin (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17080486" start="5863" end="5871" title="Twirling" label="Twirling"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28927" wikidata="Q25377588" url="?curid=28927" title="Stellar classification">
<text>In astronomy, stellar classification is the classification of stars based on their spectral characteristics. Electromagnetic radiation from the star is analyzed by splitting it with a prism or diffraction grating into a spectrum exhibiting the rainbow of colors interspersed with spectral lines. Each line indicates a particular chemical element or molecule, with the line strength indicating the abundance of that element. The strengths of the different spectral lines vary mainly due to the temperature of the photosphere, although in some cases there are true abundance differences. The &quot;spectral class&quot; of a star is a short code primarily summarizing the ionization state, giving an objective measure of the photosphere&#x27;s temperature.

Most stars are currently classified under the Morgan–Keenan (MK) system using the letters &quot;O&quot;, &quot;B&quot;, &quot;A&quot;, &quot;F&quot;, &quot;G&quot;, &quot;K&quot;, and &quot;M&quot;, a sequence from the hottest (&quot;O&quot; type) to the coolest (&quot;M&quot; type). Each letter class is then subdivided using a numeric digit with &quot;0&quot; being hottest and &quot;9&quot; being coolest (e.g., A8, A9, F0, and F1 form a sequence from hotter to cooler). The sequence has been expanded with three classes for other stars that do not fit in the classical system: &quot;W&quot;, &quot;S&quot; and &quot;C&quot;. Some stellar remnants or objects of deviating mass have also been assigned letters: &quot;D&quot; for white dwarfs and &quot;L&quot;, &quot;T&quot; and &quot;Y&quot; for brown dwarfs (and exoplanets).

In the MK system, a luminosity class is added to the spectral class using Roman numerals. This is based on the width of certain absorption lines in the star&#x27;s spectrum, which vary with the density of the atmosphere and so distinguish giant stars from dwarfs. Luminosity class &quot;0&quot; or &quot;Ia+&quot; is used for &quot;hypergiants&quot;, class &quot;I&quot; for &quot;supergiants&quot;, class &quot;II&quot; for bright &quot;giants&quot;, class &quot;III&quot; for regular &quot;giants&quot;, class &quot;IV&quot; for &quot;subgiants&quot;, class &quot;V&quot; for &quot;main-sequence stars&quot;, class &quot;sd&quot; (or &quot;VI&quot;) for &quot;subdwarfs&quot;, and class &quot;D&quot; (or &quot;VII&quot;) for &quot;white dwarfs&quot;. The full spectral class for the Sun is then G2V, indicating a main-sequence star with a surface temperature around 5,800 K.

==Conventional colour description==
The conventional colour description takes into account only the peak of the stellar spectrum. In actuality, however, stars radiate in all parts of the spectrum. Because all spectral colours combined appear white, the actual apparent colours the human eye would observe are far lighter than the conventional colour descriptions would suggest. This characteristic of &#x27;lightness&#x27; indicates that the simplified assignment of colours within the spectrum can be misleading. Excluding colour-contrast effects in dim light, in typical viewing conditions there are no green, cyan, indigo, or violet stars. &quot;Yellow&quot; dwarfs such as the Sun are white, &quot;red&quot; dwarfs are a deep shade of yellow/orange, and &quot;brown&quot; dwarfs do not literally appear brown, but hypothetically would appear dim red or grey/black to a nearby observer.

==Modern classification==
The modern classification system is known as the &quot;Morgan–Keenan&quot; (MK) classification. Each star is assigned a spectral class (from the older Harvard spectral classification, which did not include luminosity) and a luminosity class using Roman numerals as explained below, forming the star&#x27;s spectral type.

Other modern stellar classification systems, such as the UBV system, are based on color indices—the measured differences in three or more color magnitudes. Those numbers are given labels such as &quot;U−V&quot; or &quot;B−V&quot;, which represent the colors passed by two standard filters (e.g. &quot;U&quot;ltraviolet, &quot;B&quot;lue and &quot;V&quot;isual).

===Harvard spectral classification===
The &quot;Harvard system&quot; is a one-dimensional classification scheme by astronomer Annie Jump Cannon, who re-ordered and simplified the prior alphabetical system by Draper (see History). Stars are grouped according to their spectral characteristics by single letters of the alphabet, optionally with numeric subdivisions. Main-sequence stars vary in surface temperature from approximately 2,000 to 50,000 K, whereas more-evolved stars – in particular, newly-formed white dwarfs – can have surface temperatures above 100,000 K. Physically, the classes indicate the temperature of the star&#x27;s atmosphere and are normally listed from hottest to coldest.
A common mnemonic for remembering the order of the spectral type letters, from hottest to coolest, is &quot;Oh, Be A Fine Guy/Girl: Kiss Me!&quot;, or another one is &quot;Our Bright Astronomers Frequently Generate Killer Mnemonics!&quot;.

The spectral classes O through M, as well as other more specialized classes discussed later, are subdivided by Arabic numerals (0–9), where 0 denotes the hottest stars of a given class. For example, A0 denotes the hottest stars in class A and A9 denotes the coolest ones. Fractional numbers are allowed; for example, the star Mu Normae is classified as O9.7. The Sun is classified as G2.

The fact that the Harvard classification of a star indicated its surface or photospheric temperature (or more precisely, its effective temperature) was not fully understood until after its development, though by the time the first Hertzsprung–Russell diagram was formulated (by 1914), this was generally suspected to be true. In the 1920s, the Indian physicist Meghnad Saha derived a theory of ionization by extending well-known ideas in physical chemistry pertaining to the dissociation of molecules to the ionization of atoms. First he applied it to the solar chromosphere, then to stellar spectra.

Harvard astronomer Cecilia Payne then demonstrated that the &quot;O-B-A-F-G-K-M&quot; spectral sequence is actually a sequence in temperature. Because the classification sequence predates our understanding that it is a temperature sequence, the placement of a spectrum into a given subtype, such as B3 or A7, depends upon (largely subjective) estimates of the strengths of absorption features in stellar spectra. As a result, these subtypes are not evenly divided into any sort of mathematically representable intervals.

===Yerkes spectral classification===
The &quot;Yerkes spectral classification&quot;, also called the &quot;MK,&quot; or Morgan-Keenan (alternatively referred to as the MKK, or Morgan-Keenan-Kellman) system from the authors&#x27; initials, is a system of stellar spectral classification introduced in 1943 by William Wilson Morgan, Philip C. Keenan, and Edith Kellman from Yerkes Observatory. This two-dimensional (temperature and luminosity) classification scheme is based on spectral lines sensitive to stellar temperature and surface gravity, which is related to luminosity (whilst the &quot;Harvard classification&quot; is based on just surface temperature). Later, in 1953, after some revisions to the list of standard stars and classification criteria, the scheme was named the &quot;Morgan–Keenan classification&quot;, or &quot;MK&quot;, which remains in use today.

Denser stars with higher surface gravity exhibit greater pressure broadening of spectral lines. The gravity, and hence the pressure, on the surface of a giant star is much lower than for a dwarf star because the radius of the giant is much greater than a dwarf of similar mass. Therefore, differences in the spectrum can be interpreted as &quot;luminosity effects&quot; and a luminosity class can be assigned purely from examination of the spectrum.

A number of different &quot;luminosity classes&quot; are distinguished, as listed in the table below.

Marginal cases are allowed; for example, a star may be either a supergiant or a bright giant, or may be in between the subgiant and main-sequence classifications. 
In these cases, two special symbols are used:
*A slash (/) means that a star is either one class or the other.
*A dash (-) means that the star is in between the two classes.

For example, a star classified as A3-4III/IV would be in between spectral types A3 and A4, while being either a giant star or a subgiant.

Sub-dwarf classes have also been used: VI for sub-dwarfs (stars slightly less luminous than the main sequence).

Nominal luminosity class VII (and sometimes higher numerals) is now rarely used for white dwarf or &quot;hot sub-dwarf&quot; classes, since the temperature-letters of the main sequence and giant stars no longer apply to white dwarfs.

Occasionally, letters &quot;a&quot; and &quot;b&quot; are applied to luminosity classes other than supergiants; for example, a giant star slightly less luminous than typical may be given a luminosity class of IIIb, while a luminosity class IIIa indicates a star slightly brighter than a typical giant.

A sample of extreme V stars with strong absorption in He II λ4686 spectral lines have been given the &quot;Vz&quot; designation. An example star is HD 93129 B.

===Spectral peculiarities===
Additional nomenclature, in the form of lower-case letters, can follow the spectral type to indicate peculiar features of the spectrum.

For example, 59 Cygni is listed as spectral type B1.5Vnne, indicating a spectrum with the general classification B1.5V, as well as very broad absorption lines and certain emission lines.

==History==
The reason for the odd arrangement of letters in the Harvard classification is historical, having evolved from the earlier Secchi classes and been progressively modified as understanding improved.

===Secchi classes===
During the 1860s and 1870s, pioneering stellar spectroscopist Angelo Secchi created the &quot;Secchi classes&quot; in order to classify observed spectra. By 1866, he had developed three classes of stellar spectra, shown in the table below.

In the late 1890s, this classification began to be superseded by the Harvard classification, which is discussed in the remainder of this article.

The Roman numerals used for Secchi classes should not be confused with the completely unrelated Roman numerals used for Yerkes luminosity classes and the proposed neutron star classes.

===Draper system===
In the 1880s, the astronomer Edward C. Pickering began to make a survey of stellar spectra at the Harvard College Observatory, using the objective-prism method. A first result of this work was the &quot;Draper Catalogue of Stellar Spectra&quot;, published in 1890. Williamina Fleming classified most of the spectra in this catalogue and was credited with classifying over 10,000 featured stars and discovering 10 novae and more than 200 variable stars. With the help of the Harvard computers, especially Williamina Fleming, the first iteration of the Henry Draper catalogue was devised to replace the Roman-numeral scheme established by Angelo Secchi.

The catalogue used a scheme in which the previously used Secchi classes (I to V) were subdivided into more specific classes, given letters from A to P. Also, the letter Q was used for stars not fitting into any other class. Fleming worked with Pickering to differentiate 17 different classes based on the intensity of hydrogen spectral lines, which causes variation in the wavelengths emanated from stars and results in variation in color appearance. The spectra in class A tended to produce the strongest hydrogen absorption lines while spectra in class O produced virtually no visible lines. The lettering system displayed the gradual decrease in hydrogen absorption in the spectral classes when moving down the alphabet. This classification system was later modified by Annie Jump Cannon and Antonia Maury to produce the Harvard spectral classification scheme.

=== The old Harvard system (1897) ===
In 1897, another astronomer at Harvard, Antonia Maury, placed the Orion subtype of Secchi class I ahead of the remainder of Secchi class I, thus placing the modern type B ahead of the modern type A. She was the first to do so, although she did not use lettered spectral types, but rather a series of twenty-two types numbered from I–XXII.
Because the 22 Roman numeral groupings did not account for additional variations in spectra, three additional divisions were made to further specify differences: Lowercase letters were added to differentiate relative line appearance in spectra; the lines were defined as:

* (a): average width
* (b): hazy
* (c): sharp

Antonia Maury published her own stellar classification catalogue in 1897 called &quot;Spectra of Bright Stars Photographed with the 11 inch Draper Telescope as Part of the Henry Draper Memorial&quot;, which included 4,800 photographs and Maury&#x27;s analyses of 681 bright northern stars. This was the first instance in which a woman was credited for an observatory publication.

===The current Harvard system (1912) ===
In 1901, Annie Jump Cannon returned to the lettered types, but dropped all letters except O, B, A, F, G, K, M, and N used in that order, as well as P for planetary nebulae and Q for some peculiar spectra. She also used types such as B5A for stars halfway between types B and A, F2G for stars one fifth of the way from F to G, and so on.

Finally, by 1912, Cannon had changed the types B, A, B5A, F2G, etc. to B0, A0, B5, F2, etc. This is essentially the modern form of the Harvard classification system. This system was developed through the analysis of spectra on photographic plates, which could convert light emanated from stars into a readable spectrum.

===Mount Wilson classes===
A luminosity classification known as the Mount Wilson system was used to distinguish between stars of different luminosities. This notation system is still sometimes seen on modern spectra.

* sd: subdwarf
* d: dwarf
* sg: subgiant
* g: giant
* c: supergiant

==Spectral types==

The stellar classification system is taxonomic, based on type specimens, similar to classification of species in biology: The categories are defined by one or more standard stars for each category and sub-category, with an associated description of the distinguishing features.

===&quot;Early&quot; and &quot;late&quot; nomenclature===
Stars are often referred to as &quot;early&quot; or &quot;late&quot; types. &quot;Early&quot; is a synonym for &quot;hotter&quot;, while &quot;late&quot; is a synonym for &quot;cooler&quot;.

Depending on the context, &quot;early&quot; and &quot;late&quot; may be absolute or relative terms. &quot;Early&quot; as an absolute term would therefore refer to O or B, and possibly A stars. As a relative reference it relates to stars hotter than others, such as &quot;early K&quot; being perhaps K0, K1, K2 and K3.

&quot;Late&quot; is used in the same way, with an unqualified use of the term indicating stars with spectral types such as K and M, but it can also be used for stars that are cool relative to other stars, as in using &quot;late G&quot; to refer to G7, G8, and G9.

In the relative sense, &quot;early&quot; means a lower Arabic numeral following the class letter, and &quot;late&quot; means a higher number.

This obscure terminology is a hold-over from a late nineteenth century model of stellar evolution, which supposed that stars were powered by gravitational contraction via the Kelvin–Helmholtz mechanism, which is now known to not apply to main-sequence stars. If that were true, then stars would start their lives as very hot &quot;early-type&quot; stars and then gradually cool down into &quot;late-type&quot; stars. This mechanism provided ages of the Sun that were much smaller than what is observed in the geologic record, and was rendered obsolete by the discovery that stars are powered by nuclear fusion. The terms &quot;early&quot; and &quot;late&quot; were carried over, beyond the demise of the model they were based on.

===Class O===

O-type stars are very hot and extremely luminous, with most of their radiated output in the ultraviolet range. These are the rarest of all main-sequence stars. About 1 in 3,000,000 (0.00003%) of the main-sequence stars in the solar neighborhood are O-type stars. Some of the most massive stars lie within this spectral class. O-type stars frequently have complicated surroundings that make measurement of their spectra difficult.

O-type spectra formerly were defined by the ratio of the strength of the He II λ4541 relative to that of He I λ4471, where λ is the radiation wavelength. Spectral type O7 was defined to be the point at which the two intensities are equal, with the He I line weakening towards earlier types. Type O3 was, by definition, the point at which said line disappears altogether, although it can be seen very faintly with modern technology. Due to this, the modern definition uses the ratio of the nitrogen line N IV λ4058 to N III λλ4634-40-42.

O-type stars have dominant lines of absorption and sometimes emission for He II lines, prominent ionized (Si IV, O III, N III, and C III) and neutral helium lines, strengthening from O5 to O9, and prominent hydrogen Balmer lines, although not as strong as in later types. Higher-mass O-type stars do not retain extensive atmospheres due to the extreme velocity of their stellar wind, which may reach 2,000 km/s. Because they are so massive, O-type stars have very hot cores and burn through their hydrogen fuel very quickly, so they are the first stars to leave the main sequence.

When the MKK classification scheme was first described in 1943, the only subtypes of class O used were O5 to O9.5. The MKK scheme was extended to O9.7 in 1971 and O4 in 1978, and new classification schemes that add types O2, O3, and O3.5 have subsequently been introduced.

Spectral standards:
* O7V – S Monocerotis
* O9V – 10 Lacertae

===Class B===
B-type stars are very luminous and blue. Their spectra have neutral helium lines, which are most prominent at the B2 subclass, and moderate hydrogen lines. As O- and B-type stars are so energetic, they only live for a relatively short time. Thus, due to the low probability of kinematic interaction during their lifetime, they are unable to stray far from the area in which they formed, apart from runaway stars.

The transition from class O to class B was originally defined to be the point at which the He II λ4541 disappears. However, with modern equipment, the line is still apparent in the early B-type stars. Today for main-sequence stars, the B class is instead defined by the intensity of the He I violet spectrum, with the maximum intensity corresponding to class B2. For supergiants, lines of silicon are used instead; the Si IV λ4089 and Si III λ4552 lines are indicative of early B. At mid-B, the intensity of the latter relative to that of Si II λλ4128-30 is the defining characteristic, while for late B, it is the intensity of Mg II λ4481 relative to that of He I λ4471.

These stars tend to be found in their originating OB associations, which are associated with giant molecular clouds. The Orion OB1 association occupies a large portion of a spiral arm of the Milky Way and contains many of the brighter stars of the constellation Orion. About 1 in 800 (0.125%) of the main-sequence stars in the solar neighborhood are B-type main-sequence stars. B-type stars are relatively uncommon and the closest is Regulus, at around 80 light years.

Massive yet non-supergiant stars known as Be stars have been observed to show one or more Balmer lines in emission, with the hydrogen-related electromagnetic radiation series projected out by the stars being of particular interest. Be stars are generally thought to feature unusually strong stellar winds, high surface temperatures, and significant attrition of stellar mass as the objects rotate at a curiously rapid rate.

Objects known as B[e] stars – or B(e) stars for typographic reasons – possess distinctive neutral or low ionisation emission lines that are considered to have forbidden mechanisms, undergoing processes not normally allowed under current understandings of quantum mechanics.

Spectral standards:
* B0V – Upsilon Orionis
* B0Ia – Alnilam
* B2Ia – Chi2 Orionis
* B2Ib – 9 Cephei
* B3V – Eta Ursae Majoris
* B3V – Eta Aurigae
* B3Ia – Omicron2 Canis Majoris
* B5Ia – Eta Canis Majoris
* B8Ia – Rigel

===Class A=== 
A-type stars are among the more common naked eye stars, and are white or bluish-white. They have strong hydrogen lines, at a maximum by A0, and also lines of ionized metals (Fe II, Mg II, Si II) at a maximum at A5. The presence of Ca II lines is notably strengthening by this point. About 1 in 160 (0.625%) of the main-sequence stars in the solar neighborhood are A-type stars, which includes 9 stars within 15 parsecs.

Spectral standards:
* A0Van – Gamma Ursae Majoris
* A0Va – Vega
* A0Ib – Eta Leonis
* A0Ia – HD 21389
* A1V – Sirius A
* A2Ia – Deneb
* A3Va – Fomalhaut
===Class F===
F-type stars have strengthening spectral lines &quot;H&quot; and &quot;K&quot; of Ca II. Neutral metals (Fe I, Cr I) beginning to gain on ionized metal lines by late F. Their spectra are characterized by the weaker hydrogen lines and ionized metals. Their color is white. About 1 in 33 (3.03%) of the main-sequence stars in the solar neighborhood are F-type stars, including 1 star Procyon A within 20 ly.

Spectral standards:
* F0IIIa – Zeta Leonis
* F0Ib – Alpha Leporis
* F1V - 37 Ursae Majoris 
* F2V – 78 Ursae Majoris
* F7V - Iota Piscium
* F9V - Beta Virginis 
* F9V - HD 10647

===Class G===

G-type stars, including the Sun, have prominent spectral lines &quot;H&quot; and &quot;K&quot; of Ca II, which are most pronounced at G2. They have even weaker hydrogen lines than F, but along with the ionized metals, they have neutral metals. There is a prominent spike in the G band of CN molecules. Class G main-sequence stars make up about 7.5%, nearly one in thirteen, of the main-sequence stars in the solar neighborhood. There are 21 G-type stars within 10pc.

Class G contains the &quot;Yellow Evolutionary Void&quot;. Supergiant stars often swing between O or B (blue) and K or M (red). While they do this, they do not stay for long in the unstable yellow supergiant class.

Spectral standards:
* G0V – Beta Canum Venaticorum
* G0IV – Eta Boötis
* G0Ib – Beta Aquarii
* G2V – Sun
* G5V – Kappa1 Ceti
* G5IV – Mu Herculis
* G5Ib – 9 Pegasi
* G8V – 61 Ursae Majoris
* G8IV – Beta Aquilae
* G8IIIa – Kappa Geminorum
* G8IIIab – Epsilon Virginis
* G8Ib – Epsilon Geminorum

===Class K===

K-type stars are orangish stars that are slightly cooler than the Sun. They make up about 12% of the main-sequence stars in the solar neighborhood. There are also giant K-type stars, which range from hypergiants like RW Cephei, to giants and supergiants, such as Arcturus, whereas orange dwarfs, like Alpha Centauri B, are main-sequence stars.

They have extremely weak hydrogen lines, if those are present at all, and mostly neutral metals (Mn I, Fe I, Si I). By late K, molecular bands of titanium oxide become present. Mainstream theories (those rooted in lower harmful radioactivity and star longevity) would thus suggest such stars have the optimal chances of heavily evolved life developing on orbiting planets (if such life is directly analogous to Earth&#x27;s) due to a broad habitable zone yet much lower harmful periods of emission compared to those with the broadest such zones.

Spectral standards:
* K0V – Sigma Draconis
* K0III – Pollux
* K0III – Epsilon Cygni
* K2V – Epsilon Eridani
* K2III – Kappa Ophiuchi
* K3III – Rho Boötis
* K5V – 61 Cygni A
* K5III – Gamma Draconis

===Class M===
Class M stars are by far the most common. About 76% of the main-sequence stars in the solar neighborhood are class M stars. However, class M main-sequence stars (red dwarfs) have such low luminosities that none are bright enough to be seen with the unaided eye, unless under exceptional conditions. The brightest-known M class main-sequence star is Lacaille 8760, class M0V, with magnitude 6.7 (the limiting magnitude for typical naked-eye visibility under good conditions being typically quoted as 6.5), and it is extremely unlikely that any brighter examples will be found.

Although most class M stars are red dwarfs, most of the largest-known supergiant stars in the Milky Way are class M stars, such as VY Canis Majoris, VV Cephei, Antares, and Betelgeuse. Furthermore, some larger, hotter brown dwarfs are late class M, usually in the range of M6.5 to M9.5.

The spectrum of a class M star contains lines from oxide molecules (in the visible spectrum, especially TiO) and all neutral metals, but absorption lines of hydrogen are usually absent. TiO bands can be strong in class M stars, usually dominating their visible spectrum by about M5. Vanadium(II) oxide bands become present by late M.

Spectral standards:
* M0IIIa – Beta Andromedae
* M2III – Chi Pegasi
* M1-M2Ia-Iab – Betelgeuse
* M2Ia – Mu Cephei (&quot;Herschel&#x27;s garnet&quot;)

==Extended spectral types==
A number of new spectral types have been taken into use from newly discovered types of stars.

===Hot blue emission star classes===
Spectra of some very hot and bluish stars exhibit marked emission lines from carbon or nitrogen, or sometimes oxygen.

====Class WR (or W): Wolf–Rayet====

Once included as type O stars, the Wolf–Rayet stars of class W or WR are notable for spectra lacking hydrogen lines. Instead their spectra are dominated by broad emission lines of highly ionized helium, nitrogen, carbon, and sometimes oxygen. They are thought to mostly be dying supergiants with their hydrogen layers blown away by stellar winds, thereby directly exposing their hot helium shells. Class WR is further divided into subclasses according to the relative strength of nitrogen and carbon emission lines in their spectra (and outer layers).

WR spectra range is listed below:
* WN – spectrum dominated by N III-V and He I-II lines
** WNE (WN2 to WN5 with some WN6) – hotter or &quot;early&quot;
** WNL (WN7 to WN9 with some WN6) – cooler or &quot;late&quot;
** Extended WN classes WN10 and WN11 sometimes used for the Ofpe/WN9 stars
** h tag used (e.g. WN9h) for WR with hydrogen emission and ha (e.g. WN6ha) for both hydrogen emission and absorption
* WN/C – WN stars plus strong C IV lines, intermediate between WN and WC stars
* WC – spectrum with strong C II-IV lines
** WCE (WC4 to WC6) – hotter or &quot;early&quot;
** WCL (WC7 to WC9) – cooler or &quot;late&quot;
* WO (WO1 to WO4) – strong O VI lines, extremely rare, extension of the WCE class into incredibly hot temperatures (up to 200 kK or more)

Although the central stars of most planetary nebulae (CSPNe) show O-type spectra, around 10% are hydrogen-deficient and show WR spectra. These are low-mass stars and to distinguish them from the massive Wolf–Rayet stars, their spectra are enclosed in square brackets: e.g. [WC]. Most of these show [WC] spectra, some [WO], and very rarely [WN].

====Slash stars====

The &quot;slash&quot; stars are O-type stars with WN-like lines in their spectra. The name &quot;slash&quot; comes from their printed spectral type having a slash in it (e.g. &quot;Of/WNL&quot;)).

There is a secondary group found with these spectra, a cooler, &quot;intermediate&quot; group designated &quot;Ofpe/WN9&quot;. These stars have also been referred to as WN10 or WN11, but that has become less popular with the realisation of the evolutionary difference from other Wolf–Rayet stars. Recent discoveries of even rarer stars have extended the range of slash stars as far as O2-3.5If*/WN5-7, which are even hotter than the original &quot;slash&quot; stars.

====Magnetic O stars====
They are O stars with strong magnetic fields. Designation is Of?p.

===Cool red and brown dwarf classes===

The new spectral types L, T, and Y were created to classify infrared spectra of cool stars. This includes both red dwarfs and brown dwarfs that are very faint in the visible spectrum.

Brown dwarfs, stars that do not undergo hydrogen fusion, cool as they age and so progress to later spectral types. Brown dwarfs start their lives with M-type spectra and will cool through the L, T, and Y spectral classes, faster the less massive they are; the highest-mass brown dwarfs cannot have cooled to Y or even T dwarfs within the age of the universe. Because this leads to an unresolvable overlap between spectral types″ effective temperature and luminosity for some masses and ages of different L-T-Y types, no distinct temperature or luminosity values can be given.

====Class L====

Class L dwarfs get their designation because they are cooler than M stars and L is the remaining letter alphabetically closest to M. Some of these objects have masses large enough to support hydrogen fusion and are therefore stars, but most are of substellar mass and are therefore brown dwarfs. They are a very dark red in color and brightest in infrared. Their atmosphere is cool enough to allow metal hydrides and alkali metals to be prominent in their spectra.

Due to low surface gravity in giant stars, TiO- and VO-bearing condensates never form. Thus, L-type stars larger than dwarfs can never form in an isolated environment. However, it may be possible for these L-type supergiants to form through stellar collisions, an example of which is V838 Monocerotis while in the height of its luminous red nova eruption.

====Class T====

Class T dwarfs are cool brown dwarfs with surface temperatures between approximately . Their emission peaks in the infrared. Methane is prominent in their spectra.

Study of the number of proplyds (protoplanetary disks, clumps of gas in nebulae from which stars and planetary systems are formed) indicates that the number of stars in the galaxy should be several orders of magnitude higher than what was previously conjectured. It is theorized that these proplyds are in a race with each other. The first one to form will become a protostar, which are very violent objects and will disrupt other proplyds in the vicinity, stripping them of their gas. The victim proplyds will then probably go on to become main-sequence stars or brown dwarfs of the L and T classes, which are quite invisible to us.

====Class Y====

Brown dwarfs of spectral class Y are cooler than those of spectral class T and have qualitatively different spectra from them. A total of 17 objects have been placed in class Y as of August 2013. Although such dwarfs have been modelled and detected within forty light-years by the Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE) there is no well-defined spectral sequence yet and no prototypes. Nevertheless, several objects have been proposed as spectral classes Y0, Y1, and Y2.

The spectra of these prospective Y objects display absorption around 1.55 micrometers. Delorme et al. have suggested that this feature is due to absorption from ammonia, and that this should be taken as the indicative feature for the T-Y transition. In fact, this ammonia-absorption feature is the main criterion that has been adopted to define this class. However, this feature is difficult to distinguish from absorption by water and methane, and other authors have stated that the assignment of class Y0 is premature.

The latest brown dwarf proposed for the Y spectral type, WISE 1828+2650, is a &gt; Y2 dwarf with an effective temperature originally estimated around 300 K, the temperature of the human body. Parallax measurements have, however, since shown that its luminosity is inconsistent with it being colder than ~400 K. The coolest Y dwarf currently known is WISE 0855−0714 with an approximate temperature of 250 K, and a mass just seven times that of Jupiter.

The mass range for Y dwarfs is 9–25 Jupiter masses, but young objects might reach below one Jupiter mass (although they cool to become planets), which means that Y class objects straddle the 13 Jupiter mass deuterium-fusion limit that marks the current IAU division between brown dwarfs and planets.

==== Peculiar brown dwarfs ====

Young brown dwarfs have low surface gravities because they have larger radii and lower masses compared to the field stars of similar spectral type. These sources are marked by a letter beta () for intermediate surface gravity and gamma () for low surface gravity. Indication for low surface gravity are weak CaH, K and Na lines, as well as strong VO line. Alpha () stands for normal surface gravity and is usually dropped. Sometimes an extremely low surface gravity is denoted by a delta (). The suffix &quot;pec&quot; stands for peculiar. The peculiar suffix is still used for other features that are unusual and summarizes different properties, indicative of low surface gravity, subdwarfs and unresolved binaries.
The prefix sd stands for subdwarf and only includes cool subdwarfs. This prefix indicates a low metallicity and kinematic properties that are more similar to halo stars than to disk stars. Subdwarfs appear bluer than disk objects.
The red suffix describes objects with red color, but an older age. This is not interpreted as low surface gravity, but as a high dust content. The blue suffix describes objects with blue near-infrared colors that cannot be explained with low metallicity. Some are explained as L+T binaries, others are not binaries, such as 2MASS J11263991−5003550 and are explained with thin and/or large-grained clouds.

===Late giant carbon-star classes===
Carbon-stars are stars whose spectra indicate production of carbon – a byproduct of triple-alpha helium fusion. With increased carbon abundance, and some parallel s-process heavy element production, the spectra of these stars become increasingly deviant from the usual late spectral classes G, K, and M. Equivalent classes for carbon-rich stars are S and C.

The giants among those stars are presumed to produce this carbon themselves, but some stars in this class are double stars, whose odd atmosphere is suspected of having been transferred from a companion that is now a white dwarf, when the companion was a carbon-star.

====Class C====
Originally classified as R and N stars, these are also known as &quot;carbon stars&quot;. These are red giants, near the end of their lives, in which there is an excess of carbon in the atmosphere. The old R and N classes ran parallel to the normal classification system from roughly mid-G to late M. These have more recently been remapped into a unified carbon classifier C with N0 starting at roughly C6. Another subset of cool carbon stars are the C–J-type stars, which are characterized by the strong presence of molecules of 13CN in addition to those of 12CN. A few main-sequence carbon stars are known, but the overwhelming majority of known carbon stars are giants or supergiants. There are several subclasses:
* C-R – Formerly its own class (&quot;R&quot;) representing the carbon star equivalent of late G- to early K-type stars.
* C-N – Formerly its own class representing the carbon star equivalent of late K- to M-type stars.
* C-J – A subtype of cool C stars with a high content of 13C.
* C-H – Population II analogues of the C-R stars.
* C-Hd – Hydrogen-deficient carbon stars, similar to late G supergiants with CH and C2 bands added.

====Class S====

Class S stars form a continuum between class M stars and carbon stars. Those most similar to class M stars have strong ZrO absorption bands analogous to the TiO bands of class M stars, whereas those most similar to carbon stars have strong sodium D lines and weak C2 bands. Class S stars have excess amounts of zirconium and other elements produced by the s-process, and have more similar carbon and oxygen abundances to class M or carbon stars. Like carbon stars, nearly all known class S stars are asymptotic-giant-branch stars.

The spectral type is formed by the letter S and a number between zero and ten. This number corresponds to the temperature of the star and approximately follows the temperature scale used for class M giants. The most common types are S3 to S5. The non-standard designation S10 has only been used for the star Chi Cygni when at an extreme minimum.

The basic classification is usually followed by an abundance indication, following one of several schemes: S2,5; S2/5; S2 Zr4 Ti2; or S2*5. A number following a comma is a scale between 1 and 9 based on the ratio of ZrO and TiO. A number following a slash is a more-recent but less-common scheme designed to represent the ratio of carbon to oxygen on a scale of 1 to 10, where a 0 would be an MS star. Intensities of zirconium and titanium may be indicated explicitly. Also occasionally seen is a number following an asterisk, which represents the strength of the ZrO bands on a scale from 1 to 5.

====Classes MS and SC: Intermediate carbon-related classes====
In between the M and S classes, border cases are named MS stars. In a similar way, border cases between the S and C-N classes are named SC or CS. The sequence M → MS → S → SC → C-N is hypothesized to be a sequence of increased carbon abundance with age for carbon stars in the asymptotic giant branch.

===White dwarf classifications===
The class D (for Degenerate) is the modern classification used for white dwarfs—low-mass stars that are no longer undergoing nuclear fusion and have shrunk to planetary size, slowly cooling down. Class D is further divided into spectral types DA, DB, DC, DO, DQ, DX, and DZ. The letters are not related to the letters used in the classification of other stars, but instead indicate the composition of the white dwarf&#x27;s visible outer layer or atmosphere.

The white dwarf types are as follows:
* DA – a hydrogen-rich atmosphere or outer layer, indicated by strong Balmer hydrogen spectral lines.
* DB – a helium-rich atmosphere, indicated by neutral helium, He I, spectral lines.
* DO – a helium-rich atmosphere, indicated by ionized helium, He II, spectral lines.
* DQ – a carbon-rich atmosphere, indicated by atomic or molecular carbon lines.
* DZ – a metal-rich atmosphere, indicated by metal spectral lines (a merger of the obsolete white dwarf spectral types, DG, DK, and DM).
* DC – no strong spectral lines indicating one of the above categories.
* DX – spectral lines are insufficiently clear to classify into one of the above categories.

The type is followed by a number giving the white dwarf&#x27;s surface temperature. This number is a rounded form of 50400/&quot;T&quot;eff, where &quot;T&quot;eff is the effective surface temperature, measured in kelvins. Originally, this number was rounded to one of the digits 1 through 9, but more recently fractional values have started to be used, as well as values below 1 and above 9.(For example DA1.5 for IK Pegasi B)

Two or more of the type letters may be used to indicate a white dwarf that displays more than one of the spectral features above.

==== Extended white dwarf spectral types ====

* DAB – a hydrogen- and helium-rich white dwarf displaying neutral helium lines
* DAO – a hydrogen- and helium-rich white dwarf displaying ionized helium lines
* DAZ – a hydrogen-rich metallic white dwarf
* DBZ – a helium-rich metallic white dwarf

A different set of spectral peculiarity symbols are used for white dwarfs than for other types of stars:

=== Luminous Blue Variables ===

Luminous blue variables (LBVs) are rare, massive and evolved stars that show unpredictable and sometimes dramatic variations in their spectra and brightness. During their &quot;quiescent&quot; states, they are usually similar to B-type stars, although with unusual spectral lines. During outbursts, they are more similar to F-type stars, with significantly lower temperatures. Many papers treat LBV as its own spectral type.

===Spectral types of non-single objects: Classes P and Q===
Finally, the classes P and Q are left over from the system developed by Cannon for the &quot;Henry Draper Catalogue&quot;. They are occasionally used for certain objects, not associated with a single star: Type P objects are stars within planetary nebulae (typically young white dwarfs or hydrogen-poor M giants); type Q objects are novae.

==Stellar remnants==

Stellar remnants are objects associated with the death of stars. Included in the category are white dwarfs, and as can be seen from the radically different classification scheme for class D, stellar remnants are difficult to fit into the MK system.

The Hertzsprung–Russell diagram, which the MK system is based on, is observational in nature so these remnants cannot easily be plotted on the diagram, or cannot be placed at all. Old neutron stars are relatively small and cold, and would fall on the far right side of the diagram. Planetary nebulae are dynamic and tend to quickly fade in brightness as the progenitor star transitions to the white dwarf branch. If shown, a planetary nebula would be plotted to the right of the diagram&#x27;s upper right quadrant. A black hole emits no visible light of its own, and therefore would not appear on the diagram.

A classification system for neutron stars using Roman numerals has been proposed: type I for less massive neutron stars with low cooling rates, type II for more massive neutron stars with higher cooling rates, and a proposed type III for more massive neutron stars (possible exotic star candidates) with higher cooling rates. The more massive a neutron star is, the higher neutrino flux it carries. These neutrinos carry away so much heat energy that after only a few years the temperature of an isolated neutron star falls from the order of billions to only around a million Kelvin. This proposed neutron star classification system is not to be confused with the earlier Secchi spectral classes and the Yerkes luminosity classes.

==Replaced spectral classes==
Several spectral types, all previously used for non-standard stars in the mid-20th century, have been replaced during revisions of the stellar classification system. They may still be found in old editions of star catalogs: R and N have been subsumed into the new C class as C-R and C-N.

==Stellar classification, habitability, and the search for life==
While humans may eventually be able to colonize any kind of stellar habitat, this section will address the probability of life arising around other stars.

Stability, luminosity, and lifespan are all factors in stellar habitability. Humans know of only one star that hosts life, the G-class Sun, a star with an abundance of heavy elements and low variability in brightness. The Solar System is also unlike many stellar systems in that it only contains one star (see Habitability of binary star systems).

Working from these constraints and the problems of having an empirical sample set of only one, the range of stars that are predicted to be able to support life is limited by a few factors. Of the main-sequence star types, stars more massive than 1.5 times that of the Sun (spectral types O, B, and A) age too quickly for advanced life to develop (using Earth as a guideline). On the other extreme, dwarfs of less than half the mass of the Sun (spectral type M) are likely to tidally lock planets within their habitable zone, along with other problems (see Habitability of red dwarf systems). While there are many problems facing life on red dwarfs, many astronomers continue to model these systems due to their sheer numbers and longevity.

For these reasons NASA&#x27;s Kepler Mission is searching for habitable planets at nearby main-sequence stars that are less massive than spectral type A but more massive than type M—making the most probable stars to host life dwarf stars of types F, G, and K.

==See also==
* 
* , survey of stars

== Notes ==
==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==

* Libraries of stellar spectra by D. Montes, UCM
* Spectral Types for Hipparcos Catalogue Entries
* Stellar Spectral Classification by Richard O. Gray and Christopher J. Corbally
* Spectral models of stars by P. Coelho
*Stellar classification table</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="3" end="12" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="14" end="36" title="Stellar classification" label="stellar classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="62" end="66" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q752171" start="83" end="91" title="stellar spectrum" label="spectral"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="109" end="134" title="Electromagnetic radiation" label="Electromagnetic radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q165896" start="184" end="189" title="Prism (optics)" label="prism"/>
<link wikidata="Q653294" start="193" end="212" title="diffraction grating" label="diffraction grating"/>
<link wikidata="Q654182" start="220" end="228" title="spectrum" label="spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q113581936" start="244" end="251" title="Continuum (spectrum)" label="rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="280" end="293" title="spectral line" label="spectral line"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344" start="329" end="345" title="chemical element" label="chemical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="349" end="357" title="molecule" label="molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q6372" start="512" end="523" title="photosphere" label="photosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q190382" start="669" end="679" title="ionization" label="ionization"/>
<link wikidata="Q6251" start="1343" end="1344" title="W-type star" label="W"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153392" start="1358" end="1359" title="S-type star" label="S"/>
<link wikidata="Q130019" start="1376" end="1377" title="C-type star" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q368442" start="1390" end="1406" title="Compact object" label="stellar remnants"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1475" end="1476" title="Stellar classification#White dwarf classifications" label="D"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871" start="1487" end="1498" title="white dwarf" label="white dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q11878917" start="1510" end="1511" title="L dwarf" label="L"/>
<link wikidata="Q11702990" start="1525" end="1526" title="T dwarf" label="T"/>
<link wikidata="Q9283175" start="1543" end="1544" title="Y Dwarf" label="Y"/>
<link wikidata="Q101600" start="1555" end="1567" title="brown dwarfs" label="brown dwarfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q44559" start="1573" end="1583" title="Exoplanet" label="exoplanets"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="1607" end="1623" title="luminosity class" label="luminosity class"/>
<link wikidata="Q38918" start="1661" end="1675" title="Roman numerals" label="Roman numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q231982" start="1919" end="1929" title="hypergiant" label="hypergiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q193599" start="1968" end="1978" title="supergiant" label="supergiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5875" start="2025" end="2031" title="Giant star" label="giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q6227" start="2124" end="2132" title="subgiant" label="subgiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450" start="2171" end="2184" title="main-sequence" label="main-sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6220" start="2249" end="2257" title="subdwarf" label="subdwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871" start="2321" end="2332" title="white dwarf" label="white dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="2373" end="2376" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5864" start="3109" end="3134" title="Yellow dwarf star" label="&amp;quot;Yellow&amp;quot; dwarfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="3147" end="3150" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893" start="3162" end="3183" title="red dwarf" label="&amp;quot;red&amp;quot; dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q101600" start="3224" end="3247" title="brown dwarf" label="&amp;quot;brown&amp;quot; dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q948944" start="3718" end="3748" title="photometric system" label="stellar classification systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q129833" start="3762" end="3772" title="UBV photometric system" label="UBV system"/>
<link wikidata="Q271860" start="3787" end="3800" title="color index" label="color indices"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028919" start="3843" end="3858" title="Magnitude (astronomy)" label="color magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q230650" start="4194" end="4211" title="Annie Jump Cannon" label="Annie Jump Cannon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4288" end="4295" title="#History" label="History"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="4516" end="4517" title="kelvin" label="K"/>
<link wikidata="Q191062" start="4775" end="4783" title="mnemonic" label="mnemonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q29961325" start="5118" end="5133" title="Arabic numerals" label="Arabic numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661499" start="5333" end="5342" title="Mu Normae" label="Mu Normae"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="5370" end="5373" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6372" start="5472" end="5484" title="Photosphere" label="photospheric"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="5485" end="5496" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q854050" start="5521" end="5542" title="effective temperature" label="effective temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270143" start="5627" end="5654" title="Hertzsprung–Russell diagram" label="Hertzsprung–Russell diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q377898" start="5757" end="5769" title="Meghnad Saha" label="Meghnad Saha"/>
<link wikidata="Q234909" start="6017" end="6030" title="Cecilia Payne-Gaposchkin" label="Cecilia Payne"/>
<link wikidata="Q543398" start="6828" end="6849" title="William Wilson Morgan" label="William Wilson Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086095" start="6851" end="6867" title="Philip Childs Keenan" label="Philip C. Keenan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18709447" start="6873" end="6886" title="Edith Kellman" label="Edith Kellman"/>
<link wikidata="Q14310" start="6892" end="6910" title="Yerkes Observatory" label="Yerkes Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="6934" end="6945" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q105902" start="6950" end="6960" title="luminosity" label="luminosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="6996" end="7009" title="spectral line" label="spectral line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758384" start="7048" end="7063" title="surface gravity" label="surface gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="7450" end="7469" title="pressure broadening" label="pressure broadening"/>
<link wikidata="Q5875" start="7546" end="7556" title="giant star" label="giant star"/>
<link wikidata="Q244393" start="7582" end="7592" title="dwarf star" label="dwarf star"/>
<link wikidata="Q66491347" start="9224" end="9234" title="HD 93129" label="HD 93129 B"/>
<link wikidata="Q4640977" start="9416" end="9424" title="59 Cygni" label="59 Cygni"/>
<link wikidata="Q312416" start="9884" end="9897" title="Angelo Secchi" label="Angelo Secchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q38918" start="10214" end="10228" title="Roman numerals" label="Roman numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q156896" start="10445" end="10464" title="Edward C. Pickering" label="Edward C. Pickering"/>
<link wikidata="Q637936" start="10514" end="10541" title="Harvard College Observatory" label="Harvard College Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q111130" start="10619" end="10654" title="Draper Catalogue of Stellar Spectra" label="Draper Catalogue of Stellar Spectra"/>
<link wikidata="Q284180" start="10681" end="10699" title="Williamina Fleming" label="Williamina Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q553727" start="10890" end="10907" title="Harvard Computers" label="Harvard computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q284180" start="10920" end="10938" title="Williamina Fleming" label="Williamina Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q289010" start="12012" end="12025" title="Antonia Maury" label="Antonia Maury"/>
<link wikidata="Q230650" start="13062" end="13079" title="Annie Jump Cannon" label="Annie Jump Cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7211" start="14056" end="14065" title="taxonomy (general)" label="taxonomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707858" start="14076" end="14090" title="Type (biology)" label="type specimens"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="14132" end="14139" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6472" start="15355" end="15372" title="stellar evolution" label="stellar evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q477816" start="15450" end="15476" title="Kelvin–Helmholtz mechanism" label="Kelvin–Helmholtz mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450" start="15513" end="15531" title="main-sequence star" label="main-sequence star"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="15728" end="15731" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887426" start="15784" end="15799" title="geologic record" label="geologic record"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="15870" end="15884" title="nuclear fusion" label="nuclear fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="16113" end="16124" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q817157" start="16247" end="16265" title="solar neighborhood" label="solar neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142077" start="16296" end="16314" title="List of most massive stars" label="most massive stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="16525" end="16527" title="Helium" label="He"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="16594" end="16604" title="wavelength" label="wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="16941" end="16949" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="17064" end="17066" title="helium" label="He"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="17096" end="17098" title="silicon" label="Si"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="17103" end="17104" title="oxygen" label="O"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="17110" end="17111" title="nitrogen" label="N"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="17121" end="17122" title="carbon" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="17140" end="17146" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q653711" start="17206" end="17218" title="Balmer lines" label="Balmer lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q654396" start="17360" end="17372" title="stellar wind" label="stellar wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450" start="17556" end="17569" title="main sequence" label="main sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q76851296" start="17874" end="17887" title="S Monocerotis" label="S Monocerotis"/>
<link wikidata="Q135520" start="17896" end="17907" title="10 Lacertae" label="10 Lacertae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5886" start="18082" end="18101" title="OB star" label="O- and B-type stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6440" start="18321" end="18333" title="runaway star" label="runaway star"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="18428" end="18430" title="Helium" label="He"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="18726" end="18733" title="silicon" label="silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6440" start="19060" end="19074" title="OB association" label="OB association"/>
<link wikidata="Q272447" start="19109" end="19124" title="molecular cloud" label="molecular cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311038" start="19183" end="19193" title="spiral arm" label="spiral arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="19201" end="19210" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q8860" start="19258" end="19277" title="Orion constellation" label="constellation Orion"/>
<link wikidata="Q767432" start="19360" end="19385" title="B-type main-sequence star" label="B-type main-sequence star"/>
<link wikidata="Q193599" start="19496" end="19506" title="supergiant" label="supergiant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19522" end="19529" title="Be star" label="Be star"/>
<link wikidata="Q653711" start="19570" end="19582" title="Balmer lines" label="Balmer lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="19605" end="19613" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="19622" end="19647" title="electromagnetic radiation" label="electromagnetic radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613048" start="19648" end="19654" title="Hydrogen spectral series" label="series"/>
<link wikidata="Q654396" start="19771" end="19783" title="stellar wind" label="stellar wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079618" start="19842" end="19854" title="stellar mass" label="stellar mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6464" start="19870" end="19876" title="Stellar rotation" label="rotate"/>
<link wikidata="Q25352882" start="19922" end="19932" title="B(e) star" label="B[e] stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="20021" end="20035" title="emission lines" label="emission lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q932483" start="20064" end="20083" title="forbidden mechanism" label="forbidden mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="20160" end="20177" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668847" start="20208" end="20223" title="Upsilon Orionis" label="Upsilon Orionis"/>
<link wikidata="Q13070" start="20233" end="20240" title="Alnilam" label="Alnilam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608735" start="20250" end="20262" title="Chi2 Orionis" label="Chi2 Orionis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646397" start="20272" end="20280" title="9 Cephei" label="9 Cephei"/>
<link wikidata="Q13093" start="20289" end="20306" title="Eta Ursae Majoris" label="Eta Ursae Majoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q13232" start="20315" end="20326" title="Eta Aurigae" label="Eta Aurigae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716216" start="20336" end="20358" title="Omicron2 Canis Majoris" label="Omicron2 Canis Majoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416" start="20368" end="20385" title="Eta Canis Majoris" label="Eta Canis Majoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q12126" start="20395" end="20400" title="Rigel" label="Rigel"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="20591" end="20593" title="iron" label="Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="20598" end="20600" title="magnesium" label="Mg"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="20605" end="20607" title="silicon" label="Si"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="20648" end="20650" title="calcium" label="Ca"/>
<link wikidata="Q13099" start="20868" end="20887" title="Gamma Ursae Majoris" label="Gamma Ursae Majoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427" start="20897" end="20901" title="Vega" label="Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q14208" start="20911" end="20921" title="Eta Leonis" label="Eta Leonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5010398" start="20931" end="20939" title="HD 21389" label="HD 21389"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409" start="20948" end="20956" title="Sirius" label="Sirius A"/>
<link wikidata="Q12179" start="20966" end="20971" title="Deneb" label="Deneb"/>
<link wikidata="Q13169" start="20981" end="20990" title="Fomalhaut" label="Fomalhaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="21087" end="21089" title="calcium" label="Ca"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="21110" end="21112" title="iron" label="Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="21116" end="21118" title="chromium" label="Cr"/>
<link wikidata="Q13034" start="21387" end="21396" title="Procyon A" label="Procyon A"/>
<link wikidata="Q14207" start="21443" end="21454" title="Zeta Leonis" label="Zeta Leonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q693059" start="21464" end="21477" title="Alpha Leporis" label="Alpha Leporis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076199" start="21486" end="21502" title="37 Ursae Majoris" label="37 Ursae Majoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351107" start="21512" end="21528" title="78 Ursae Majoris" label="78 Ursae Majoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326919" start="21537" end="21549" title="Iota Piscium" label="Iota Piscium"/>
<link wikidata="Q14201" start="21558" end="21571" title="Beta Virginis" label="Beta Virginis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071735" start="21581" end="21589" title="HD 10647" label="HD 10647"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="21634" end="21637" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="21704" end="21706" title="calcium" label="Ca"/>
<link wikidata="Q55076544" start="21894" end="21896" title="cyanide" label="CN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142197" start="22264" end="22281" title="yellow supergiant" label="yellow supergiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q44409" start="22318" end="22340" title="Beta Canum Venaticorum" label="Beta Canum Venaticorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q14020" start="22350" end="22360" title="Eta Boötis" label="Eta Boötis"/>
<link wikidata="Q13243" start="22370" end="22382" title="Beta Aquarii" label="Beta Aquarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="22391" end="22394" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370413" start="22403" end="22414" title="Kappa1 Ceti" label="Kappa1 Ceti"/>
<link wikidata="Q89716591" start="22424" end="22435" title="Mu Herculis" label="Mu Herculis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743655" start="22445" end="22453" title="9 Pegasi" label="9 Pegasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327524" start="22462" end="22478" title="61 Ursae Majoris" label="61 Ursae Majoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q78181697" start="22488" end="22500" title="Beta Aquilae" label="Beta Aquilae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526773" start="22512" end="22527" title="Kappa Geminorum" label="Kappa Geminorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q14198" start="22540" end="22556" title="Epsilon Virginis" label="Epsilon Virginis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416569" start="22566" end="22583" title="Epsilon Geminorum" label="Epsilon Geminorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q231982" start="22800" end="22810" title="hypergiant" label="hypergiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q269233" start="22817" end="22826" title="RW Cephei" label="RW Cephei"/>
<link wikidata="Q5875" start="22831" end="22837" title="Giant star" label="giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q193599" start="22842" end="22852" title="supergiant" label="supergiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12985" start="22863" end="22871" title="Arcturus" label="Arcturus"/>
<link wikidata="Q863936" start="22881" end="22894" title="K-type main-sequence star" label="orange dwarfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q12176" start="22901" end="22915" title="Alpha Centauri" label="Alpha Centauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="23042" end="23044" title="manganese" label="Mn"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="23048" end="23050" title="iron" label="Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="23054" end="23056" title="silicon" label="Si"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985790" start="23091" end="23105" title="titanium monoxide" label="titanium oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q311489" start="23520" end="23534" title="Sigma Draconis" label="Sigma Draconis"/>
<link wikidata="Q13028" start="23545" end="23551" title="Pollux (star)" label="Pollux"/>
<link wikidata="Q13328" start="23562" end="23575" title="Epsilon Cygni" label="Epsilon Cygni"/>
<link wikidata="Q194394" start="23584" end="23599" title="Epsilon Eridani" label="Epsilon Eridani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520858" start="23610" end="23624" title="Kappa Ophiuchi" label="Kappa Ophiuchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545896" start="23635" end="23645" title="Rho Boötis" label="Rho Boötis"/>
<link wikidata="Q249302" start="23654" end="23664" title="61 Cygni" label="61 Cygni A"/>
<link wikidata="Q14246" start="23675" end="23689" title="Gamma Draconis" label="Gamma Draconis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893" start="23867" end="23876" title="red dwarf" label="red dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143187" start="24054" end="24067" title="Lacaille 8760" label="Lacaille 8760"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="24085" end="24094" title="stellar magnitude" label="magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q183349" start="24413" end="24429" title="VY Canis Majoris" label="VY Canis Majoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q603657" start="24431" end="24440" title="VV Cephei" label="VV Cephei"/>
<link wikidata="Q12166" start="24442" end="24449" title="Antares" label="Antares"/>
<link wikidata="Q12124" start="24455" end="24465" title="Betelgeuse" label="Betelgeuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q101600" start="24500" end="24511" title="brown dwarf" label="brown dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q50690" start="24621" end="24626" title="oxide" label="oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="24627" end="24635" title="molecule" label="molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q76299" start="24645" end="24661" title="visible spectrum" label="visible spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985790" start="24674" end="24677" title="Titanium(II) oxide" label="TiO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966236" start="24853" end="24871" title="Vanadium(II) oxide" label="Vanadium(II) oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q13043" start="24936" end="24951" title="Beta Andromedae" label="Beta Andromedae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095096" start="24962" end="24972" title="Chi Pegasi" label="Chi Pegasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12124" start="24989" end="24999" title="Betelgeuse" label="Betelgeuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q13781" start="25009" end="25018" title="Mu Cephei" label="Mu Cephei"/>
<link wikidata="Q14277" start="25026" end="25034" title="William Herschel" label="Herschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6251" start="25408" end="25423" title="Wolf–Rayet star" label="Wolf–Rayet star"/>
<link wikidata="Q654396" start="25705" end="25717" title="stellar wind" label="stellar wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893" start="27971" end="27980" title="red dwarf" label="red dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q101600" start="27986" end="27997" title="brown dwarf" label="brown dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q76299" start="28026" end="28042" title="visible spectrum" label="visible spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q101600" start="28045" end="28056" title="Brown dwarf" label="Brown dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057093" start="28085" end="28100" title="hydrogen fusion" label="hydrogen fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q854050" start="28474" end="28495" title="effective temperature" label="effective temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q105902" start="28500" end="28510" title="luminosity" label="luminosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q854050" start="28574" end="28585" title="effective temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q105902" start="28589" end="28599" title="luminosity" label="luminosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132741" start="28887" end="28897" title="substellar object" label="substellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="28986" end="28994" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q8104" start="29002" end="29012" title="atmosphere" label="atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q106520" start="29037" end="29050" title="metal hydride" label="metal hydride"/>
<link wikidata="Q19557" start="29056" end="29068" title="alkali metal" label="alkali metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985790" start="29148" end="29151" title="Titanium monoxide" label="TiO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966236" start="29157" end="29159" title="Vanadium monoxide" label="VO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821405" start="29311" end="29328" title="L-type supergiant" label="L-type supergiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q855198" start="29389" end="29405" title="V838 Monocerotis" label="V838 Monocerotis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821405" start="29433" end="29450" title="luminous red nova" label="luminous red nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q101600" start="29503" end="29514" title="brown dwarf" label="brown dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="29594" end="29602" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="29604" end="29611" title="Methane" label="Methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q505781" start="29667" end="29675" title="protoplanetary disk" label="proplyds"/>
<link wikidata="Q42372" start="29716" end="29722" title="nebula" label="nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q318" start="29817" end="29823" title="galaxy" label="galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q518730" start="29842" end="29861" title="order of magnitude" label="orders of magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q204903" start="30010" end="30019" title="protostar" label="protostar"/>
<link wikidata="Q693552" start="30577" end="30612" title="Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer" label="Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q175821" start="30846" end="30857" title="micrometers" label="micrometers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="30933" end="30940" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="31198" end="31203" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="31208" end="31215" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237059" start="31351" end="31365" title="WISE 1828+2650" label="WISE 1828+2650"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="31448" end="31449" title="kelvin" label="K"/>
<link wikidata="Q165074" start="31486" end="31494" title="Parallax" label="Parallax"/>
<link wikidata="Q16664406" start="31644" end="31658" title="WISE 0855−0714" label="WISE 0855−0714"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="31783" end="31790" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q102296" start="31954" end="31963" title="deuterium" label="deuterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867" start="32000" end="32003" title="International Astronomical Union" label="IAU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758384" start="32109" end="32126" title="Surface gravity" label="surface gravities"/>
<link wikidata="Q6220" start="32823" end="32831" title="subdwarf" label="subdwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q217030" start="32894" end="32905" title="metallicity" label="metallicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q631379" start="32956" end="32960" title="Galactic halo" label="halo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784279" start="32975" end="32979" title="Thin disk" label="disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="33216" end="33229" title="near-infrared" label="near-infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q222481" start="33353" end="33376" title="2MASS J11263991−5003550" label="2MASS J11263991−5003550"/>
<link wikidata="Q336225" start="33556" end="33568" title="Triple-alpha process" label="triple-alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q277209" start="33635" end="33644" title="s-process" label="s-process"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770822" start="34645" end="34647" title="Carbon-13" label="13"/>
<link wikidata="Q55076544" start="34647" end="34649" title="cyanide" label="CN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058364" start="34674" end="34676" title="Carbon-12" label="12"/>
<link wikidata="Q55076544" start="34676" end="34678" title="cyanide" label="CN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770822" start="35110" end="35113" title="Carbon-13" label="13C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436016" start="35123" end="35136" title="Population II" label="Population II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333711" start="35242" end="35244" title="Methylidyne radical" label="CH"/>
<link wikidata="Q866218" start="35249" end="35251" title="diatomic carbon" label="C2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038" start="35402" end="35405" title="Zirconium monoxide" label="ZrO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882278" start="35406" end="35422" title="spectral bands" label="absorption bands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985790" start="35440" end="35443" title="Titanium monoxide" label="TiO"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="35523" end="35529" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q866218" start="35547" end="35549" title="Diatomic carbon" label="C2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038" start="35594" end="35603" title="zirconium" label="zirconium"/>
<link wikidata="Q277209" start="35639" end="35648" title="s-process" label="s-process"/>
<link wikidata="Q50089" start="35783" end="35806" title="asymptotic giant branch" label="asymptotic-giant-branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071564" start="36123" end="36132" title="Chi Cygni" label="Chi Cygni"/>
<link wikidata="Q716" start="36593" end="36601" title="titanium" label="titanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q130019" start="37081" end="37092" title="carbon star" label="carbon star"/>
<link wikidata="Q50089" start="37101" end="37124" title="asymptotic giant branch" label="asymptotic giant branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q51368" start="37178" end="37188" title="Electron-degenerate matter" label="Degenerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="37286" end="37300" title="nuclear fusion" label="nuclear fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="37668" end="37676" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="37745" end="37758" title="spectral line" label="spectral line"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="37770" end="37776" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344455" start="37823" end="37827" title="spectroscopic notation" label="He I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344455" start="37907" end="37912" title="spectroscopic notation" label="He II"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="37939" end="37945" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q217030" start="38019" end="38024" title="metal (astronomy)" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q854050" start="38484" end="38513" title="effective temperature" label="effective surface temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="38527" end="38533" title="kelvin" label="kelvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q230650" start="39866" end="39872" title="Annie Jump Cannon" label="Cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q111130" start="39887" end="39909" title="Henry Draper Catalogue" label="Henry Draper Catalogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q13632" start="40032" end="40048" title="planetary nebula" label="planetary nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q6458" start="40127" end="40131" title="nova" label="nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871" start="40251" end="40262" title="white dwarf" label="white dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q13632" start="40689" end="40705" title="Planetary nebula" label="Planetary nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126" start="41392" end="41400" title="neutrino" label="neutrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q686876" start="42175" end="42183" title="space colonization" label="colonize"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="42514" end="42526" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q206717" start="42547" end="42562" title="planetary system" label="stellar systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656470" start="42602" end="42637" title="Habitability of binary star systems" label="Habitability of binary star systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036619" start="43197" end="43230" title="Habitability of red dwarf systems" label="Habitability of red dwarf systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q47272" start="43412" end="43426" title="Kepler Mission" label="Kepler Mission"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28928" wikidata="Q231650" url="?curid=28928" title="Sinope">
<text>Sinope may refer to:
*Sinop, Turkey, a city on the Black Sea, historically known as Sinope
** Battle of Sinop, 1853 naval battle in the Sinop port
*Sinop Province
*Sinope, Leicestershire, a hamlet in the Midlands of England
*Sinope (mythology), in Greek mythology, daughter of Asopus
*Sinope (moon), a moon of the planet Jupiter
*&quot;Sinope&quot; (moth), a moth genus
*Sinope Gospels, fragment of a 6th-century illuminated manuscript

== History ==
* Siege of Sinope, a battle during the late history of the Byzantine Empire
* Empire of Trebizond, the territory for which the above siege was fought

==See also==
* Sinop (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q231650" start="0" end="6" title="Sinope" label="Sinope"/>
<link wikidata="Q599416" start="22" end="35" title="Sinop, Turkey" label="Sinop, Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q427958" start="94" end="109" title="Battle of Sinop" label="Battle of Sinop"/>
<link wikidata="Q134413" start="148" end="162" title="Sinop Province" label="Sinop Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q7296551" start="164" end="186" title="Sinope, Leicestershire" label="Sinope, Leicestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539539" start="225" end="243" title="Sinope (mythology)" label="Sinope (mythology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17433" start="285" end="298" title="Sinope (moon)" label="Sinope (moon)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7524928" start="330" end="355" title="Sinope (moth)" label="&amp;quot;Sinope&amp;quot; (moth)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106292" start="371" end="385" title="Sinope Gospels" label="Sinope Gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q6130126" start="453" end="468" title="Siege of Sinope" label="Siege of Sinope"/>
<link wikidata="Q178913" start="529" end="548" title="Empire of Trebizond" label="Empire of Trebizond"/>
<link wikidata="Q230505" start="617" end="639" title="Sinop (disambiguation)" label="Sinop (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28929" wikidata="Q229335" url="?curid=28929" title="Seven Sisters">
<text>Seven Sisters may refer to:
* [[Pleiades]], or Seven Sisters, a star cluster named for [[Pleiades (Greek mythology)]], the seven sisters who are companions of Artemis in Greek mythology

==Arts and entertainment==
===Music===
* &quot;Seven Sisters&quot; (Beta Radio album), 2010
* &quot;Seven Sisters&quot; (Meja album), 1998
* &quot;Seven Sisters&quot;, an instrumental by Tori Amos from &quot;Night of Hunters&quot;, 2011
* &quot;Seven Sisters&quot;, a song by MewithoutYou from &quot;Catch for Us the Foxes&quot;, 2004
* &quot;Seven Sisters&quot;, a song by the Sword from &quot;Apocryphon&quot;, 2012
* &quot;The Seven Sisters&quot;, a song by Celldweller from &quot;Wish Upon a Blackstar&quot;, 2012
* &quot;The Seven Sisters&quot;, a song by Rainer Maria from &quot;A Better Version of Me&quot;, 2001

===Films===
* &quot;The Seven Sisters&quot; (film), a 1915 American silent romantic comedy
* &quot;Seven Sisters&quot; (film), or &quot;What Happened to Monday&quot;, a 2017 dystopian science-fiction film

===Books and plays===
* &quot;The Seven Sisters&quot; (musical), an 1860 musical
* &quot;The Seven Sisters&quot;, a 1975 book by Anthony Sampson about the Seven Sisters (oil companies)
* &quot;The Seven Sisters&quot; (novel), 1992 novel by Margaret Drabble
* &quot;The Seven Sisters&quot;, 2014–2023 book series by Lucinda Riley

===Theatre===
*Seven Sisters Group, a 1990 British performance company

===Other media===
* Seven sisters (studios), the seven original major movie studios
* Seven Sisters (magazines), a group of American women&#x27;s magazines
* Seven Sisters (&quot;Forgotten Realms&quot;), fictional characters from the &quot;Forgotten Realms&quot; role-playing game
* The Seven Sisters (role-playing game supplement)

==Biology==
*Seven Sisters Oak, largest southern live oak registered in the U.S.
* Jungle babbler, a type of bird known as seven sisters in northern India
* &quot;Crinum americanum&quot;, a plant commonly known as seven sisters
* &quot;Sterculia monosperma&quot;, a type of nut from Southern China known as seven sisters&#x27; fruit

==Organizations==
* Big Oil, various lists of seven companies said to dominate the oil industry at various times
* Seven Sisters (colleges), the name given to seven US liberal arts colleges that are historically women&#x27;s colleges
* Seven Sisters (law firms), seven Canadian law firms

==Places==
===Australia===
* Seven Sisters (Queensland), a group of small mountains on the Atherton Tableland in Australia

===Continental Europe===
* Seven Sisters (Moscow), a group of skyscrapers in Russia
* Seven Sisters Waterfall (Norway) , Geirangerfjord
* De syv søstre (Seven Sisters), a mountain formation in Helgeland, Norway

===Ireland===
* Seven Sisters, Donegal, a mountain chain in County Donegal, Ireland

===North America===
* Seven Sisters (Massachusetts), a group of ridgeline knobs in the Holyoke Range of Western Massachusetts, US
* Seven Sisters, Baja California, seven surfing point breaks in Baja California, Mexico
* Seven Sisters Falls, Manitoba, a community in Manitoba, Canada
* Seven Sisters Mountain, Alberta, Canada
* Seven Sisters Peaks, British Columbia, Canada
* Seven Sisters, Texas, US

===United Kingdom===
====England====
* Seven Sisters, London
**Seven Sisters station, a rail and Tube station
**Seven Sisters Road, North London
* Seven Sisters (Quantock Hills), a prominent Somerset landmark 
* Seven Sisters Road, St Lawrence, Isle of Wight
*Seven Sisters, Sussex, a group of chalk cliffs
* Seven Sisters Rocks, Symonds Yat, Herefordshire

====Wales====
* Seven Sisters, Neath Port Talbot, a village
** Seven Sisters (electoral ward), an electoral ward, Neath Port Talbot

===Hong Kong===
* Tsat Tsz Mui (Seven Sisters), an area and road in Hong Kong

===India===
* Seven Sister States, a region in northeastern India

==Other uses==
* The Seven Sisters songline, a creation (Dreamtime) story in Aboriginal Australian mythology,
**linked to Australian Aboriginal astronomy
* Seven Sisters of American Protestantism, mainline Protestant denominations
* &quot;Seven Sisters&quot; (&quot;Sette Sorelle&quot;), most successful Italian Serie A football clubs: Juventus, Milan, Inter, Roma, Lazio, Napoli (replacing Parma), and Fiorentina

==See also==
*Pleiades in folklore and literature, often termed the Seven Sisters</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q229335" start="0" end="13" title="Seven Sisters" label="Seven Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q229335" start="30" end="42" title="Seven Sisters" label="[[Pleiades]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q229335" start="47" end="60" title="Seven Sisters" label="Seven Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q229335" start="87" end="117" title="Seven Sisters" label="[[Pleiades (Greek mythology)]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q17032498" start="228" end="272" title="Seven Sisters (Beta Radio album)" label="&amp;quot;Seven Sisters&amp;quot; (Beta Radio album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457423" start="281" end="319" title="Seven Sisters (Meja album)" label="&amp;quot;Seven Sisters&amp;quot; (Meja album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640632" start="395" end="411" title="Night of Hunters" label="Night of Hunters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051696" start="487" end="509" title="Catch for Us the Foxes" label="Catch for Us the Foxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q76810" start="582" end="592" title="Apocryphon (album)" label="Apocryphon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027547" start="671" end="692" title="Wish Upon a Blackstar" label="Wish Upon a Blackstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4655444" start="772" end="794" title="A Better Version of Me" label="A Better Version of Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q3989214" start="822" end="858" title="The Seven Sisters (film)" label="&amp;quot;The Seven Sisters&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20814900" start="901" end="933" title="Seven Sisters (film)" label="&amp;quot;Seven Sisters&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18393751" start="1038" end="1077" title="The Seven Sisters (musical)" label="&amp;quot;The Seven Sisters&amp;quot; (musical)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330390" start="1169" end="1198" title="Seven Sisters (oil companies)" label="Seven Sisters (oil companies)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25217848" start="1201" end="1238" title="The Seven Sisters (novel)" label="&amp;quot;The Seven Sisters&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6535236" start="1329" end="1342" title="Lucinda Riley" label="Lucinda Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457429" start="1359" end="1378" title="Seven Sisters Group" label="Seven Sisters Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537117" start="1436" end="1459" title="Seven sisters (studios)" label="Seven sisters (studios)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457427" start="1502" end="1527" title="Seven Sisters (magazines)" label="Seven Sisters (magazines)"/>
<link wikidata="Q853499" start="1574" end="1618" title="Seven Sisters (Forgotten Realms)" label="Seven Sisters (&amp;quot;Forgotten Realms&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q127257541" start="1699" end="1747" title="The Seven Sisters (role-playing game supplement)" label="The Seven Sisters (role-playing game supplement)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457431" start="1762" end="1779" title="Seven Sisters Oak" label="Seven Sisters Oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q62098182" start="1832" end="1846" title="Jungle babbler" label="Jungle babbler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185769" start="1912" end="1929" title="Crinum americanum" label="Crinum americanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923879" start="1985" end="2005" title="Sterculia monosperma" label="Sterculia monosperma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330390" start="2103" end="2110" title="Big Oil" label="Big Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886223" start="2198" end="2222" title="Seven Sisters (colleges)" label="Seven Sisters (colleges)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457425" start="2319" end="2344" title="Seven Sisters (law firms)" label="Seven Sisters (law firms)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457424" start="2401" end="2427" title="Seven Sisters (Queensland)" label="Seven Sisters (Queensland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q521935" start="2523" end="2545" title="Seven Sisters (Moscow)" label="Seven Sisters (Moscow)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2582" end="2615" title="Seven Sisters Waterfall (Norway) " label="Seven Sisters Waterfall (Norway) "/>
<link wikidata="Q1293127" start="2634" end="2647" title="De syv søstre" label="De syv søstre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457419" start="2724" end="2746" title="Seven Sisters, Donegal" label="Seven Sisters, Donegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480795" start="2815" end="2844" title="Seven Sisters (Massachusetts)" label="Seven Sisters (Massachusetts)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457418" start="2925" end="2955" title="Seven Sisters, Baja California" label="Seven Sisters, Baja California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457430" start="3013" end="3042" title="Seven Sisters Falls, Manitoba" label="Seven Sisters Falls, Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q22565535" start="3078" end="3100" title="Seven Sisters Mountain" label="Seven Sisters Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q85800491" start="3120" end="3139" title="Seven Sisters Peaks" label="Seven Sisters Peaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q131152374" start="3168" end="3181" title="Seven Sisters, Texas" label="Seven Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639390" start="3233" end="3254" title="Seven Sisters, London" label="Seven Sisters, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q109037583" start="3257" end="3278" title="Seven Sisters station" label="Seven Sisters station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298343" start="3306" end="3324" title="Seven Sisters Road" label="Seven Sisters Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q115804554" start="3341" end="3371" title="Seven Sisters (Quantock Hills)" label="Seven Sisters (Quantock Hills)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7593954" start="3426" end="3452" title="St Lawrence, Isle of Wight" label="St Lawrence, Isle of Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754640" start="3454" end="3475" title="Seven Sisters, Sussex" label="Seven Sisters, Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q990105" start="3524" end="3535" title="Symonds Yat" label="Symonds Yat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457421" start="3568" end="3600" title="Seven Sisters, Neath Port Talbot" label="Seven Sisters, Neath Port Talbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q15276517" start="3615" end="3645" title="Seven Sisters (electoral ward)" label="Seven Sisters (electoral ward)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7849433" start="3703" end="3715" title="Tsat Tsz Mui" label="Tsat Tsz Mui"/>
<link wikidata="Q863038" start="3778" end="3797" title="Seven Sister States" label="Seven Sister States"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3908" end="3939" title="Pleiades in folklore and literature#Australia" label="Aboriginal Australian mythology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3953" end="3984" title="Australian Aboriginal astronomy#Pleiades" label="Australian Aboriginal astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4028" end="4047" title="mainline Protestant#Denominations" label="mainline Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q15804" start="4143" end="4150" title="Serie A" label="Serie A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422" start="4167" end="4175" title="Juventus" label="Juventus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543" start="4177" end="4182" title="AC Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q631" start="4184" end="4189" title="FC Internazionale Milano" label="Inter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739" start="4191" end="4195" title="AS Roma" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609" start="4197" end="4202" title="SS Lazio" label="Lazio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641" start="4204" end="4210" title="SSC Napoli" label="Napoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2693" start="4222" end="4227" title="Parma Calcio 1913" label="Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052" start="4234" end="4244" title="ACF Fiorentina" label="Fiorentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437924" start="4260" end="4295" title="Pleiades in folklore and literature" label="Pleiades in folklore and literature"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28930" wikidata="Q584905" url="?curid=28930" title="SN 1987A">
<text>SN 1987A was a type II supernova in the Large Magellanic Cloud, a dwarf satellite galaxy of the Milky Way. It occurred approximately from Earth and was the closest observed supernova since Kepler&#x27;s Supernova in 1604. Light and neutrinos from the explosion reached Earth on February 23, 1987, and it was designated &quot;SN 1987A&quot; as the first supernova discovered that year. Its brightness peaked in May of that year, with an apparent magnitude of about 3, brighter than the constellation&#x27;s brightest star, Alpha Doradus.

It was the first supernova that modern astronomers were able to study in great detail, and its observations have provided much insight into core-collapse supernovae. SN 1987A provided the first opportunity to confirm by direct observation the radioactive source of the energy for visible light emissions, by detecting predicted gamma-ray line radiation from two of its abundant radioactive nuclei. This proved the radioactive nature of the long-duration post-explosion glow of supernovae.

In 2019, indirect evidence for the presence of a collapsed neutron star within the remnants of SN 1987A was discovered using the Atacama Large Millimeter Array telescope. Further evidence was subsequently uncovered in 2021 through observations conducted by the Chandra and NuSTAR X-ray telescopes.

==Discovery==
SN 1987A was discovered independently by Ian Shelton and Oscar Duhalde at the Las Campanas Observatory in Chile on February 24, 1987, and within the same 24 hours by Albert Jones in New Zealand.

Later investigations found photographs showing the supernova brightening rapidly early on February 23. On March 4–12, 1987, it was observed from space by Astron, the largest ultraviolet space telescope of that time.

== Progenitor ==

Four days after the event was recorded, the progenitor star was tentatively identified as (), a blue supergiant.
After the supernova faded, that identification was definitively confirmed, as had disappeared. The possibility of a blue supergiant producing a supernova was considered surprising, and the confirmation led to further research which identified an earlier supernova with a blue supergiant progenitor.

Some models of SN 1987A&#x27;s progenitor attributed the blue color largely to its chemical composition rather than its evolutionary stage, particularly the low levels of heavy elements. There was some speculation that the star might have merged with a companion star before the supernova. However, it is now widely understood that blue supergiants are natural progenitors of some supernovae, although there is still speculation that the evolution of such stars could require mass loss involving a binary companion.

==Neutrino emissions==
Approximately two to three hours before the visible light from SN 1987A reached Earth, a burst of neutrinos was observed at three neutrino observatories. This was likely due to neutrino emission which occurs simultaneously with core collapse, but before visible light is emitted as the shock wave reaches the stellar surface. At 7:35 UT, 12 antineutrinos were detected by Kamiokande II, 8 by IMB, and 5 by Baksan in a burst lasting less than 13 seconds. Approximately three hours earlier, the Mont Blanc liquid scintillator detected a five-neutrino burst, but this is generally believed to not be associated with SN 1987A.

The Kamiokande II detection, which at 12 neutrinos had the largest sample population, showed the neutrinos arriving in two distinct pulses. The first pulse at 07:35:35 comprised 9 neutrinos over a period of 1.915 seconds. A second pulse of three neutrinos arrived during a 3.220-second interval from 9.219 to 12.439 seconds after the beginning of the first pulse.

Although only 25 neutrinos were detected during the event, it was a significant increase from the previously observed background level. This was the first time neutrinos known to be emitted from a supernova had been observed directly, which marked the beginning of neutrino astronomy. The observations were consistent with theoretical supernova models in which 99% of the energy of the collapse is radiated away in the form of neutrinos. The observations are also consistent with the models&#x27; estimates of a total neutrino count of 1058 with a total energy of 1046 joules, i.e. a mean value of some dozens of MeV per neutrino. Billions of neutrinos passed through a square centimeter on Earth.

The neutrino measurements allowed upper bounds on neutrino mass and charge, as well as the number of flavors of neutrinos and other properties. For example, the data show that the rest mass of the electron neutrino is &lt; 16 eV/c2 at 95% confidence, which is 30,000 times smaller than the mass of an electron. The data suggest that the total number of neutrino flavors is at most 8 but other observations and experiments give tighter estimates. Many of these results have since been confirmed or tightened by other neutrino experiments such as more careful analysis of solar neutrinos and atmospheric neutrinos as well as experiments with artificial neutrino sources.

==Neutron star==
SN 1987A appears to be a core-collapse supernova, which should result in a neutron star given the size of the original star. The neutrino data indicate that a compact object did form at the star&#x27;s core, and astronomers immediately began searching for the collapsed core. The Hubble Space Telescope took images of the supernova regularly from August 1990 without a clear detection of a neutron star.

A number of possibilities for the &quot;missing&quot; neutron star were considered. First, that the neutron star may be obscured by surrounding dense dust clouds. Second, that a pulsar was formed, but with either an unusually large or small magnetic field. Third, that large amounts of material fell back on the neutron star, collapsing it further into a black hole. Neutron stars and black holes often give off light as material falls onto them. If there is a compact object in the supernova remnant, but no material to fall onto it, it would be too dim for detection. A fourth hypothesis is that the collapsed core became a quark star.

In 2019, evidence was presented for a neutron star inside one of the brightest dust clumps, close to the expected position of the supernova remnant. In 2021, further evidence was presented of hard X-ray emissions from SN 1987A originating in the pulsar wind nebula. The latter result is supported by a three-dimensional magnetohydrodynamic model, which describes the evolution of SN 1987A from the SN event to the present, and reconstructs the ambient environment, predicting the absorbing power of the dense stellar material around the pulsar.

In 2024, researchers using the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) identified distinctive emission lines of ionized argon within the central region of the Supernova 1987A remnants. These emission lines, discernible only near the remnant&#x27;s core, were analyzed using photoionization models. The models indicate that the observed line ratios and velocities can be attributed to ionizing radiation originating from a neutron star illuminating gas from the inner regions of the exploded star.

==Light curve==
Much of the light curve, or graph of luminosity as a function of time, after the explosion of a type II supernova such as SN 1987A is produced by the energy from radioactive decay. Although the luminous emission consists of optical photons, it is the radioactive power absorbed that keeps the remnant hot enough to radiate light. Without the radioactive heat, it would dim quickly. The radioactive decay of 56Ni through its daughters 56Co to 56Fe produces gamma-ray photons that are absorbed and dominate the heating and thus the luminosity of the ejecta at intermediate times (several weeks) to late times (several months). Energy for the peak of the light curve of SN1987A was provided by the decay of 56Ni to 56Co (half life of 6 days) while energy for the later light curve in particular fit very closely with the 77.3-day half-life of 56Co decaying to 56Fe. Later measurements by space gamma-ray telescopes of the small fraction of the 56Co and 57Co gamma rays that escaped the SN1987A remnant without absorption confirmed earlier predictions that those two radioactive nuclei were the power source.

Because the 56Co in SN1987A has now completely decayed, it no longer supports the luminosity of the SN 1987A ejecta. That is currently powered by the radioactive decay of 44Ti, with a half life of about 60 years but which increases with its ionization state as the decay is purely through electron capture. With this change, X-rays produced by the ring interactions of the ejecta began to contribute significantly to the total light curve. This was noticed by the Hubble Space Telescope as a steady increase in luminosity 10,000 days after the event in the blue and red spectral bands. X-ray lines 44Ti observed by the INTEGRAL space X-ray telescope showed that the total mass of radioactive 44Ti synthesized during the explosion was .

Observations of the radioactive power from their decays in the 1987A light curve have measured accurate total masses of the 56Ni, 57Ni, and 44Ti created in the explosion, which agree with the masses measured by gamma-ray line space telescopes and provides nucleosynthesis constraints on the computed supernova model.

==Interaction with circumstellar material==
The three bright rings around SN 1987A that were visible after a few months in images by the Hubble Space Telescope are material from the stellar wind of the progenitor. These rings were ionized by the ultraviolet flash from the supernova explosion, and consequently began emitting in various emission lines. These rings did not &quot;turn on&quot; until several months after the supernova and the process can be very accurately studied through spectroscopy. The rings are large enough that their angular size can be measured accurately: the inner ring is 0.808 arcseconds in radius. The time light traveled to light up the inner ring gives its radius of 0.66 (ly) light years. Using this as the base of a right angle triangle and the angular size as seen from the Earth for the local angle, one can use basic trigonometry to calculate the distance to SN 1987A, which is about 168,000 light-years. The material from the explosion is catching up with the material expelled during both its red and blue supergiant phases and heating it, so we observe ring structures about the star.

Around 2001, the expanding (&gt;7,000 km/s) supernova ejecta collided with the inner ring. This caused its heating and the generation of x-rays—the x-ray flux from the ring increased by a factor of three between 2001 and 2009. A part of the x-ray radiation, which is absorbed by the dense ejecta close to the center, is responsible for a comparable increase in the optical flux from the supernova remnant in 2001–2009. This increase of the brightness of the remnant reversed the trend observed before 2001, when the optical flux was decreasing due to the decaying of 44Ti isotope.

A study reported in June 2015, using images from the Hubble Space Telescope and the Very Large Telescope taken between 1994 and 2014, shows that the emissions from the clumps of matter making up the rings are fading as the clumps are destroyed by the shock wave. It is predicted the ring would fade away between 2020 and 2030. These findings are also supported by the results of a three-dimensional hydrodynamic model which describes the interaction of the blast wave with the circumstellar nebula.
The model also shows that X-ray emission from ejecta heated up by the shock will be dominant very soon, after which the ring would fade away. As the shock wave passes the circumstellar ring it will trace the history of mass loss of the supernova&#x27;s progenitor and provide useful information for discriminating among various models for the progenitor of SN 1987A.

In 2018, radio observations from the interaction between the circumstellar ring of dust and the shockwave confirmed that the shockwave has now left the circumstellar material. It also shows that the speed of the shockwave, which slowed down to 2,300 km/s while interacting with the dust in the ring, has now re-accelerated to 3,600 km/s.

==Condensation of warm dust in the ejecta==
Soon after the SN 1987A outburst, three major groups embarked in a photometric monitoring of the supernova: the South African Astronomical Observatory (SAAO), the Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory (CTIO), and the European Southern Observatory (ESO). In particular, the ESO team reported an infrared excess which became apparent beginning less than one month after the explosion (March 11, 1987). Three possible interpretations for it were discussed in this work: the infrared echo hypothesis was discarded, and thermal emission from dust that could have condensed in the ejecta was favoured (in which case the estimated temperature at that epoch was ~ 1250 K, and the dust mass was approximately ). The possibility that the IR excess could be produced by optically thick free-free emission seemed unlikely because the luminosity in UV photons needed to keep the envelope ionized was much larger than what was available, but it was not ruled out in view of the eventuality of electron scattering, which had not been considered.

However, none of these three groups had sufficiently convincing proofs to claim for a dusty ejecta on the basis of an IR excess alone.

An independent Australian team advanced several arguments in favour of an echo interpretation. This seemingly straightforward interpretation of the nature of the IR emission was challenged by the ESO group and definitively ruled out after presenting optical evidence for the presence of dust in the SN ejecta.
To discriminate between the two interpretations, they considered the implication of the presence of an echoing dust cloud on the optical light curve, and on the existence of diffuse optical emission around the SN. They concluded that the expected optical echo from the cloud should be resolvable, and could be very bright with an integrated visual brightness of magnitude 10.3 around day 650. However, further optical observations, as expressed in SN light curve, showed no inflection in the light curve at the predicted level. Finally, the ESO team presented a convincing clumpy model for dust condensation in the ejecta.

Although it had been thought more than 50 years ago that dust could form in the ejecta of a core-collapse supernova, which in particular could explain the origin of the dust seen in young galaxies, that was the first time that such a condensation was observed. If SN 1987A is a typical representative of its class then the derived mass of the warm dust formed in the debris of core collapse supernovae is not sufficient to account for all the dust observed in the early universe. However, a much larger reservoir of ~0.25 solar mass of colder dust (at ~26 K) in the ejecta of SN 1987A was found with the infrared Herschel Space Telescope in 2011 and confirmed with the Atacama Large Millimeter Array (ALMA) in 2014.

==ALMA observations==
Following the confirmation of a large amount of cold dust in the ejecta, ALMA has continued observing SN 1987A. Synchrotron radiation due to shock interaction in the equatorial ring has been measured. Cold (20–100K) carbon monoxide (CO) and silicate molecules (SiO) were observed. The data show that CO and SiO distributions are clumpy, and that different nucleosynthesis products (C, O and Si) are located in different places of the ejecta, indicating the footprints of the stellar interior at the time of the explosion.

== Gallery ==

==See also==
* History of supernova observation
* List of supernovae
* List of supernova candidates
* List of supernova remnants

==References==
==Sources==
* 
** 

==Further reading==
==Notes==

==External links==
* AAVSO: More information on the discovery of SN 1987A
* Rochester Astronomy discovery timeline
* Light curves and spectra on the Open Supernova Catalog 
* Light echoes from Sn1987a, Movie with real images by the group EROS2
* SN 1987A at ESA/Hubble
* Supernova 1987A, WIKISKY.ORG
* More information at Phil Plait&#x27;s Bad Astronomy site
* 3D View of Supernova&#x27;s &#x27;Heart&#x27; Sheds New Light on Star Explosions (Images) - Space.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q584905" start="0" end="8" title="SN 1987A" label="SN 1987A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049029" start="15" end="32" title="type II supernova" label="type II supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q49957" start="40" end="62" title="Large Magellanic Cloud" label="Large Magellanic Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495" start="72" end="88" title="satellite galaxy" label="satellite galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="96" end="105" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="138" end="143" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="173" end="182" title="supernova" label="supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q320670" start="189" end="212" title="Kepler&amp;#x27;s Supernova" label="Kepler&amp;#x27;s Supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126" start="232" end="241" title="Neutrino" label="neutrinos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="304" end="318" title="Supernova#Naming convention" label="was designated"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="436" end="454" title="apparent magnitude" label="apparent magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448989" start="522" end="535" title="Alpha Doradus" label="Alpha Doradus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063" start="577" end="587" title="astronomer" label="astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="678" end="701" title="core-collapse supernova" label="core-collapse supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202" start="1087" end="1099" title="neutron star" label="neutron star"/>
<link wikidata="Q725364" start="1157" end="1187" title="Atacama Large Millimeter Array" label="Atacama Large Millimeter Array"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982881" start="1382" end="1393" title="Ian Shelton" label="Ian Shelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068067" start="1419" end="1443" title="Las Campanas Observatory" label="Las Campanas Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="1447" end="1452" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4710169" start="1507" end="1519" title="Albert F. A. L. Jones" label="Albert Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="1523" end="1534" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q19764" start="1691" end="1697" title="Astron (spacecraft)" label="Astron"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="1711" end="1722" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q148578" start="1723" end="1738" title="Space observatory" label="space telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048372" start="1868" end="1883" title="blue supergiant" label="blue supergiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q50053" start="2438" end="2452" title="Binary star" label="companion star"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126" start="2823" end="2831" title="neutrino" label="neutrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q583152" start="2855" end="2877" title="neutrino detector" label="neutrino observatories"/>
<link wikidata="Q106231229" start="2902" end="2919" title="Supernova neutrinos" label="neutrino emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q874572" start="3059" end="3061" title="Universal Time" label="UT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126" start="3066" end="3078" title="antineutrino" label="antineutrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q363047" start="3097" end="3110" title="Kamiokande II" label="Kamiokande II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6074424" start="3117" end="3120" title="Irvine-Michigan-Brookhaven (detector)" label="IMB"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388193" start="3131" end="3137" title="Baksan Neutrino Observatory" label="Baksan"/>
<link wikidata="Q583" start="3218" end="3228" title="Mont Blanc" label="Mont Blanc"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3229" end="3248" title="Neutrino detector#Scintillators" label="liquid scintillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801478" start="3979" end="3997" title="neutrino astronomy" label="neutrino astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097654" start="4593" end="4602" title="rest mass" label="rest mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814108" start="4703" end="4722" title="mass of an electron" label="mass of an electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202" start="5175" end="5187" title="neutron star" label="neutron star"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513" start="5380" end="5402" title="Hubble Space Telescope" label="Hubble Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q4360" start="5683" end="5689" title="pulsar" label="pulsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="5860" end="5870" title="black hole" label="black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="5890" end="5901" title="Black hole" label="black holes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7029" start="6131" end="6141" title="quark star" label="quark star"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549249" start="6464" end="6483" title="magnetohydrodynamic" label="magnetohydrodynamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q186447" start="6721" end="6747" title="James Webb Space Telescope" label="James Webb Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q696" start="6804" end="6809" title="argon" label="argon"/>
<link wikidata="Q10284378" start="6958" end="6973" title="photoionization" label="photoionization"/>
<link wikidata="Q675076" start="7210" end="7221" title="light curve" label="light curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049029" start="7294" end="7311" title="type II supernova" label="type II supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="7360" end="7377" title="radioactive decay" label="radioactive decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q727373" start="7605" end="7609" title="isotopes of nickel" label="56Ni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372202" start="7632" end="7636" title="isotopes of cobalt" label="56Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201493" start="7640" end="7644" title="isotopes of iron" label="56Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="7664" end="7670" title="photon" label="photon"/>
<link wikidata="Q472211" start="8475" end="8479" title="Isotopes of titanium" label="44Ti"/>
<link wikidata="Q50021" start="8923" end="8931" title="INTEGRAL" label="INTEGRAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q654396" start="9541" end="9553" title="stellar wind" label="stellar wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q752171" start="9848" end="9860" title="Astronomical spectroscopy" label="spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q531" start="10068" end="10079" title="light years" label="light years"/>
<link wikidata="Q472211" start="11052" end="11056" title="Isotopes of titanium" label="44Ti"/>
<link wikidata="Q265628" start="11151" end="11171" title="Very Large Telescope" label="Very Large Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q227807" start="12429" end="12467" title="South African Astronomical Observatory" label="South African Astronomical Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056113" start="12480" end="12519" title="Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory" label="Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q151991" start="12536" end="12565" title="European Southern Observatory" label="European Southern Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396651" start="12613" end="12628" title="infrared excess" label="infrared excess"/>
<link wikidata="Q192593" start="12834" end="12850" title="thermal emission" label="thermal emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q655904" start="13094" end="13112" title="free-free emission" label="free-free emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="14159" end="14168" title="apparent magnitude" label="magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q212794" start="14271" end="14281" title="inflection point" label="inflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q209630" start="15034" end="15058" title="Herschel Space Observatory" label="Herschel Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q725364" start="15090" end="15120" title="Atacama Large Millimeter Array" label="Atacama Large Millimeter Array"/>
<link wikidata="Q212871" start="15272" end="15293" title="Synchrotron radiation" label="Synchrotron radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089434" start="15713" end="15745" title="History of supernova observation" label="History of supernova observation"/>
<link wikidata="Q967576" start="15748" end="15766" title="List of supernovae" label="List of supernovae"/>
<link wikidata="Q133424" start="15769" end="15797" title="List of supernova candidates" label="List of supernova candidates"/>
<link wikidata="Q617320" start="15800" end="15826" title="List of supernova remnants" label="List of supernova remnants"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28931" wikidata="Q375791" url="?curid=28931" title="Standard Oil">
<text>Standard Oil is the common name for a corporate trust in the petroleum industry that existed from 1882 to 1911. The origins of the trust lay in the operations of the Standard Oil Company (Ohio), which had been founded in 1870 by John D. Rockefeller. The trust was born on January 2, 1882, when a group of 41 investors signed the Standard Oil Trust Agreement, which pooled their securities of 40 companies into a single holding agency managed by nine trustees. The original trust was valued at $70 million. On March 21, 1892, the Standard Oil Trust was dissolved and its holdings were reorganized into 20 independent companies that formed an unofficial union referred to as &quot;Standard Oil Interests.&quot; In 1899, the Standard Oil Company (New Jersey) acquired the shares of the other 19 companies and became the holding company for the trust.

Jersey Standard operated a near monopoly in the American oil industry from 1899 until 1911 and was the largest corporation in the United States. In 1911, the landmark Supreme Court case &quot;Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey v. United States&quot; found Jersey Standard guilty of anticompetitive practices and ordered it to break up its holdings. The charge against Jersey came about in part as a consequence of the reporting of Ida Tarbell, who wrote &quot;The History of the Standard Oil Company&quot;. The net value of companies severed from Jersey Standard in 1911 was $375 million, which constituted 57 per cent of Jersey&#x27;s value. After the dissolution, Jersey Standard became the United States&#x27; second largest corporation after United States Steel.

The Standard Oil Company (New Jersey), which was renamed Exxon in 1973 and ExxonMobil in 1999, remains one of the largest public oil companies in the world. Many of the companies disassociated from Jersey Standard in 1911 remained powerful businesses through the twentieth century. These included the Standard Oil Company of New York, Standard Oil Company (Indiana), Standard Oil Company (California), Ohio Oil Company, Continental Oil Company, and Atlantic Refining Company.

==Founding and early years==

Standard Oil&#x27;s prehistory began in 1863, as an Ohio partnership formed by industrialist John D. Rockefeller, his brother William Rockefeller, Henry Flagler, chemist Samuel Andrews, silent partner Stephen V. Harkness, and Oliver Burr Jennings, who had married the sister of William Rockefeller&#x27;s wife. In 1870, Rockefeller abolished the partnership and incorporated Standard Oil in Ohio. Of the initial 10,000 shares, John D. Rockefeller received 2,667, Harkness received 1,334, William Rockefeller, Flagler, and Andrews received 1,333 each, Jennings received 1,000, and the firm of Rockefeller, Andrews &amp; Flagler received 1,000. Rockefeller chose the &quot;Standard Oil&quot; name as a symbol of the reliable &quot;standards&quot; of quality and service that he envisioned for the nascent oil industry.


In the early years, John D. Rockefeller dominated the combine; he was the single most important figure in shaping the new oil industry. He quickly distributed power and the tasks of policy formation to a system of committees, but always remained the largest shareholder. Authority was centralized in the company&#x27;s main office in Cleveland, but decisions in the office were made cooperatively.

The company grew by increasing sales and through acquisitions. After purchasing competing firms, Rockefeller shut down those he believed to be inefficient and kept the others. In a seminal deal, in 1868, the Lake Shore Railroad, a part of the New York Central, gave Rockefeller&#x27;s firm a going rate of one cent a gallon or forty-two cents a barrel, an effective 71% discount from its listed rates in return for a promise to ship at least 60 carloads of oil daily and to handle loading and unloading on its own. Smaller companies decried such deals as unfair because they were not producing enough oil to qualify for discounts.

Standard&#x27;s actions and secret transport deals helped its kerosene price to drop from 58 to 26 cents from 1865 to 1870. Rockefeller used the Erie Canal as a cheap alternative form of transportation—in the summer months when it was not frozen—to ship his refined oil from Cleveland to the industrialized Northeast. In the winter months, his only options were the three trunk lines—the Erie Railroad and the New York Central Railroad to New York City, and the Pennsylvania Railroad to Pittsburgh and Philadelphia.

Competitors disliked the company&#x27;s business practices, but consumers liked the lower prices. Standard Oil, being formed well before the discovery of the Spindletop oil field (in Texas, far from Standard Oil&#x27;s base in the Midwest) and a demand for oil other than for heat and light, was well placed to control the growth of the oil business. The company was perceived to own and control all aspects of the trade.

===South Improvement Company===
In 1872, Rockefeller joined the South Improvement Co. which would have allowed him to receive rebates for shipping and drawbacks on oil his competitors shipped. But when this deal became known, competitors convinced the Pennsylvania Legislature to revoke South Improvement&#x27;s charter. No oil was ever shipped under this arrangement. Using highly effective tactics, later widely criticized, it absorbed or destroyed most of its competition in Cleveland in less than two months and later throughout the northeastern United States.

===Hepburn Committee===
A. Barton Hepburn was directed by the New York State Legislature in 1879, to investigate the railroads&#x27; practice of giving rebates to their largest clients within the state. Merchants without ties to the oil industry had pressed for the hearings. Prior to the committee&#x27;s investigation, few knew of the size of Standard Oil&#x27;s control and influence on seemingly unaffiliated oil refineries and pipelines—Hawke (1980) cites that only a dozen or so within Standard Oil knew the extent of company operations.

The committee counsel, Simon Sterne, questioned representatives from the Erie Railroad and the New York Central Railroad and discovered that at least half of their long-haul traffic granted rebates and much of this traffic came from Standard Oil. The committee then shifted its focus to Standard Oil&#x27;s operations. John Dustin Archbold, as president of Acme Oil Company, denied that Acme was associated with Standard Oil. He then admitted to being a director of Standard Oil.

The committee&#x27;s final report scolded the railroads for their rebate policies and cited Standard Oil as an example. This scolding was largely moot to Standard Oil&#x27;s interests since long-distance oil pipelines were now their preferred method of transportation.

===Standard Oil Trust===
In response to state laws that had the result of limiting the scale of companies, Rockefeller and his associates developed innovative ways of organizing to effectively manage their fast-growing enterprise. On January 2, 1882, they combined their disparate companies, spread across dozens of states, under a single group of trustees. By a secret agreement, the existing 37 stockholders conveyed their shares &quot;in trust&quot; to nine trustees: John and William Rockefeller, Oliver H. Payne, Charles Pratt, Henry Flagler, John D. Archbold, William G. Warden, Jabez Bostwick, and Benjamin Brewster.

&quot;Whereas some state legislatures imposed special taxes on out-of-state corporations doing business in their states, other legislatures forbade corporations in their state from holding the stock of companies based elsewhere. (Legislators established such restrictions in the hope that they would force successful companies to incorporate—and thus pay taxes—in their state.)&quot;

Standard Oil&#x27;s organizational concept proved so successful that other giant enterprises adopted this &quot;trust&quot; form.

By 1882, Rockefeller&#x27;s top aide was John Dustin Archbold, whom he left in control after disengaging from business to concentrate on philanthropy after 1896. Other notable principals of the company include Henry Flagler, developer of the Florida East Coast Railway and resort cities, and Henry H. Rogers, who built the Virginian Railway.

In 1885, Standard Oil of Ohio moved its headquarters from Cleveland to its permanent headquarters at 26 Broadway in New York City. Concurrently, the trustees of Standard Oil of Ohio chartered the Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey (SOCNJ) to take advantage of New Jersey&#x27;s more lenient corporate stock ownership laws.

===Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890===
In 1890, Congress overwhelmingly passed the Sherman Antitrust Act (Senate 51–1; House 242–0), a source of American anti-monopoly laws. The law forbade every contract, scheme, deal, or conspiracy to restrain trade, though the phrase &quot;restraint of trade&quot; remained subjective. The Standard Oil group quickly attracted attention from antitrust authorities leading to a lawsuit filed by Ohio Attorney General David K. Watson.

===Earnings and dividends===
From 1882 to 1906, Standard paid out $548,436,000 () in dividends at a 65.4% payout ratio. The total net earnings from 1882 to 1906 amounted to $838,783,800 (), exceeding the dividends by $290,347,800, which was used for plant expansions.

==1895–1913==
In 1896, John Rockefeller retired from the Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey, the holding company of the group, but remained president and a major shareholder. Vice-president John Dustin Archbold took a large part in the running of the firm. In the year 1904, Standard Oil controlled 91% of oil refinement and 85% of final sales in the United States. At this time, state and federal laws sought to counter this development with antitrust laws. In 1911, the U.S. Justice Department sued the group under the federal antitrust law and ordered its breakup into 39 companies.

Standard Oil&#x27;s market position was initially established through an emphasis on efficiency and responsibility. While most companies dumped gasoline in rivers (this was before the automobile was popular), Standard used it to fuel its machines. While other companies&#x27; refineries piled mountains of heavy waste, Rockefeller found ways to sell it. For example, Standard bought the company that invented and produced Vaseline, the Chesebrough Manufacturing Co., which was a Standard company only from 1908 until 1911.

One of the original &quot;Muckrakers&quot; Ida M. Tarbell, was an American author and journalist whose father was an oil producer whose business had failed because of Rockefeller&#x27;s business dealings. After extensive interviews with a sympathetic senior executive of Standard Oil, Henry H. Rogers, Tarbell&#x27;s investigations of Standard Oil fueled growing public attacks on Standard Oil and monopolies in general. Her work was published in 19 parts in &quot;McClure&#x27;s&quot; magazine from November 1902 to October 1904, then in 1904 as the book &quot;The History of the Standard Oil Co&quot;.

The Standard Oil Trust was controlled by a small group of families. Rockefeller stated in 1910: &quot;I think it is true that the Pratt family, the Payne–Whitney family (which were one, as all the stock came from Colonel Payne), the Harkness-Flagler family (which came into the company together) and the Rockefeller family controlled a majority of the stock during all the history of the company up to the present time.&quot;

These families reinvested most of the dividends in other industries, especially railroads. They also invested heavily in the gas and the electric lighting business (including the giant Consolidated Gas Co. of New York City). They made large purchases of stock in U.S. Steel, Amalgamated Copper, and even Corn Products Refining Co.

Weetman Pearson, a British petroleum entrepreneur in Mexico, began negotiating with Standard Oil in 1912–13 to sell his &quot;El Aguila&quot; oil company, since Pearson was no longer bound to promises to the Porfirio Díaz regime (1876–1911) to not to sell to U.S. interests. However, the deal fell through and the firm was sold to Royal Dutch Shell.

===China===
Standard Oil&#x27;s production increased so rapidly it soon exceeded U.S. demand, and the company began viewing export markets. In the 1890s, Standard Oil began marketing kerosene to China&#x27;s large population of close to 400 million as lamp fuel. For its Chinese trademark and brand, Standard Oil adopted the name &quot;Mei Foo&quot; () as a transliteration. Mei Foo also became the name of the tin lamp that Standard Oil produced and gave away or sold cheaply to Chinese farmers, encouraging them to switch from vegetable oil to kerosene. The response was positive, sales boomed, and China became Standard Oil&#x27;s largest market in Asia. Prior to Pearl Harbor, Stanvac was the largest single U.S. investment in Southeast Asia.

The North China Department of Socony (Standard Oil Company of New York) operated a subsidiary called Socony River and Coastal Fleet, North Coast Division, which became the North China Division of Stanvac (Standard Vacuum Oil Company) after that company was formed in 1933. To distribute its products, Standard Oil constructed storage tanks, canneries (bulk oil from large ocean tankers was re-packaged into tins), warehouses, and offices in key Chinese cities. For inland distribution, the company had motor tank trucks and railway tank cars, and for river navigation, it had a fleet of low-draft steamers and other vessels.

Stanvac&#x27;s North China Division, based in Shanghai, owned hundreds of vessels, including motor barges, steamers, launches, tugboats, and tankers. Up to 13 tankers operated on the Yangtze River, the largest of which were &quot;Mei Ping&quot; (), &quot;Mei Hsia&quot; (), and &quot;Mei An&quot; (). All three were destroyed in the 1937 USS &quot;Panay&quot; incident.

&quot;Mei An&quot; was launched in 1901 and was the first vessel in the fleet. Other vessels included &quot;Mei Chuen&quot;, &quot;Mei Foo&quot;, &quot;Mei Hung&quot;, &quot;Mei Kiang&quot;, &quot;Mei Lu&quot;, &quot;Mei Tan&quot;, &quot;Mei Su&quot;, &quot;Mei Hsia&quot;, &quot;Mei Ying&quot;, and &quot;Mei Yun&quot;. &quot;Mei Hsia&quot;, a tanker, was specially designed for river duty. It was built by New Engineering and Shipbuilding Works of Shanghai, who also built the 500-ton launch &quot;Mei Foo&quot; in 1912.

&quot;Mei Hsia&quot; (&quot;Beautiful Gorges&quot;) was launched in 1926 and carried 350 tons of bulk oil in three holds, plus a forward cargo hold, and space between decks for carrying general cargo or packed oil. She had a length of , a beam of , a depth of , and had a bulletproof wheelhouse. &quot;Mei Ping&quot; (&quot;Beautiful Tranquility&quot;), launched in 1927, was designed off-shore, but assembled and finished in Shanghai. Its oil-fuel burners came from the U.S. and water-tube boilers came from England.

===Middle East===
Standard Oil Company and Socony-Vacuum Oil Company became partners in providing markets for the oil reserves in the Middle East. In 1906, SOCONY (later Mobil) opened its first fuel terminals in Alexandria. It explored in Palestine before the World War broke out, but ran into conflict with the local authorities.

===Monopoly charges and antitrust legislation===

By 1890, Standard Oil controlled 88 percent of the refined oil flows in the United States. The state of Ohio successfully sued Standard, compelling the dissolution of the trust in 1892. But Standard simply separated Standard Oil of Ohio and kept control of it. Eventually, the state of New Jersey changed its incorporation laws to allow a company to hold shares in other companies in any state.

So, in 1899, the Standard Oil Trust, based at 26 Broadway in New York, was legally reborn as a holding company, the &quot;Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey&quot; (SOCNJ), which held stock in 41 other companies, which controlled other companies, which in turn controlled yet other companies. According to Daniel Yergin in his Pulitzer Prize-winning &quot;The Prize: The Epic Quest for Oil, Money, and Power&quot; (1990), this conglomerate was seen by the public as all-pervasive, controlled by a select group of directors, and completely unaccountable.
In 1904, Standard controlled 91 percent of production and 85 percent of final sales. Most of its output was kerosene, of which 55 percent was exported around the world. After 1900 it did not try to force competitors out of business by selling at a loss. The federal Commissioner of Corporations studied Standard&#x27;s operations from the period of 1904 to 1906 and concluded that &quot;beyond question ... the dominant position of the Standard Oil Co. in the refining industry was due to unfair practices—to abuse of the control of pipe-lines, to railroad discriminations, and to unfair methods of competition in the sale of the refined petroleum products&quot;.

Because of competition from other firms, their market share gradually eroded to 70 percent by 1906 which was the year when the antitrust case was filed against Standard. Standard&#x27;s market share was 64 percent by 1911 when Standard was ordered broken up. At least 147 refining companies were competing with Standard including Gulf, Texaco, and Shell. It did not try to monopolize the exploration and extraction of oil (its share in 1911 was 11 percent).
In 1909, the U.S. Justice Department sued Standard under federal antitrust law, the Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890, for sustaining a monopoly and restraining interstate commerce by:

Rebates, preferences, and other discriminatory practices in favor of the combination by railroad companies; restraint and monopolization by control of pipe lines, and unfair practices against competing pipe lines; contracts with competitors in restraint of trade; unfair methods of competition, such as local price cutting at the points where necessary to suppress competition; [and] espionage of the business of competitors, the operation of bogus independent companies, and payment of rebates on oil, with the like intent.

The lawsuit argued that Standard&#x27;s monopolistic practices had taken place over the preceding four years:

The general result of the investigation has been to disclose the existence of numerous and flagrant discriminations by the railroads on behalf of the Standard Oil Co. and its affiliated corporations. With comparatively few exceptions, mainly of other large concerns in California, the Standard has been the sole beneficiary of such discriminations. In almost every section of the country that company has been found to enjoy some unfair advantages over its competitors, and some of these discriminations affect enormous areas.

The government identified four illegal patterns: (1) secret and semi-secret railroad rates; (2) discriminations in the open arrangement of rates; (3) discriminations in classification and rules of shipment; (4) discriminations in the treatment of private tank cars. The government alleged:

Almost everywhere the rates from the shipping points used exclusively, or almost exclusively, by the Standard are relatively lower than the rates from the shipping points of its competitors. Rates have been made low to let the Standard into markets, or they have been made high to keep its competitors out of markets. Trifling differences in distances are made an excuse for large differences in rates favorable to the Standard Oil Co., while large differences in distances are ignored where they are against the Standard. Sometimes connecting roads prorate on oil—that is, make through rates which are lower than the combination of local rates; sometimes they refuse to prorate; but in either case the result of their policy is to favor the Standard Oil Co. Different methods are used in different places and under different conditions, but the net result is that from Maine to California the general arrangement of open rates on petroleum oil is such as to give the Standard an unreasonable advantage over its competitors.

The government said that Standard raised prices to its monopolistic customers but lowered them to hurt competitors, often disguising its illegal actions by using bogus, supposedly independent companies it controlled.

The evidence is, in fact, absolutely conclusive that the Standard Oil Co. charges altogether excessive prices where it meets no competition, and particularly where there is little likelihood of competitors entering the field, and that, on the other hand, where competition is active, it frequently cuts prices to a point which leaves even the Standard little or no profit, and which more often leaves no profit to the competitor, whose costs are ordinarily somewhat higher.

On May 15, 1911, the US Supreme Court upheld the lower court judgment and declared the Standard Oil group to be an &quot;unreasonable&quot; monopoly under the Sherman Antitrust Act, Section II. It ordered Standard to break up into 39 independent companies with different boards of directors, the biggest two of the companies being Standard Oil of New Jersey (which became Exxon) and Standard Oil of New York (which became Mobil).

Standard&#x27;s president, John D. Rockefeller, had long since retired from any management role. But, as he owned a quarter of the shares of the resultant companies, and those share values mostly doubled, he emerged from the dissolution as the richest man in the world. The dissolution had actually propelled Rockefeller&#x27;s personal wealth.

==Breakup==
By 1911 the Supreme Court of the United States ruled, in &quot;Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey v. United States&quot;, that Standard Oil of New Jersey must be dissolved under the Sherman Antitrust Act and split into 34 companies. Two of these companies were Standard Oil of New Jersey (Jersey Standard or Esso), which eventually became Exxon, and Standard Oil of New York (Socony), which eventually became Mobil; those two companies later merged into ExxonMobil.

Over the next few decades, both companies grew significantly. Jersey Standard, led by Walter C. Teagle, became the largest oil producer in the world. It acquired a 50 percent share in Humble Oil &amp; Refining Co., a Texas oil producer. Socony purchased a 45 percent interest in Magnolia Petroleum Co., a major refiner, marketer, and pipeline transporter. In 1931, Socony merged with Vacuum Oil Co., an industry pioneer dating back to 1866, and a growing Standard Oil spin-off in its own right.

In the Asia-Pacific region, Jersey Standard had oil production and refineries in the Dutch East Indies but no marketing network. Socony-Vacuum had Asian marketing outlets supplied remotely from California. In 1933, Jersey Standard and Socony-Vacuum merged their interests in the region into a 50–50 joint venture. Standard-Vacuum Oil Co., or &quot;Stanvac&quot;, operated in 50 countries, from East Africa to New Zealand, before it was dissolved in 1962.

Rockefeller&#x27;s original company, Standard Oil Company of Ohio (Sohio), effectively ceased to exist when it was purchased by BP in 1987. BP continued to sell gasoline under the Sohio brand until 1991. Other Standard oil entities include &quot;Standard Oil of Indiana&quot; which became Amoco after other mergers and a name change in the 1980s, and &quot;Standard Oil of California&quot; which became the Chevron Corp.

==Legacy and criticism of breakup==

Some have speculated that if not for that court ruling, Standard Oil could have possibly been worth more than $1 trillion in the 2000s. Whether the breakup of Standard Oil was beneficial is a matter of some controversy. Some economists believe that Standard Oil was not a monopoly, and argue that the intense free market competition resulted in cheaper oil prices and more diverse petroleum products. Critics claimed that success in meeting consumer needs was driving other companies, who were not as successful, out of the market.

An example of this thinking was given in 1890, when Rep. William Mason, arguing in favor of the Sherman Antitrust Act, said: &quot;trusts have made products cheaper, have reduced prices; but if the price of oil, for instance, were reduced to one cent a barrel, it would not right the wrong done to people of this country by the &quot;trusts&quot; which have destroyed legitimate competition and driven honest men from legitimate business enterprise&quot;.

The Sherman Antitrust Act prohibits the restraint of trade. Defenders of Standard Oil insist that the company did not restrain trade; they were simply superior competitors. The federal courts ruled otherwise.

Some economic historians have observed that Standard Oil was in the process of losing its monopoly at the time of its breakup in 1911. Although Standard had 90 percent of American refining capacity in 1880, by 1911, that had shrunk to between 60 and 65 percent because of the expansion in capacity by competitors. Numerous regional competitors (such as Pure Oil in the East, Texaco and Gulf Oil in the Gulf Coast, Cities Service and Sun in the Midcontinent, Union in California, and Shell overseas) had organized themselves into competitive vertically integrated oil companies, the industry structure pioneered years earlier by Standard itself.

In addition, demand for petroleum products was increasing more rapidly than the ability of Standard to expand. The result was that although in 1911 Standard still controlled most production in the older regions of the Appalachian Basin (78 percent share, down from 92 percent in 1880), Lima-Indiana (90 percent, down from 95 percent in 1906), and the Illinois Basin (83 percent, down from 100 percent in 1906), its share was much lower in the rapidly expanding new regions that would dominate U.S. oil production in the 20th century. In 1911, Standard controlled only 44 percent of production in the Midcontinent, 29 percent in California, and 10 percent on the Gulf Coast.

Some analysts argue that the breakup was beneficial to consumers in the long run, and no one has ever proposed that Standard Oil be reassembled in pre-1911 form. ExxonMobil, however, does represent a substantial part of the original company.

Since the breakup of Standard Oil, several companies, such as General Motors and Microsoft, have come under antitrust investigation for being inherently too large for market competition; however, most of them remained together. The only company since the breakup of Standard Oil that was divided into parts like Standard Oil was AT&amp;T, which after decades as a regulated natural monopoly, was forced to divest itself of the Bell System in 1984.

==Successor companies==

Standard Oil&#x27;s breakup split the company into 39 separate companies. Several of these companies were considered among the Seven Sisters who dominated the industry worldwide for much of the 20th century, and both Standard Oil&#x27;s direct and indirect descendants make up Big Oil.

Today, Standard Oil&#x27;s influence is primarily concentrated in a few companies:

* ExxonMobil, continuation of Standard Oil of New Jersey (later Exxon) which merged with Standard Oil of New York (later Mobil)
* Chevron, continuation of Standard Oil of California which acquired Kentucky Standard
* BP, continuation of the Anglo-Persian Oil Company which acquired Standard Oil of Ohio and Standard Oil of Indiana
* Marathon Oil and Marathon Petroleum, continuations of The Ohio Oil Company
* ConocoPhillips and Phillips 66, continuations of the Continental Oil Company

Many of today&#x27;s largest oil and gas companies are or have acquired a descendant of Standard Oil. Moreover, many other companies have acquired or been created from Standard Oil descendants over time, including Unilever (which acquired Standard descendant Vaseline in 1987), TransUnion (created originally as a holding company for Standard descendant Union Tank Car) and Berkshire Hathaway (which later acquired Union Tank Car).

==Rights to the name==

Of the 39 &quot;Baby Standards&quot;, 11 were given rights to the Standard Oil name, based on the state they were in. Conoco and Atlantic elected to use their respective names instead of the Standard name, and their rights would be claimed by other companies.

By the 1980s, most companies were using their brand names instead of the Standard name, with Amoco being the last one to have widespread use of the &quot;Standard&quot; name, as it gave Midwestern owners the option of using the Amoco name or Standard.

Three supermajor companies now own the rights to the Standard name in the United States: ExxonMobil, Chevron Corp., and BP. BP acquired its rights through acquiring Standard Oil of Ohio and merging with Amoco and has a small handful of stations in the Midwestern United States using the Standard name. Likewise, BP continues to sell marine fuel under the Sohio brand at various marinas throughout Ohio. ExxonMobil keeps the Esso trademark alive at stations that sell diesel fuel by selling &quot;Esso Diesel&quot; displayed on the pumps.

ExxonMobil has full international rights to the Standard name, and continues to use the Esso name overseas and in Canada. To protect its trademark, Chevron has one station in each state it owns the rights to be branded as Standard. Some of its Standard-branded stations have a mix of some signs that say Standard and some signs that say Chevron. Over time, Chevron has changed which station in a given state is the Standard station. As of December 2024 Chevron got a new federal trademark registered for the Standard name for its new electric charging fuel stations.

In February 2016, ExxonMobil successfully asked a U.S. federal court to lift the 1930s trademark injunction that banned it from using the Esso brand in some states. Neither BP nor Chevron objected to the decision. ExxonMobil asked for it to be lifted primarily so it could have universal marketing material for its stations globally and, likewise, the Esso name returned to some minor station signage at both Exxon and Mobil stations.

As of 2021, six states that have the Standard Oil name rights are not being actively used by the companies that own them. Chevron withdrew from Kentucky (home of the Standard Oil of Kentucky, which Chevron acquired in 1961) in 2010, while BP gradually withdrew from five Great Plains and Rocky Mountain states (Colorado, Montana, North Dakota, Oklahoma, and Wyoming) since the initial conversion of Amoco sites to BP. As ExxonMobil has stations in all of these states, with the aforementioned minor signage ExxonMobil has de facto claimed the Standard trademark in these states, though they are still held by their respective rights holders.

==See also==
* History of ExxonMobil
* Standard Oil Gasoline Station (disambiguation)

== Notes ==
==References==

=== Citations ===
== Bibliography ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Olien, Diana Davids, and Roger M. Olien. “Why Big Bad Oil?” &quot;OAH Magazine of History&quot; 11#1 (1996), pp. 22–27. online
* 


==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q375791" start="0" end="12" title="Standard Oil" label="Standard Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133938" start="38" end="53" title="Trust (business)" label="corporate trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q862571" start="61" end="79" title="petroleum industry" label="petroleum industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q634417" start="166" end="193" title="Standard Oil of Ohio" label="Standard Oil Company (Ohio)"/>
<link wikidata="Q160278" start="229" end="248" title="John D. Rockefeller" label="John D. Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q156238" start="722" end="755" title="ExxonMobil" label="Standard Oil Company (New Jersey)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598276" start="1041" end="1088" title="Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey v. United States" label="Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q271712" start="1276" end="1287" title="Ida Tarbell" label="Ida Tarbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739826" start="1305" end="1344" title="The History of the Standard Oil Company" label="The History of the Standard Oil Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q72539" start="1591" end="1610" title="U.S. Steel" label="United States Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q156238" start="1688" end="1698" title="ExxonMobil" label="ExxonMobil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088656" start="1914" end="1946" title="Mobil" label="Standard Oil Company of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q465952" start="1948" end="1978" title="Amoco" label="Standard Oil Company (Indiana)"/>
<link wikidata="Q319642" start="1980" end="2013" title="Chevron Corporation" label="Standard Oil Company (California)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577587" start="2015" end="2031" title="Marathon Oil" label="Ohio Oil Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126518" start="2033" end="2056" title="Conoco" label="Continental Oil Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816506" start="2062" end="2087" title="Atlantic Petroleum" label="Atlantic Refining Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="2172" end="2176" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q911554" start="2199" end="2212" title="industrialist" label="industrialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q160278" start="2213" end="2232" title="John D. Rockefeller" label="John D. Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347859" start="2246" end="2265" title="William Rockefeller" label="William Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q746530" start="2267" end="2280" title="Henry Flagler" label="Henry Flagler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410770" start="2290" end="2304" title="Samuel Andrews (chemist)" label="Samuel Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376920" start="2321" end="2340" title="Stephen V. Harkness" label="Stephen V. Harkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087436" start="2346" end="2366" title="Oliver Burr Jennings" label="Oliver Burr Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q11998149" start="2712" end="2746" title="Rockefeller, Andrews &amp;amp; Flagler" label="Rockefeller, Andrews &amp;amp; Flagler"/>
<link wikidata="Q381136" start="3197" end="3208" title="shareholder" label="shareholder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371464" start="3581" end="3597" title="New York Central" label="New York Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q76904" start="4032" end="4040" title="kerosene" label="kerosene"/>
<link wikidata="Q459578" start="4115" end="4125" title="Erie Canal" label="Erie Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353770" start="4358" end="4371" title="Erie Railroad" label="Erie Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371464" start="4380" end="4405" title="New York Central Railroad" label="New York Central Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197895" start="4432" end="4453" title="Pennsylvania Railroad" label="Pennsylvania Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602814" start="4645" end="4655" title="Spindletop" label="Spindletop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304511" start="4974" end="4995" title="South Improvement Company" label="South Improvement Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q2867077" start="5162" end="5186" title="Pennsylvania Legislature" label="Pennsylvania Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="5388" end="5397" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647584" start="5500" end="5517" title="A. Barton Hepburn" label="A. Barton Hepburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270268" start="5538" end="5564" title="New York State Legislature" label="New York State Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q60791188" start="5577" end="5677" title="The Hepburn Committee" label="investigate the railroads&amp;#x27; practice of giving rebates to their largest clients within the state"/>
<link wikidata="Q15126669" start="6044" end="6056" title="Simon Sterne" label="Simon Sterne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6230549" start="6340" end="6360" title="John Dustin Archbold" label="John Dustin Archbold"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087590" start="7273" end="7288" title="Oliver Hazard Payne" label="Oliver H. Payne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373540" start="7290" end="7303" title="Charles Pratt" label="Charles Pratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q746530" start="7305" end="7318" title="Henry Flagler" label="Henry Flagler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6230549" start="7320" end="7336" title="John Dustin Archbold" label="John D. Archbold"/>
<link wikidata="Q6110120" start="7357" end="7371" title="Jabez A. Bostwick" label="Jabez Bostwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888328" start="7377" end="7394" title="Benjamin Brewster (financier)" label="Benjamin Brewster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6230549" start="7954" end="7974" title="John Dustin Archbold" label="John Dustin Archbold"/>
<link wikidata="Q442450" start="8155" end="8181" title="Florida East Coast Railway" label="Florida East Coast Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118797" start="8205" end="8220" title="Henry H. Rogers" label="Henry H. Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353871" start="8236" end="8253" title="Virginian Railway" label="Virginian Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="8314" end="8323" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q762816" start="8357" end="8368" title="26 Broadway" label="26 Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="8372" end="8385" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="8621" end="8629" title="Congress of the United States" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425088" start="8656" end="8677" title="Sherman Antitrust Act" label="Sherman Antitrust Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q326498" start="8952" end="8961" title="antitrust" label="antitrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080745" start="9004" end="9025" title="Ohio Attorney General" label="Ohio Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235808" start="9026" end="9041" title="David K. Watson" label="David K. Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q181201" start="9129" end="9137" title="dividend" label="dividend"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294672" start="9150" end="9162" title="payout ratio" label="payout ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6230549" start="9499" end="9519" title="John Dustin Archbold" label="John Dustin Archbold"/>
<link wikidata="Q326498" start="9752" end="9761" title="antitrust" label="antitrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="9781" end="9804" title="United States Department of Justice" label="U.S. Justice Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q39558" start="10040" end="10048" title="gasoline" label="gasoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q185120" start="10318" end="10326" title="Vaseline" label="Vaseline"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092911" start="10332" end="10361" title="Chesebrough Manufacturing Company" label="Chesebrough Manufacturing Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q1474197" start="10446" end="10455" title="Muckraker" label="Muckraker"/>
<link wikidata="Q271712" start="10463" end="10477" title="Ida M. Tarbell" label="Ida M. Tarbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118797" start="10705" end="10720" title="Henry H. Rogers" label="Henry H. Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6800390" start="10885" end="10899" title="McClure&amp;#x27;s" label="McClure&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739826" start="10982" end="11016" title="The History of the Standard Oil Company" label="The History of the Standard Oil Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q3065576" start="11179" end="11193" title="Whitney family" label="Whitney family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130469" start="11329" end="11347" title="Rockefeller family" label="Rockefeller family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127536" start="11637" end="11674" title="Consolidated Edison" label="Consolidated Gas Co. of New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q72539" start="11715" end="11725" title="U.S. Steel" label="U.S. Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845063" start="11727" end="11745" title="Amalgamated Copper" label="Amalgamated Copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q8273105" start="11756" end="11782" title="Corn Products Refining Company" label="Corn Products Refining Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q5612753" start="11784" end="11799" title="Weetman Pearson" label="Weetman Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q150688" start="11992" end="12005" title="Porfirio Díaz" label="Porfirio Díaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q154950" start="12115" end="12132" title="Royal Dutch Shell" label="Royal Dutch Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q24525581" start="12816" end="12823" title="Standard Vacuum Oil Company" label="Stanvac"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="12866" end="12880" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088656" start="12913" end="12919" title="Socony" label="Socony"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413" start="13692" end="13705" title="Yangtze River" label="Yangtze River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049158" start="13847" end="13877" title="USS Panay incident" label="USS &amp;quot;Panay&amp;quot; incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="15409" end="15413" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="15591" end="15601" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q219577" start="15796" end="15811" title="holding company" label="holding company"/>
<link wikidata="Q714148" start="16002" end="16015" title="Daniel Yergin" label="Daniel Yergin"/>
<link wikidata="Q784589" start="16023" end="16045" title="Pulitzer Prize for General Non-Fiction" label="Pulitzer Prize-winning"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16052" end="16103" title="The Prize: The Epic Quest for Oil, Money, and Power" label="The Prize: The Epic Quest for Oil, Money, and Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q76904" start="16358" end="16366" title="kerosene" label="kerosene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="17386" end="17409" title="United States Department of Justice" label="U.S. Justice Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425088" start="17457" end="17478" title="Sherman Antitrust Act" label="Sherman Antitrust Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="20751" end="20767" title="US Supreme Court" label="US Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q43637" start="20870" end="20878" title="monopoly" label="monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425088" start="20889" end="20910" title="Sherman Antitrust Act" label="Sherman Antitrust Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q156238" start="21102" end="21107" title="Exxon" label="Exxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088656" start="21152" end="21157" title="Mobil" label="Mobil"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="21531" end="21565" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598276" start="21582" end="21629" title="Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey v. United States" label="Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425088" start="21697" end="21718" title="Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890" label="Sherman Antitrust Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q156238" start="21854" end="21859" title="Exxon" label="Exxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088656" start="21924" end="21929" title="Mobil" label="Mobil"/>
<link wikidata="Q156238" start="21969" end="21979" title="ExxonMobil" label="ExxonMobil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964484" start="22068" end="22084" title="Walter C. Teagle" label="Walter C. Teagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9005394" start="22166" end="22195" title="Humble Oil" label="Humble Oil &amp;amp; Refining Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="22199" end="22204" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884493" start="22261" end="22283" title="Magnolia Petroleum Co." label="Magnolia Petroleum Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q7908039" start="22366" end="22380" title="Vacuum Oil Company" label="Vacuum Oil Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q1070940" start="22485" end="22497" title="Asia-Pacific" label="Asia-Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q188161" start="22563" end="22580" title="Dutch East Indies" label="Dutch East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="22872" end="22883" title="East Africa" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="22887" end="22898" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q634417" start="23001" end="23006" title="Sohio" label="Sohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q152057" start="23062" end="23064" title="BP" label="BP"/>
<link wikidata="Q465952" start="23223" end="23228" title="Amoco" label="Amoco"/>
<link wikidata="Q319642" start="23341" end="23353" title="Chevron Corporation" label="Chevron Corp"/>
<link wikidata="Q297279" start="24124" end="24136" title="price of oil" label="price of oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425088" start="24387" end="24408" title="Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890" label="Sherman Antitrust Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261117" start="24946" end="24954" title="Pure Oil" label="Pure Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q775060" start="24968" end="24974" title="Texaco" label="Texaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296860" start="24979" end="24987" title="Gulf Oil" label="Gulf Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974437" start="25007" end="25021" title="Cities Service Company" label="Cities Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423218" start="25026" end="25029" title="Sun Oil" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393497" start="25051" end="25056" title="Union Oil" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q154950" start="25076" end="25081" title="Royal Dutch Shell" label="Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4199344" start="25590" end="25604" title="Illinois Basin" label="Illinois Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q156238" start="26076" end="26086" title="ExxonMobil" label="ExxonMobil"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="26219" end="26233" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="26238" end="26247" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843047" start="26486" end="26494" title="AT&amp;amp;T Corporation" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q648510" start="26531" end="26547" title="natural monopoly" label="natural monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959692" start="26563" end="26576" title="Breakup of the Bell System" label="divest itself"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883269" start="26584" end="26595" title="Bell System" label="Bell System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330390" start="26758" end="26771" title="Seven Sisters (oil companies)" label="Seven Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330390" start="26908" end="26915" title="Big Oil" label="Big Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q156238" start="27004" end="27014" title="ExxonMobil" label="ExxonMobil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088656" start="27123" end="27128" title="Mobil" label="Mobil"/>
<link wikidata="Q319642" start="27132" end="27139" title="Chevron Corporation" label="Chevron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598283" start="27199" end="27216" title="Kyso" label="Kentucky Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q152057" start="27219" end="27221" title="BP" label="BP"/>
<link wikidata="Q267380" start="27243" end="27268" title="Anglo-Persian Oil Company" label="Anglo-Persian Oil Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q634417" start="27284" end="27304" title="Standard Oil of Ohio" label="Standard Oil of Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q465952" start="27309" end="27332" title="Amoco" label="Standard Oil of Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577587" start="27335" end="27347" title="Marathon Oil" label="Marathon Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q458363" start="27352" end="27370" title="Marathon Petroleum" label="Marathon Petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q214763" start="27412" end="27426" title="ConocoPhillips" label="ConocoPhillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656230" start="27431" end="27442" title="Phillips 66" label="Phillips 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330390" start="27511" end="27540" title="Big Oil" label="largest oil and gas companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q157062" start="27704" end="27712" title="Unilever" label="Unilever"/>
<link wikidata="Q185120" start="27749" end="27757" title="Vaseline" label="Vaseline"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833641" start="27768" end="27778" title="TransUnion" label="TransUnion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886151" start="27844" end="27858" title="Union Tank Car Company" label="Union Tank Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q217583" start="27864" end="27882" title="Berkshire Hathaway" label="Berkshire Hathaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126518" start="28065" end="28071" title="Conoco" label="Conoco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816506" start="28076" end="28084" title="Atlantic Petroleum" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330390" start="28467" end="28477" title="supermajor" label="supermajor"/>
<link wikidata="Q156238" start="28550" end="28560" title="ExxonMobil" label="ExxonMobil"/>
<link wikidata="Q319642" start="28562" end="28575" title="Chevron Corporation" label="Chevron Corp."/>
<link wikidata="Q152057" start="28581" end="28583" title="BP" label="BP"/>
<link wikidata="Q634417" start="28626" end="28646" title="Standard Oil of Ohio" label="Standard Oil of Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q465952" start="28664" end="28669" title="Amoco" label="Amoco"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="28713" end="28737" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwestern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q867662" start="28885" end="28889" title="Esso" label="Esso"/>
<link wikidata="Q38423" start="28928" end="28939" title="diesel fuel" label="diesel fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="30148" end="30156" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598283" start="30170" end="30194" title="Standard Oil of Kentucky" label="Standard Oil of Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="30275" end="30287" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="30292" end="30306" title="Rocky Mountain" label="Rocky Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="30315" end="30323" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="30325" end="30332" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207" start="30334" end="30346" title="North Dakota" label="North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="30348" end="30356" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="30362" end="30369" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="30526" end="30534" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q114001197" start="30662" end="30683" title="History of ExxonMobil" label="History of ExxonMobil"/>
<link wikidata="Q26261900" start="30686" end="30732" title="Standard Oil Gasoline Station (disambiguation)" label="Standard Oil Gasoline Station (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28935" wikidata="Q83371" url="?curid=28935" title="Seismology">
<text>Seismology (; from Ancient Greek σεισμός (&quot;seismós&quot;) meaning &quot;earthquake&quot; and -λογία (&quot;-logía&quot;) meaning &quot;study of&quot;) is the scientific study of earthquakes (or generally, quakes) and the generation and propagation of elastic waves through planetary bodies. It also includes studies of the environmental effects of earthquakes such as tsunamis; other seismic sources such as volcanoes, plate tectonics, glaciers, rivers, oceanic microseisms, and the atmosphere; and artificial processes such as explosions.

Paleoseismology is a related field that uses geology to infer information regarding past earthquakes. A recording of Earth&#x27;s motion as a function of time, created by a seismograph is called a seismogram. A seismologist is a scientist who works in basic or applied seismology.

==History==
Scholarly interest in earthquakes can be traced back to antiquity. Early speculations on the natural causes of earthquakes were included in the writings of Thales of Miletus (), Anaximenes of Miletus (), Aristotle (), and Zhang Heng (132 CE).

In 132 CE, Zhang Heng of China&#x27;s Han dynasty designed the first known seismoscope.

In the 17th century, Athanasius Kircher argued that earthquakes were caused by the movement of fire within a system of channels inside the Earth. Martin Lister (1638–1712) and Nicolas Lemery (1645–1715) proposed that earthquakes were caused by chemical explosions within the Earth.

The Lisbon earthquake of 1755, coinciding with the general flowering of science in Europe, set in motion intensified scientific attempts to understand the behaviour and causation of earthquakes. The earliest responses include work by John Bevis (1757) and John Michell (1761). Michell determined that earthquakes originate within the Earth and were waves of movement caused by &quot;shifting masses of rock miles below the surface&quot;.

In response to a series of earthquakes near Comrie in Scotland in 1839, a committee was formed in the United Kingdom in order to produce better detection methods for earthquakes. The outcome of this was the production of one of the first modern seismometers by James David Forbes, first presented in a report by David Milne-Home in 1842. This seismometer was an inverted pendulum, which recorded the measurements of seismic activity through the use of a pencil placed on paper above the pendulum. The designs provided did not prove effective, according to Milne&#x27;s reports.

From 1857, Robert Mallet laid the foundation of modern instrumental seismology and carried out seismological experiments using explosives. He is also responsible for coining the word &quot;seismology.&quot;

In 1889 Ernst von Rebeur-Paschwitz recorded the first teleseismic earthquake signal (an earthquake in Japan recorded at Pottsdam Germany).

In 1897, Emil Wiechert&#x27;s theoretical calculations led him to conclude that the Earth&#x27;s interior consists of a mantle of silicates, surrounding a core of iron.

In 1906 Richard Dixon Oldham identified the separate arrival of P waves, S waves and surface waves on seismograms and found the first clear evidence that the Earth has a central core.

In 1909, Andrija Mohorovičić, one of the founders of modern seismology, discovered and defined the Mohorovičić discontinuity. Usually referred to as the &quot;Moho discontinuity&quot; or the &quot;Moho,&quot; it is the boundary between the Earth&#x27;s crust and the mantle. It is defined by the distinct change in velocity of seismological waves as they pass through changing densities of rock.

In 1910, after studying the April 1906 San Francisco earthquake, Harry Fielding Reid put forward the &quot;elastic rebound theory&quot; which remains the foundation for modern tectonic studies. The development of this theory depended on the considerable progress of earlier independent streams of work on the behavior of elastic materials and in mathematics.

An early scientific study of aftershocks from a destructive earthquake came after the January 1920 Xalapa earthquake. An Wiechert seismograph was brought to the Mexican city of Xalapa by rail after the earthquake. The instrument was deployed to record its aftershocks. Data from the seismograph would eventually determine that the mainshock was produced along a shallow crustal fault.

In 1926, Harold Jeffreys was the first to claim, based on his study of earthquake waves, that below the mantle, the core of the Earth is liquid.

In 1937, Inge Lehmann determined that within Earth&#x27;s liquid outer core there is a solid inner core.

In 1950, Michael S. Longuet-Higgins elucidated the ocean processes responsible for the global background seismic microseism.

By the 1960s, Earth science had developed to the point where a comprehensive theory of the causation of seismic events and geodetic motions had come together in the now well-established theory of plate tectonics.

==Types of seismic wave==
Seismic waves are elastic waves that propagate in solid or fluid materials. They can be divided into &quot;body waves&quot; that travel through the interior of the materials; &quot;surface waves&quot; that travel along surfaces or interfaces between materials; and &quot;normal modes&quot;, a form of standing wave.

===Body waves===

There are two types of body waves, pressure waves or primary waves (P waves) and shear or secondary waves (S waves). P waves are longitudinal waves that involve compression and expansion in the direction that the wave is moving and are always the first waves to appear on a seismogram as they are the fastest moving waves through solids. S waves are transverse waves that move perpendicular to the direction of propagation. S waves are slower than P waves. Therefore, they appear later than P waves on a seismogram. Fluids cannot support transverse elastic waves because of their low shear strength, so S waves only travel in solids.

===Surface waves===
Surface waves are the result of P and S waves interacting with the surface of the Earth. These waves are dispersive, meaning that different frequencies have different velocities. The two main surface wave types are Rayleigh waves, which have both compressional and shear motions, and Love waves, which are purely shear. Rayleigh waves result from the interaction of P waves and vertically polarized S waves with the surface and can exist in any solid medium. Love waves are formed by horizontally polarized S waves interacting with the surface, and can only exist if there is a change in the elastic properties with depth in a solid medium, which is always the case in seismological applications. Surface waves travel more slowly than P waves and S waves because they are the result of these waves traveling along indirect paths to interact with Earth&#x27;s surface. Because they travel along the surface of the Earth, their energy decays less rapidly than body waves (1/distance2 vs. 1/distance3), and thus the shaking caused by surface waves is generally stronger than that of body waves, and the primary surface waves are often thus the largest signals on earthquake seismograms. Surface waves are strongly excited when their source is close to the surface, as in a shallow earthquake or a near-surface explosion, and are much weaker for deep earthquake sources.

===Normal modes===

Both body and surface waves are traveling waves; however, large earthquakes can also make the entire Earth &quot;ring&quot; like a resonant bell. This ringing is a mixture of normal modes with discrete frequencies and periods of approximately an hour or shorter. Normal mode motion caused by a very large earthquake can be observed for up to a month after the event. The first observations of normal modes were made in the 1960s as the advent of higher fidelity instruments coincided with two of the largest earthquakes of the 20th century the 1960 Valdivia earthquake and the 1964 Alaska earthquake. Since then, the normal modes of the Earth have given us some of the strongest constraints on the deep structure of the Earth.

==Earthquakes==

One of the first attempts at the scientific study of earthquakes followed the 1755 Lisbon earthquake. Other notable earthquakes that spurred major advancements in the science of seismology include the 1857 Basilicata earthquake, the 1906 San Francisco earthquake, the 1964 Alaska earthquake, the 2004 Sumatra-Andaman earthquake, and the 2011 Great East Japan earthquake.

==Controlled seismic sources==

Seismic waves produced by explosions or vibrating controlled sources are one of the primary methods of underground exploration in geophysics (in addition to many different electromagnetic methods such as induced polarization and magnetotellurics). Controlled-source seismology has been used to map salt domes, anticlines and other geologic traps in petroleum-bearing rocks, faults, rock types, and long-buried giant meteor craters. For example, the Chicxulub Crater, which was caused by an impact that has been implicated in the extinction of the dinosaurs, was localized to Central America by analyzing ejecta in the Cretaceous–Paleogene boundary, and then physically proven to exist using seismic maps from oil exploration.

==Detection of seismic waves==

Seismometers are sensors that detect and record the motion of the Earth arising from elastic waves. Seismometers may be deployed at the Earth&#x27;s surface, in shallow vaults, in boreholes, or underwater. A complete instrument package that records seismic signals is called a seismograph. Networks of seismographs continuously record ground motions around the world to facilitate the monitoring and analysis of global earthquakes and other sources of seismic activity. Rapid location of earthquakes makes tsunami warnings possible because seismic waves travel considerably faster than tsunami waves. Seismometers also record signals from non-earthquake sources ranging from explosions (nuclear and chemical), to local noise from wind or anthropogenic activities, to incessant signals generated at the ocean floor and coasts induced by ocean waves (the global microseism), to cryospheric events associated with large icebergs and glaciers. Above-ocean meteor strikes with energies as high as 4.2 × 1013 J (equivalent to that released by an explosion of ten kilotons of TNT) have been recorded by seismographs, as have a number of industrial accidents and terrorist bombs and events (a field of study referred to as forensic seismology). A major long-term motivation for the global seismographic monitoring has been for the detection and study of nuclear testing.

==Mapping Earth&#x27;s interior==
Because seismic waves commonly propagate efficiently as they interact with the internal structure of the Earth, they provide high-resolution noninvasive methods for studying the planet&#x27;s interior. One of the earliest important discoveries (suggested by Richard Dixon Oldham in 1906 and definitively shown by Harold Jeffreys in 1926) was that the outer core of the earth is liquid. Since S waves do not pass through liquids, the liquid core causes a &quot;shadow&quot; on the side of the planet opposite the earthquake where no direct S waves are observed. In addition, P waves travel much slower through the outer core than the mantle.

Processing readings from many seismometers using seismic tomography, seismologists have mapped the mantle of the earth to a resolution of several hundred kilometers. This has enabled scientists to identify convection cells and other large-scale features such as the large low-shear-velocity provinces near the core–mantle boundary.

==Seismology and society==

===Earthquake prediction===

Forecasting a probable timing, location, magnitude and other important features of a forthcoming seismic event is called earthquake prediction. Various attempts have been made by seismologists and others to create effective systems for precise earthquake predictions, including the VAN method. Most seismologists do not believe that a system to provide timely warnings for individual earthquakes has yet been developed, and many believe that such a system would be unlikely to give useful warning of impending seismic events. However, more general forecasts routinely predict seismic hazard. Such forecasts estimate the probability of an earthquake of a particular size affecting a particular location within a particular time-span, and they are routinely used in earthquake engineering.

Public controversy over earthquake prediction erupted after Italian authorities indicted six seismologists and one government official for manslaughter in connection with a magnitude 6.3 earthquake in L&#x27;Aquila, Italy on April 5, 2009. A report in Nature stated that the indictment was widely seen in Italy and abroad as being for failing to predict the earthquake and drew condemnation from the American Association for the Advancement of Science and the American Geophysical Union. However, the magazine also indicated that the population of Aquila do not consider the failure to predict the earthquake to be the reason for the indictment, but rather the alleged failure of the scientists to evaluate and communicate risk. The indictment claims that, at a special meeting in L&#x27;Aquila the week before the earthquake occurred, scientists and officials were more interested in pacifying the population than providing adequate information about earthquake risk and preparedness.

In locations where a historical record exists it may be used to estimate the timing, location and magnitude of future seismic events. There are several interpretative factors to consider. The epicentres or foci and magnitudes of historical earthquakes are subject to interpretation meaning it is possible that 5–6 earthquakes described in the historical record could be larger events occurring elsewhere that were felt moderately in the populated areas that produced written records. Documentation in the historic period may be sparse or incomplete, and not give a full picture of the geographic scope of an earthquake, or the historical record may only have earthquake records spanning a few centuries, a very short time frame in a seismic cycle.

=== Engineering seismology ===
Engineering seismology is the study and application of seismology for engineering purposes. It generally applied to the branch of seismology that deals with the assessment of the seismic hazard of a site or region for the purposes of earthquake engineering. It is, therefore, a link between earth science and civil engineering. There are two principal components of engineering seismology. Firstly, studying earthquake history (e.g. historical and instrumental catalogs of seismicity) and tectonics to assess the earthquakes that could occur in a region and their characteristics and frequency of occurrence. Secondly, studying strong ground motions generated by earthquakes to assess the expected shaking from future earthquakes with similar characteristics. These strong ground motions could either be observations from accelerometers or seismometers or those simulated by computers using various techniques, which are then often used to develop ground motion prediction equations (or ground-motion models).

== Tools ==
Seismological instruments can generate large amounts of data. Systems for processing such data include:

* CUSP (Caltech-USGS Seismic Processing)
* RadExPro seismic software
* SeisComP3

==Notable seismologists==

* Aki, Keiiti
* Ambraseys, Nicholas
* Anderson, Don L.
* Bolt, Bruce
* Beroza,Gregory
* Claerbout, Jon
* Dziewonski, Adam Marian
* Ewing, Maurice
* Galitzine, Boris Borisovich
* Gamburtsev, Grigory A.
* Gutenberg, Beno
* Hough, Susan
* Jeffreys, Harold
* Jones, Lucy
* Kanamori, Hiroo
* Keilis-Borok, Vladimir
* Knopoff, Leon
* Lehmann, Inge
* Macelwane, James
* Mallet, Robert
* Mercalli, Giuseppe
* Milne, John
* Mohorovičić, Andrija
* Oldham, Richard Dixon
* Omori, Fusakichi
* Sebastião de Melo, Marquis of Pombal
* Press, Frank
* Rautian, Tatyana G.
* Richards, Paul G.
* Richter, Charles Francis
* Sekiya, Seikei
* Sieh, Kerry
* Paul G. Silver
* Stein, Ross
* Tucker, Brian
* Vidale, John
* Wen, Lianxing
* Winthrop, John
* Zhang Heng
==See also==

* (starquakes)
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
==Notes==
==References==
*
*
*
*
*
*


==External links==

* European-Mediterranean Seismological Center, real-time earthquake information website.
* Seismological Society of America.
* Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology.
* USGS Earthquake Hazards Program.
* A brief history of seismology to 1910 (UCSB ERI)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q83371" start="0" end="10" title="Seismology" label="Seismology"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="19" end="32" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="77" end="87" title="earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="183" end="193" title="earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2692116" start="210" end="216" title="quake (natural phenomenon)" label="quakes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="256" end="268" title="Linear elasticity#Elastic wave" label="elastic wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q400144" start="278" end="294" title="planetary body" label="planetary bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008639" start="328" end="364" title="earthquake environmental effects" label="environmental effects of earthquakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070" start="373" end="381" title="tsunamis" label="tsunamis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514746" start="389" end="403" title="seismic source" label="seismic source"/>
<link wikidata="Q109743457" start="451" end="457" title="Fluvial seismology" label="rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303250" start="467" end="477" title="microseism" label="microseism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394636" start="504" end="524" title="induced seismicity" label="artificial processes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501881" start="546" end="561" title="Paleoseismology" label="Paleoseismology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="591" end="598" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="663" end="668" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q160567" start="719" end="730" title="seismograph" label="seismograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q510375" start="743" end="753" title="seismogram" label="seismogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q83371" start="757" end="769" title="Seismology" label="seismologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q36303" start="996" end="1002" title="Thales" label="Thales"/>
<link wikidata="Q80612" start="1018" end="1039" title="Anaximenes of Miletus" label="Anaximenes of Miletus"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="1044" end="1053" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q197206" start="1062" end="1072" title="Zhang Heng" label="Zhang Heng"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="1122" end="1133" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q160567" start="1159" end="1170" title="seismoscope" label="seismoscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q76738" start="1194" end="1212" title="Athanasius Kircher" label="Athanasius Kircher"/>
<link wikidata="Q513593" start="1319" end="1332" title="Martin Lister" label="Martin Lister"/>
<link wikidata="Q704515" start="1349" end="1363" title="Nicolas Lemery" label="Nicolas Lemery"/>
<link wikidata="Q191055" start="1460" end="1485" title="1755 Lisbon earthquake" label="Lisbon earthquake of 1755"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="1539" end="1545" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q437582" start="1690" end="1700" title="John Bevis" label="John Bevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q373097" start="1712" end="1724" title="John Michell" label="John Michell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011363" start="1939" end="1945" title="Comrie, Perth and Kinross" label="Comrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="1949" end="1957" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="1997" end="2011" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q160567" start="2140" end="2151" title="seismometer" label="seismometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356328" start="2156" end="2174" title="James David Forbes" label="James David Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237592" start="2207" end="2223" title="David Milne-Home" label="David Milne-Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q983172" start="2485" end="2498" title="Robert Mallet" label="Robert Mallet"/>
<link wikidata="Q78178" start="2690" end="2716" title="Ernst von Rebeur-Paschwitz" label="Ernst von Rebeur-Paschwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q61771" start="2831" end="2844" title="Emil Wiechert" label="Emil Wiechert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664027" start="2906" end="2927" title="Structure of the Earth" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393136" start="3000" end="3020" title="Richard Dixon Oldham" label="Richard Dixon Oldham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208908" start="3056" end="3062" title="P wave" label="P wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q243445" start="3186" end="3205" title="Andrija Mohorovičić" label="Andrija Mohorovičić"/>
<link wikidata="Q194259" start="3276" end="3301" title="Mohorovičić discontinuity" label="Mohorovičić discontinuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q194259" start="3374" end="3378" title="Mohorovičić discontinuity" label="Moho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="3417" end="3422" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4232578" start="3430" end="3435" title="Crust (geology)" label="crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q4364434" start="3444" end="3450" title="Mantle (geology)" label="mantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q211386" start="3608" end="3637" title="1906 San Francisco earthquake" label="1906 San Francisco earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5668826" start="3639" end="3658" title="Harry Fielding Reid" label="Harry Fielding Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q861025" start="3681" end="3703" title="Elastic-rebound theory" label="elastic rebound theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q308442" start="3963" end="3973" title="aftershock" label="aftershock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5894966" start="4028" end="4050" title="1920 Xalapa earthquake" label="1920 Xalapa earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q379999" start="4329" end="4344" title="Harold Jeffreys" label="Harold Jeffreys"/>
<link wikidata="Q256839" start="4475" end="4487" title="Inge Lehmann" label="Inge Lehmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q857867" start="4531" end="4541" title="outer core" label="outer core"/>
<link wikidata="Q394352" start="4559" end="4569" title="inner core" label="inner core"/>
<link wikidata="Q2241033" start="4581" end="4607" title="Michael S. Longuet-Higgins" label="Michael S. Longuet-Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303250" start="4685" end="4695" title="microseism" label="microseism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="4894" end="4909" title="plate tectonics" label="plate tectonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3851760" start="4956" end="4969" title="elastic waves" label="elastic waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q13583542" start="5354" end="5359" title="Shearing (physics)" label="shear"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053186" start="5380" end="5386" title="S wave" label="S wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q626707" start="5402" end="5419" title="longitudinal wave" label="longitudinal wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q3828108" start="5434" end="5445" title="Compression (geology)" label="compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294544" start="5450" end="5459" title="rarefaction" label="expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053186" start="5611" end="5618" title="S waves" label="S waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q691978" start="5623" end="5638" title="transverse wave" label="transverse wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q182893" start="6033" end="6043" title="Dispersion (optics)" label="dispersive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351144" start="6143" end="6156" title="Rayleigh wave" label="Rayleigh wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307937" start="6212" end="6221" title="Love wave" label="Love wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q510375" start="7099" end="7109" title="seismogram" label="seismogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q900488" start="7491" end="7503" title="normal modes" label="normal modes"/>
<link wikidata="Q212618" start="7860" end="7884" title="1960 Valdivia earthquake" label="1960 Valdivia earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q749610" start="7893" end="7915" title="1964 Alaska earthquake" label="1964 Alaska earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q601724" start="8262" end="8288" title="1857 Basilicata earthquake" label="1857 Basilicata earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q749610" start="8329" end="8351" title="1964 Alaska earthquake" label="1964 Alaska earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q130754" start="8362" end="8388" title="Sumatra-Andaman earthquake" label="Sumatra-Andaman earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q36204" start="8403" end="8430" title="Tohoku earthquake" label="Great East Japan earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q179057" start="8491" end="8500" title="explosion" label="explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202243" start="8568" end="8605" title="Exploration geophysics" label="underground exploration in geophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="8637" end="8652" title="Electromagnetic radiation" label="electromagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200946" start="8669" end="8689" title="induced polarization" label="induced polarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413106" start="8694" end="8710" title="magnetotellurics" label="magnetotellurics"/>
<link wikidata="Q477449" start="8763" end="8772" title="salt dome" label="salt dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="8814" end="8823" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="8832" end="8837" title="rock (geology)" label="rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089" start="8839" end="8845" title="Fault (geology)" label="faults"/>
<link wikidata="Q131136" start="8881" end="8887" title="meteor" label="meteor"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="8888" end="8895" title="Impact crater" label="craters"/>
<link wikidata="Q55816" start="8914" end="8930" title="Chicxulub Crater" label="Chicxulub Crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q55811" start="8976" end="9004" title="Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event" label="implicated in the extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q430" start="9012" end="9020" title="dinosaur" label="dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q682871" start="9083" end="9112" title="Cretaceous–Paleogene boundary" label="Cretaceous–Paleogene boundary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241434" start="9174" end="9189" title="oil exploration" label="oil exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q160567" start="9224" end="9235" title="Seismometer" label="Seismometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2013368" start="9418" end="9428" title="Ocean-bottom seismometer" label="underwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q160567" start="9501" end="9512" title="seismograph" label="seismograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070" start="9730" end="9737" title="tsunami" label="tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303250" start="10084" end="10094" title="microseism" label="microseism"/>
<link wikidata="Q493109" start="10100" end="10111" title="cryosphere" label="cryospheric"/>
<link wikidata="Q47568" start="10141" end="10148" title="iceberg" label="iceberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q25269" start="10227" end="10228" title="joule" label="J"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468726" start="10439" end="10458" title="forensic seismology" label="forensic seismology"/>
<link wikidata="Q210112" start="10570" end="10585" title="nuclear testing" label="nuclear testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393136" start="10880" end="10900" title="Richard Dixon Oldham" label="Richard Dixon Oldham"/>
<link wikidata="Q857867" start="10973" end="10983" title="outer core" label="outer core"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850768" start="11313" end="11331" title="seismic tomography" label="seismic tomography"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312138" start="11470" end="11485" title="convection cell" label="convection cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146465" start="11530" end="11564" title="large low-shear-velocity provinces" label="large low-shear-velocity provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330051" start="11574" end="11594" title="core–mantle boundary" label="core–mantle boundary"/>
<link wikidata="Q606654" start="11775" end="11796" title="earthquake prediction" label="earthquake prediction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555599" start="11936" end="11946" title="VAN method" label="VAN method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632490" start="12230" end="12244" title="seismic hazard" label="seismic hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q909789" start="12418" end="12440" title="earthquake engineering" label="earthquake engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q17310301" start="12523" end="12531" title="indicted" label="indicted"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882220" start="12582" end="12594" title="manslaughter" label="manslaughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q207918" start="12614" end="12681" title="2009 L&amp;#x27;Aquila earthquake" label="a magnitude 6.3 earthquake in L&amp;#x27;Aquila, Italy on April 5, 2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q180445" start="12695" end="12701" title="Nature (journal)" label="Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q40358" start="12843" end="12894" title="American Association for the Advancement of Science" label="American Association for the Advancement of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q464704" start="12903" end="12929" title="American Geophysical Union" label="American Geophysical Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476" start="13224" end="13237" title="L&amp;#x27;Aquila" label="L&amp;#x27;Aquila"/>
<link wikidata="Q111973346" start="14163" end="14176" title="seismic cycle" label="seismic cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008" start="14501" end="14514" title="earth science" label="earth science"/>
<link wikidata="Q77590" start="14519" end="14536" title="civil engineering" label="civil engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q193343" start="14699" end="14708" title="tectonics" label="tectonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q192940" start="15032" end="15045" title="accelerometer" label="accelerometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279903" start="15381" end="15406" title="RadExPro seismic software" label="RadExPro seismic software"/>
<link wikidata="Q493209" start="15449" end="15460" title="Keiiti Aki" label="Aki, Keiiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q15471156" start="15463" end="15482" title="Nicholas Ambraseys" label="Ambraseys, Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q151861" start="15485" end="15501" title="Don L. Anderson" label="Anderson, Don L."/>
<link wikidata="Q991546" start="15504" end="15515" title="Bruce Bolt" label="Bolt, Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5606818" start="15518" end="15532" title="Gregory Beroza" label="Beroza,Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="Q15994984" start="15535" end="15549" title="Jon Claerbout" label="Claerbout, Jon"/>
<link wikidata="Q349221" start="15552" end="15575" title="Adam Dziewonski" label="Dziewonski, Adam Marian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561583" start="15578" end="15592" title="Maurice Ewing" label="Ewing, Maurice"/>
<link wikidata="Q893636" start="15595" end="15622" title="Boris Borisovich Galitzine" label="Galitzine, Boris Borisovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747231" start="15625" end="15647" title="Grigoriy A. Gamburtsev" label="Gamburtsev, Grigory A."/>
<link wikidata="Q76770" start="15650" end="15665" title="Beno Gutenberg" label="Gutenberg, Beno"/>
<link wikidata="Q15460956" start="15668" end="15680" title="Susan Hough" label="Hough, Susan"/>
<link wikidata="Q379999" start="15683" end="15699" title="Harold Jeffreys" label="Jeffreys, Harold"/>
<link wikidata="Q16730410" start="15702" end="15713" title="Lucy Jones" label="Jones, Lucy"/>
<link wikidata="Q943693" start="15716" end="15731" title="Hiroo Kanamori" label="Kanamori, Hiroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q320835" start="15734" end="15756" title="Vladimir Keilis-Borok" label="Keilis-Borok, Vladimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q962770" start="15759" end="15772" title="Leon Knopoff" label="Knopoff, Leon"/>
<link wikidata="Q256839" start="15775" end="15788" title="Inge Lehmann" label="Lehmann, Inge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129139" start="15791" end="15807" title="James B. Macelwane" label="Macelwane, James"/>
<link wikidata="Q983172" start="15810" end="15824" title="Robert Mallet" label="Mallet, Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q432951" start="15827" end="15845" title="Giuseppe Mercalli" label="Mercalli, Giuseppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739759" start="15848" end="15859" title="John Milne" label="Milne, John"/>
<link wikidata="Q243445" start="15862" end="15882" title="Andrija Mohorovičić" label="Mohorovičić, Andrija"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393136" start="15885" end="15906" title="Richard Dixon Oldham" label="Oldham, Richard Dixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632448" start="15909" end="15925" title="Fusakichi Omori" label="Omori, Fusakichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q319511" start="15928" end="15964" title="Sebastião José de Carvalho e Melo" label="Sebastião de Melo, Marquis of Pombal"/>
<link wikidata="Q638644" start="15967" end="15979" title="Frank Press" label="Press, Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q97572143" start="15982" end="16001" title="Tatyana G. Rautian" label="Rautian, Tatyana G."/>
<link wikidata="Q7150793" start="16004" end="16021" title="Paul G. Richards" label="Richards, Paul G."/>
<link wikidata="Q184014" start="16024" end="16048" title="Charles Francis Richter" label="Richter, Charles Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q283854" start="16051" end="16065" title="Seikei Sekiya" label="Sekiya, Seikei"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394661" start="16068" end="16079" title="Kerry Sieh" label="Sieh, Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7153608" start="16082" end="16096" title="Paul Silver" label="Paul G. Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369640" start="16099" end="16110" title="Ross Stein" label="Stein, Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965505" start="16113" end="16126" title="Brian Tucker (seismologist)" label="Tucker, Brian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261987" start="16129" end="16141" title="John Vidale" label="Vidale, John"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540103" start="16144" end="16157" title="Lianxing Wen" label="Wen, Lianxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182777" start="16160" end="16174" title="John Winthrop (educator)" label="Winthrop, John"/>
<link wikidata="Q197206" start="16177" end="16187" title="Zhang Heng" label="Zhang Heng"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28936" wikidata="Q427161" url="?curid=28936" title="Cyanoacrylate">
<text>Cyanoacrylates are a family of strong fast-acting adhesives with industrial, medical, and household uses. They are derived from ethyl cyanoacrylate and related esters. The cyanoacrylate group in the monomer rapidly polymerizes in the presence of water to form long, strong chains.

Specific cyanoacrylates include methyl 2-cyanoacrylate (MCA), ethyl 2-cyanoacrylate (ECA, commonly sold under trade names such as &quot;Super Glue&quot; and &quot;Krazy Glue&quot;), &quot;n&quot;-butyl cyanoacrylate (n-BCA), octyl cyanoacrylate, and 2-octyl cyanoacrylate (used in medical, veterinary and first aid applications). Cyanoacrylate adhesives are sometimes known generically as instant glue, power glue, or super glue. The abbreviation &quot;CA&quot; is commonly used for industrial grade cyanoacrylate.

==Development==

The original patent for cyanoacrylate was filed in 1947 by the B.F. Goodrich Company as an outgrowth of a search for materials suitable for clear plastic gun sights for the war effort. In 1942, a team of scientists headed by Harry Coover Jr. stumbled upon a formulation that stuck to everything with which it came in contact. The team quickly rejected the substance for the wartime application, but in 1951, while working as researchers for Eastman Kodak, Coover and a colleague, Fred Joyner, rediscovered cyanoacrylates. The two realized the true commercial potential, and a form of the adhesive was first sold in 1958 under the title &quot;Eastman #910&quot; (later &quot;Eastman 910&quot;).

During the 1960s, Eastman Kodak sold cyanoacrylate to Loctite, which in turn repackaged and distributed it under a different brand name &quot;Loctite Quick Set 404&quot;. In 1971, Loctite developed its own manufacturing technology and introduced its own line of cyanoacrylate, called &quot;Super Bonder&quot;. Loctite quickly gained market share, and by the late 1970s it was believed to have exceeded Eastman Kodak&#x27;s share in the North American industrial cyanoacrylate market. National Starch and Chemical Company purchased Eastman Kodak&#x27;s cyanoacrylate business and combined it with several acquisitions made throughout the 1970s forming Permabond. Other manufacturers of cyanoacrylate include LePage (a Canadian company acquired by Henkel in 1996), the Permabond Division of National Starch and Chemical, which was a subsidiary of Unilever. Together, Loctite, Eastman, and Permabond accounted for approximately 75% of the industrial cyanoacrylate market. Permabond continued to manufacture the original 910 formula.

==Polymerization==

The most common monomer is ethyl cyanoacrylate. Several related esters are known. To facilitate easy handling, a cyanoacrylate monomer is frequently formulated with an ingredient such as fumed silica to make it more viscous or gel-like. Formulations are available with additives to increase shear strength, creating a more impact resistant bond. Such additives may include rubber, as in Loctite&#x27;s &quot;Ultra Gel&quot;, or others which are not specified.

In general, the C=C groups rapidly undergo chain-growth polymerisation in the presence of water (specifically hydroxide ions), forming long, strong chains, joining the bonded surfaces together. Because the presence of moisture causes the glue to set, exposure to normal levels of humidity in the air causes a thin skin to start to form within seconds, which very greatly slows the reaction; hence, cyanoacrylates are applied as thin coats to ensure that the reaction proceeds rapidly for bonding. Cyanoacrylate adhesives generally have a short shelf life—about one year from manufacture if unopened, and one month once opened, but this can be extended by refrigeration. 
==General properties==
Cyanoacrylates are mainly used as adhesives. Thin layers bond effectively, thick layers much less so. They bond many substances, including human skin and tissues, natural fibres, cotton, wool, and leather.

Cyanoacrylate glue has a low shearing strength, which has led to its use as a temporary adhesive in cases where the piece needs to be sheared off later. Common examples include mounting a workpiece to a sacrificial glue block on a lathe, and tightening pins and bolts. It is also used in conjunction with another slower, but more resilient, adhesive as a way of rapidly forming a joint, which then holds the pieces in the appropriate configuration until the second adhesive has set.

Cyanoacrylate-based glue has a weak bond with smooth surfaces and as such easily gives to friction; a good example of this is the fact that cyanoacrylates may be removed from human skin by means of abrasives (e.g. sugar or sandpaper).

==Uses==

===Medical and veterinary===

Cyanoacrylate glue is widely used in human and veterinary medicine. It was in veterinary use for mending bone, hide, and tortoise shell by the early 1970s or before. A cyanoacrylate spray was used in the Vietnam War to reduce bleeding in wounded soldiers until they could be taken to a hospital. 

&quot;n&quot;-Butyl cyanoacrylate has been used medically since the 1970s. In the US, due to its potential to irritate the skin, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) did not approve its use as a medical adhesive until 1998 with Dermabond (2-octyl cyanoacrylate). A 1986 independent study suggests that cyanoacrylate can be safer and more functional for wound closure than traditional suturing (stitches). Although cyanoacrylates are widely used for sutureless wound repair, &quot;existing adhesives still lack sufficient adhesion strength to completely replace sutures and staples.&quot;

Some rock climbers use cyanoacrylate to repair damage to the skin on their fingertips. Similarly, stringed-instrument players can form protective finger caps (typically, when they lose their calluses due to inactivity or accidents) with cyanoacrylates. While the glue is not very toxic and wears off quickly with shed skin, applying large quantities of glue and its fumes directly to the skin can cause chemical burns.

While standard &quot;superglue&quot; is 100% ethyl 2-cyanoacrylate, many custom formulations (e.g.&quot;,&quot; 91% ECA, 9% poly(methyl methacrylate), &lt;0.5% hydroquinone, and a small amount of organic sulfonic acid, and variations on the compound &quot;n&quot;-butyl cyanoacrylate for medical applications) have come to be used for specific applications. Three cyanoacrylate compounds are currently available as topical skin adhesives. 2-Octyl cyanoacrylate is marketed as Dermabond, SurgiSeal, and more LiquiBand Exceed. &quot;n&quot;-Butyl cyanoacrylate is marketed as Histoacryl, Indermil, GluStitch, GluSeal, PeriAcryl, and LiquiBand. The compound ethyl 2-cyanoacrylate is available as Epiglu.

The ester substituent has several effects upon the biocompatibility of the adhesive. Longer side chains result in higher flexibility of the cured adhesive allowing a better match for the flexibility of skin, and can result in a slower release of formaldehyde after curing. Alkoxy-ethyl substituents have also been investigated and have shown some promise as a medical adhesive.

===Forensics===
Cyanoacrylate is used as a forensic tool to capture latent fingerprints on non-porous surfaces like glass, plastic, etc. Cyanoacrylate is warmed to produce fumes that react with the invisible fingerprint residues and atmospheric moisture to form a white polymer (polycyanoacrylate) on the fingerprint ridges. The ridges can then be recorded. The developed fingerprints are, on most surfaces (except on white plastic or similar), visible to the naked eye. Invisible or poorly visible prints can be further enhanced by applying a luminescent or non-luminescent stain.

===Cosmetics===
Cyanoacrylate is used in the cosmetology and beauty industry as an eyelash extension glue, or a &quot;nail glue&quot; for some artificial nail enhancements such as nail tips and nail wraps, and is sometimes mistaken for eye drops causing accidental injury (adhesion and/or chemical eye injury).

===Niche and hobbies===
Cyanoacrylates are used to assemble prototype electronics (used in wire wrap), flying model aircraft, and as retention dressings for nuts and bolts. Their effectiveness in bonding metal and general versatility have made them popular among modeling and miniatures hobbyists.

Cyanoacrylate glue&#x27;s ability to resist water has made it popular with marine aquarium hobbyists for fragmenting corals. The cut branches of hard corals, such as Acropora, can be glued to a piece of live rock (harvested reef coral) or Milliput (epoxy putty) to allow the new fragment to grow out. It is safe to use directly in the tank, unlike silicone which must be cured to be safe. However, as a class of adhesives, traditional cyanoacrylates are classified as having &quot;weak&quot; resistance to both moisture and heat although the inclusion of phthalic anhydride reportedly counteracts both of these characteristics.

Cyanoacrylate glue is also used frequently in aquascaping both freshwater and marine aquariums for the purpose of securing the rhizomes of live plants to pieces of wood or stone. Thin cyanoacrylate glue has application in woodworking. It can be used as a fast-drying, glossy finish. An oil, such as boiled linseed oil, may be used to control the rate at which the cyanoacrylate cures. Cyanoacrylate glue is also used in combination with sawdust (from a saw or sanding) to fill voids and cracks. These repair methods are used on piano soundboards, wood instruments, and wood furniture. Cyanoacrylate glue is also used in the finishing of pen blanks (wooden blanks for turning pens) that have been turned on a lathe by applying multiple thin layers to build up a hard, clear finish that can then be sanded and polished to a glossy finish.

Some hobby applications call for cyanoacrylate glue mixed with inorganic fillers such as baking soda (sodium bicarbonate) and calcium oxide.

=== Arrow glues ===
Cyanoacrylate is used in archery to glue fletching to arrow shafts. Some special fletching glues are primarily cyanoacrylate repackaged in special fletching glue kits. Such tubes often have a long, thin metal nozzle for improved precision in applying the glue to the base of the fletching and to ensure secure bonding to the arrow shaft.

=== Fencing ===
Cyanoacrylate is used in fencing to glue the blade wire into the groove of the epee or foil.

==Safety issues==
===Skin injuries===
Cyanoacrylate adhesives may adhere to body parts, and injuries may occur when parts of the skin are torn off. Without force, however, the glue will spontaneously separate from the skin in time (up to four days). The glue can also cause chemical burns, and exposed skin should be washed with soap and warm water. Separation can be accelerated by applying vegetable oil or acetone near, on, and around the glue. If glue gets in eyes, serious injuries can occur. In any case of adhesives getting in or around the eyes, the eye(s) should be rinsed with lukewarm water for 15 minutes and medical care obtained.

===Toxicity===
Heating causes depolymerization of the cured polymers producing gaseous products that are highly irritating. They are immediately polymerized by the moisture in the membranes and become inert. These risks can be minimized by using cyanoacrylate in well-ventilated areas. About 5% of the population can become sensitized to cyanoacrylate fumes after repeated exposure, resulting in flu-like symptoms. Cyanoacrylate may also be a skin irritant, causing an allergic skin reaction. The American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH) assign a threshold limit value exposure limit of 200 parts per billion. On rare occasions, inhalation may trigger asthma. There is no singular measurement of toxicity for all cyanoacrylate adhesives because of the large number of adhesives that contain various cyanoacrylate formulations.

The United Kingdom&#x27;s Health and Safety Executive and the United States National Toxicology Program have concluded that the use of ethyl cyanoacrylate is safe and that additional study is unnecessary. The compound 2-octyl cyanoacrylate degrades much more slowly due to its longer organic backbone (series of covalently bonded carbon molecules) and the adhesive does not reach the threshold of tissue toxicity. Due to the toxicity issues of ethyl cyanoacrylate, the use of 2-octyl cyanoacrylate for sutures is preferred.

===Reaction with cotton, wool, and other fibrous materials ===
Applying cyanoacrylate to some natural materials such as cotton (jeans, cotton swabs, cotton balls, and certain yarns or fabrics), leather or wool results in a powerful, rapid, exothermic reaction. This reaction also occurs with fiberglass and carbon fiber. The heat released may cause serious burns or release irritating white smoke. Material safety data sheets for cyanoacrylate instruct users not to wear cotton (jeans) or wool clothing, especially cotton gloves, when applying or handling cyanoacrylates.

==Solvents and debonders==
Acetone, commonly found as a fraction of nail polish remover (or at hardware stores in pure form), is a widely available solvent capable of softening cured cyanoacrylate. Other solvents include nitromethane, dimethylformamide, dimethyl sulfoxide, and methylene chloride. Another viable solvent for removing cured cyanoacrylate is &quot;gamma&quot;-butyrolactone. Commercial debonders are also available, many based on propylene carbonate.

==Shelf life==
Cyanoacrylate adhesives have a short shelf life. Date-stamped containers help to ensure that the adhesive is still viable. One manufacturer supplies the following information and advice: When kept unopened in a cool, dry location such as a refrigerator at a temperature of about 55 °F (13 °C), the shelf life of cyanoacrylate will be extended from about one year from manufacture to at least 15 months. If the adhesive is to be used within six months, it is not necessary to refrigerate it. Cyanoacrylates are moisture-sensitive, and moving from a cool to a hot location will create condensation; after removing from the refrigerator, it is best to let the adhesive reach room temperature before opening. After opening, it should be used within 30 days. Open containers should not be refrigerated. Another manufacturer says that the maximum shelf life of 12 months is obtained for some of their cyanoacrylates if the original containers are stored at . User forums and some manufacturers say that an almost unlimited shelf life is attainable by storing unopened at , the typical temperature of a domestic freezer, and allowing the contents to reach room temperature before use. Opening a container while chilled may cause moisture from the air to condense in the container; however, reports from hobbyists suggest that storing cyanoacrylate in a freezer can preserve opened cyanoacrylate indefinitely.

As cyanoacrylates age, they polymerize, become thicker, and cure more slowly. They can be thinned with a cyanoacrylate of the same chemical composition with lower viscosity. Storing cyanoacrylates below will nearly stop the polymerization process and prevent aging.

==References==
==Further reading==

* derma+flex QS 510k Letter: http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/cdrh_docs/pdf10/K101276.pdf
* LiquiBand 510k Letter: http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/cdrh_docs/pdf8/K083531.pdf
* 
* 
* 


==External links==
* Was Super Glue invented to seal battle wounds in Vietnam? (from The Straight Dope)
* Cyanoacrylate Toxicity
* Cyanoacrylate Adhesive / Super Glue Safety Data Sheets
* Safety in the Home: Super Glue - Queensland Health
* Cyanoacrylate Technical Data Sheet
* &quot;Alcohol-Catalyzed α-Cyanoacrylate Adhesive Compositions&quot;, filed June 1954, issued October 1956.
* 3M Activators, Primers and Debonder
* Application note on measuring cure kinetics of cyanoacrylate glues</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q427161" start="0" end="14" title="Cyanoacrylate" label="Cyanoacrylates"/>
<link wikidata="Q131790" start="50" end="58" title="adhesive" label="adhesive"/>
<link wikidata="Q209366" start="128" end="147" title="ethyl cyanoacrylate" label="ethyl cyanoacrylate"/>
<link wikidata="Q101487" start="160" end="165" title="ester" label="ester"/>
<link wikidata="Q178827" start="199" end="206" title="monomer" label="monomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q81163" start="215" end="222" title="polymer" label="polymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q209367" start="314" end="336" title="methyl cyanoacrylate" label="methyl 2-cyanoacrylate"/>
<link wikidata="Q209366" start="344" end="365" title="ethyl cyanoacrylate" label="ethyl 2-cyanoacrylate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003173" start="464" end="497" title="butyl cyanoacrylate" label="&amp;quot;n&amp;quot;-butyl cyanoacrylate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077122" start="507" end="526" title="octyl cyanoacrylate" label="octyl cyanoacrylate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596910" start="532" end="553" title="2-octyl cyanoacrylate" label="2-octyl cyanoacrylate"/>
<link wikidata="Q427161" start="671" end="683" title="Cyanoacrylate" label="instant glue"/>
<link wikidata="Q427161" start="685" end="695" title="Cyanoacrylate" label="power glue"/>
<link wikidata="Q427161" start="700" end="710" title="Cyanoacrylate" label="super glue"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="828" end="834" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537591" start="878" end="899" title="B.F. Goodrich Company" label="B.F. Goodrich Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134322" start="969" end="979" title="Sight (device)" label="gun sights"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="984" end="991" title="World War II" label="the war"/>
<link wikidata="Q165205" start="1040" end="1056" title="Harry Coover" label="Harry Coover Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q486269" start="1256" end="1269" title="Eastman Kodak" label="Eastman Kodak"/>
<link wikidata="Q567411" start="1564" end="1571" title="Loctite" label="Loctite"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="1946" end="1959" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q8273105" start="1994" end="2030" title="National Starch and Chemical" label="National Starch and Chemical Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="2227" end="2235" title="Canada" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q276507" start="2256" end="2262" title="Henkel" label="Henkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q157062" start="2355" end="2363" title="Unilever" label="Unilever"/>
<link wikidata="Q209366" start="2588" end="2607" title="ethyl cyanoacrylate" label="ethyl cyanoacrylate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918778" start="2748" end="2760" title="fumed silica" label="fumed silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q128709" start="2777" end="2784" title="viscous" label="viscous"/>
<link wikidata="Q901396" start="2852" end="2866" title="shear strength" label="shear strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q131877" start="2934" end="2940" title="Natural rubber" label="rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q11821744" start="3065" end="3092" title="chain-growth polymerisation" label="chain-growth polymerisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q425597" start="3132" end="3145" title="hydroxide ion" label="hydroxide ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q180600" start="3302" end="3310" title="humidity" label="humidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689021" start="3566" end="3576" title="shelf life" label="shelf life"/>
<link wikidata="Q13583542" start="3952" end="3960" title="Shearing (physics)" label="shearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q187833" start="4154" end="4159" title="lathe" label="lathe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="4887" end="4898" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="5114" end="5147" title="U.S. Food and Drug Administration" label="U.S. Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q619800" start="5372" end="5380" title="suturing" label="suturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154336" start="5582" end="5595" title="Rock climbing" label="rock climbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2197452" start="5768" end="5774" title="callus" label="callus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141836" start="5980" end="5993" title="chemical burn" label="chemical burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q146123" start="6121" end="6146" title="poly(methyl methacrylate)" label="poly(methyl methacrylate)"/>
<link wikidata="Q419164" start="6157" end="6169" title="hydroquinone" label="hydroquinone"/>
<link wikidata="Q250437" start="6201" end="6214" title="sulfonic acid" label="sulfonic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q161210" start="6945" end="6957" title="formaldehyde" label="formaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q495304" start="7121" end="7129" title="forensic" label="forensic"/>
<link wikidata="Q178022" start="7146" end="7164" title="latent fingerprint" label="latent fingerprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474" start="7201" end="7208" title="plastic" label="plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147671" start="7804" end="7819" title="Artificial nails" label="artificial nail"/>
<link wikidata="Q552308" start="7897" end="7906" title="eye drops" label="eye drops"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090456" start="7950" end="7969" title="chemical eye injury" label="chemical eye injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="8043" end="8054" title="electronics" label="electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q605181" start="8064" end="8073" title="wire wrap" label="wire wrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q60055387" start="8083" end="8097" title="model aircraft" label="model aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q190977" start="8130" end="8133" title="nut (hardware)" label="nut"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8139" end="8143" title="screw#bolt" label="bolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498959" start="8236" end="8244" title="scale model" label="modeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053894" start="8249" end="8259" title="Miniature figure (gaming)" label="miniatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916943" start="8347" end="8362" title="marine aquarium" label="marine aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274559" start="8377" end="8388" title="Fragmentation (reproduction)" label="fragmenting"/>
<link wikidata="Q195605" start="8417" end="8428" title="Scleractinia" label="hard corals"/>
<link wikidata="Q292100" start="8438" end="8446" title="Acropora" label="Acropora"/>
<link wikidata="Q686478" start="8475" end="8484" title="live rock" label="live rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3457773" start="8511" end="8519" title="Milliput" label="Milliput"/>
<link wikidata="Q146439" start="8620" end="8628" title="silicone" label="silicone"/>
<link wikidata="Q410882" start="8827" end="8845" title="phthalic anhydride" label="phthalic anhydride"/>
<link wikidata="Q623189" start="8947" end="8958" title="aquascaping" label="aquascaping"/>
<link wikidata="Q184208" start="9028" end="9036" title="rhizomes" label="rhizomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q816871" start="9123" end="9134" title="woodworking" label="woodworking"/>
<link wikidata="Q818405" start="9200" end="9218" title="boiled linseed oil" label="boiled linseed oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q816713" start="9338" end="9345" title="sawdust" label="sawdust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189953" start="9435" end="9446" title="Sound board (music)" label="soundboards"/>
<link wikidata="Q179731" start="9841" end="9859" title="sodium bicarbonate" label="sodium bicarbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q185006" start="9865" end="9878" title="calcium oxide" label="calcium oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q108429" start="9926" end="9933" title="archery" label="archery"/>
<link wikidata="Q973227" start="9942" end="9951" title="fletching" label="fletching"/>
<link wikidata="Q12100" start="10281" end="10288" title="fencing" label="fencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q840419" start="10335" end="10339" title="epee" label="epee"/>
<link wikidata="Q471447" start="10343" end="10347" title="Foil (fencing)" label="foil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739805" start="10742" end="10755" title="vegetable oil" label="vegetable oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q49546" start="10759" end="10766" title="acetone" label="acetone"/>
<link wikidata="Q906487" start="11025" end="11041" title="depolymerization" label="depolymerization"/>
<link wikidata="Q262175" start="11196" end="11201" title="Chemically inert" label="inert"/>
<link wikidata="Q657619" start="11319" end="11329" title="Sensitization (immunology)" label="sensitized"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508755" start="11391" end="11408" title="flu-like symptoms" label="flu-like symptoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q12077704" start="11464" end="11486" title="Allergic contact dermatitis" label="allergic skin reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3614049" start="11492" end="11549" title="American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists" label="American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists"/>
<link wikidata="Q21005" start="11567" end="11588" title="threshold limit value" label="threshold limit value"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="11611" end="11628" title="parts per billion" label="parts per billion"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="11672" end="11678" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478750" start="11874" end="11901" title="Health and Safety Executive" label="Health and Safety Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268182" start="11924" end="11951" title="National Toxicology Program" label="National Toxicology Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q127920" start="12160" end="12177" title="Covalent bond" label="covalently bonded"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="12178" end="12184" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="12493" end="12499" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q83363" start="12501" end="12506" title="jeans" label="jeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q12201" start="12508" end="12519" title="cotton swab" label="cotton swab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601749" start="12522" end="12533" title="cotton ball" label="cotton ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q49007" start="12548" end="12552" title="yarn" label="yarn"/>
<link wikidata="Q286" start="12567" end="12574" title="leather" label="leather"/>
<link wikidata="Q42329" start="12578" end="12582" title="wool" label="wool"/>
<link wikidata="Q60661" start="12613" end="12623" title="exothermic" label="exothermic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7224880" start="12665" end="12675" title="fiberglass" label="fiberglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q910977" start="12680" end="12692" title="carbon fiber" label="carbon fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q222067" start="12771" end="12798" title="Material safety data sheets" label="Material safety data sheets"/>
<link wikidata="Q49546" start="12973" end="12980" title="Acetone" label="Acetone"/>
<link wikidata="Q223807" start="13014" end="13033" title="nail polish remover" label="nail polish remover"/>
<link wikidata="Q407733" start="13167" end="13179" title="nitromethane" label="nitromethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q409298" start="13181" end="13198" title="dimethylformamide" label="dimethylformamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q407927" start="13200" end="13218" title="dimethyl sulfoxide" label="dimethyl sulfoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q421748" start="13224" end="13242" title="methylene chloride" label="methylene chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q79739" start="13303" end="13334" title="gamma-butyrolactone" label="&amp;quot;gamma&amp;quot;-butyrolactone"/>
<link wikidata="Q415979" start="13391" end="13410" title="propylene carbonate" label="propylene carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q37828" start="14533" end="14540" title="freezer" label="freezer"/>
<link wikidata="Q128709" start="14994" end="15003" title="viscosity" label="viscosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766865" start="15399" end="15416" title="The Straight Dope" label="The Straight Dope"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006271" start="15535" end="15552" title="Queensland Health" label="Queensland Health"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28938" wikidata="Q959549" url="?curid=28938" title="Shell script">
<text>A shell script is a computer program designed to be run by a Unix shell, a command-line interpreter. The various dialects of shell scripts are considered to be command languages. Typical operations performed by shell scripts include file manipulation, program execution, and printing text. A script which sets up the environment, runs the program, and does any necessary cleanup or logging, is called a wrapper.

The term is also used more generally to mean the automated mode of running an operating system shell; each operating system uses a particular name for these functions including batch files (MSDos-Win95 stream, OS/2), command procedures (VMS), and shell scripts (Windows NT stream and third-party derivatives like 4NT—article is at cmd.exe), and mainframe operating systems are associated with a number of terms.

Shells commonly present in Unix and Unix-like systems include the Korn shell, the Bourne shell, and GNU Bash. While a Unix operating system may have a different default shell, such as Zsh on macOS, these shells are typically present for backwards compatibility.

==Capabilities==

===Comments===
Comments are ignored by the shell. They typically begin with the hash symbol (codice_1), and continue until the end of the line.

===Configurable choice of scripting language===

The shebang, or hash-bang, is a special kind of comment which the system uses to determine what interpreter to use to execute the file. The shebang must be the first line of the file, and start with &quot;codice_2&quot;. In Unix-like operating systems, the characters following the &quot;codice_2&quot; prefix are interpreted as a path to an executable program that will interpret the script.

===Shortcuts===
A shell script can provide a convenient variation of a system command where special environment settings, command options, or post-processing apply automatically, but in a way that allows the new script to still act as a fully normal Unix command.

One example would be to create a version of ls, the command to list files, giving it a shorter command name of codice_4, which would be normally saved in a user&#x27;s codice_5 directory as codice_6, and a default set of command options pre-supplied.
#!/bin/sh
LC_COLLATE=C ls -FCas &quot;$@&quot;
Here, the first line uses a shebang to indicate which interpreter should execute the rest of the script, and the second line makes a listing with options for file format indicators, columns, all files (none omitted), and a size in blocks. The codice_7 sets the default collation order to not fold upper and lower case together, not intermix dotfiles with normal filenames as a side effect of ignoring punctuation in the names (dotfiles are usually only shown if an option like codice_8 is used), and the codice_9 causes any parameters given to codice_4 to pass through as parameters to ls, so that all of the normal options and other syntax known to ls can still be used.

The user could then simply use codice_4 for the most commonly used short listing.

Another example of a shell script that could be used as a shortcut would be to print a list of all the files and directories within a given directory.
#!/bin/sh

clear
ls -al
In this case, the shell script would start with its normal starting line of #!/bin/sh. Following this, the script executes the command clear which clears the terminal of all text before going to the next line. The following line provides the main function of the script. The ls -al command lists the files and directories that are in the directory from which the script is being run. The ls command attributes could be changed to reflect the needs of the user.

===Batch jobs===
Shell scripts allow several commands that would be entered manually at a command-line interface to be executed automatically, and without having to wait for a user to trigger each stage of the sequence. For example, in a directory with three C source code files, rather than manually running the four commands required to build the final program from them, one could instead create a script for POSIX-compliant shells, here named codice_12 and kept in the directory with them, which would compile them automatically:
#!/bin/sh
printf &#x27;compiling...\n&#x27;
cc -c foo.c
cc -c bar.c
cc -c qux.c
cc -o myprog foo.o bar.o qux.o
printf &#x27;done.\n&#x27;
The script would allow a user to save the file being edited, pause the editor, and then just run codice_13 to create the updated program, test it, and then return to the editor. Since the 1980s or so, however, scripts of this type have been replaced with utilities like make which are specialized for building programs.

===Generalization===
Simple batch jobs are not unusual for isolated tasks, but using shell loops, tests, and variables provides much more flexibility to users. A POSIX sh script to convert JPEG images to PNG images, where the image names are provided on the command-line—possibly via wildcards—instead of each being listed within the script, can be created with this file, typically saved in a file like codice_14
#!/bin/sh
for jpg; do # use $jpg in place of each filename given, in turn
 png=${jpg%.jpg}.png # construct the PNG version of the filename by replacing .jpg with .png
 printf &#x27;converting &quot;%s&quot; ...\n&#x27; &quot;$jpg&quot; # output status info to the user running the script
 if convert &quot;$jpg&quot; jpg.to.png; then # use convert (provided by ImageMagick) to create the PNG in a temp file
 mv jpg.to.png &quot;$png&quot; # if it worked, rename the temporary PNG image to the correct name
 else # ...otherwise complain and exit from the script
 printf &gt;&amp;2 &#x27;jpg2png: error: failed output saved in &quot;jpg.to.png&quot;.\n&#x27;
 exit 1
 fi # the end of the &quot;if&quot; test construct
done # the end of the &quot;for&quot; loop
printf &#x27;all conversions successful\n&#x27; # tell the user the good news
The codice_15 command can then be run on an entire directory full of JPEG images with just codice_16

===Programming===
Many modern shells also supply various features usually found only in more sophisticated general-purpose programming languages, such as control-flow constructs, variables, comments, arrays, subroutines and so on. With these sorts of features available, it is possible to write reasonably sophisticated applications as shell scripts. However, they are still limited by the fact that most shell languages have little or no support for data typing systems, classes, threading, complex math, and other common full language features, and are also generally much slower than compiled code or interpreted languages written with speed as a performance goal.

The standard Unix tools sed and awk provide extra capabilities for shell programming; Perl can also be embedded in shell scripts as can other scripting languages like Tcl. Perl and Tcl come with graphics toolkits as well.

== Typical POSIX scripting languages ==
Scripting languages commonly found on UNIX, Linux, and POSIX-compliant operating system installations include:
* KornShell (codice_17) in several possible versions such as ksh88, Korn Shell &#x27;93 and others.
* The Bourne shell (codice_18), one of the oldest shells still common in use
* The C shell (codice_19)
* GNU Bash (codice_20)
* codice_21, a shell which is a main component of the Tcl/Tk programming language.
* The wish is a GUI-based Tcl/Tk shell.

The C and Tcl shells have syntax quite similar to that of said programming languages, and the Korn shells and Bash are developments of the Bourne shell, which is based on the ALGOL language with elements of a number of others added as well. On the other hand, the various shells plus tools like awk, sed, grep, and BASIC, Lisp, C and so forth contributed to the Perl programming language.

Other shells that may be available on a machine or for download and/or purchase include:
* Almquist shell (codice_22)
* Nushell (codice_23)
* PowerShell (codice_24)
* Z shell (codice_25, a particularly common enhanced KornShell)
* The Tenex C Shell (codice_26).

Related programs such as shells based on Python, Ruby, C, Java, Perl, Pascal, Rexx etc. in various forms are also widely available. Another somewhat common shell is Old shell (codice_27), whose manual page states it &quot;is an enhanced, backward-compatible port of the standard command interpreter from Sixth Edition UNIX.&quot;

So called remote shells such as 

* a Remote Shell (codice_28)
* a Secure Shell (codice_29)
are really just tools to run a more complex shell on a remote system and have no &#x27;shell&#x27; like characteristics themselves.

==Other scripting languages==
Many powerful scripting languages have been introduced for tasks that are too large or complex to be comfortably handled with ordinary shell scripts, but for which the advantages of a script are desirable and the development overhead of a full-blown, compiled programming language would be disadvantageous. The specifics of what separates scripting languages from high-level programming languages is a frequent source of debate, but, generally speaking, a scripting language is one which requires an interpreter.
==Life cycle==
Shell scripts often serve as an initial stage in software development, and are often subject to conversion later to a different underlying implementation, most commonly being converted to Perl, Python, or C. The interpreter directive allows the implementation detail to be fully hidden inside the script, rather than being exposed as a filename extension, and provides for seamless reimplementation in different languages with no impact on end users.

While files with the &quot;.sh&quot; file extension are usually a shell script of some kind, most shell scripts do not have any filename extension.

==Advantages and disadvantages==
Perhaps the biggest advantage of writing a shell script is that the commands and syntax are exactly the same as those directly entered at the command-line. The programmer does not have to switch to a totally different syntax, as they would if the script were written in a different language, or if a compiled language were used.

Often, writing a shell script is much quicker than writing the equivalent code in other programming languages. The many advantages include easy program or file selection, quick start, and interactive debugging. A shell script can be used to provide a sequencing and decision-making linkage around existing programs, and for moderately sized scripts the absence of a compilation step is an advantage. Interpretive running makes it easy to write debugging code into a script and re-run it to detect and fix bugs. Non-expert users can use scripting to tailor the behavior of programs, and shell scripting provides some limited scope for multiprocessing.

On the other hand, shell scripting is prone to costly errors. Inadvertent typing errors such as codice_30 (instead of the intended codice_31) are folklore in the Unix community; a single extra space converts the command from one that deletes all subdirectories contained in the current directory, to one which deletes everything from the file system&#x27;s root directory. Similar problems can transform codice_32 and codice_33 into dangerous weapons, and misuse of the codice_34 redirect can delete the contents of a file. This is made more problematic by the fact that many UNIX commands differ in name by only one letter: codice_35, codice_36, codice_37, codice_38, etc.

Another significant disadvantage is the slow execution speed and the need to launch a new process for almost every shell command executed. When a script&#x27;s job can be accomplished by setting up a pipeline in which efficient filter commands perform most of the work, the slowdown is mitigated, but a complex script is typically several orders of magnitude slower than a conventional compiled program that performs an equivalent task.

There are also compatibility problems between different platforms. Larry Wall, creator of Perl, famously wrote that &quot;It&#x27;s easier to port a shell than a shell script.&quot;

Similarly, more complex scripts can run into the limitations of the shell scripting language itself; the limits make it difficult to write quality code, and extensions by various shells to ameliorate problems with the original shell language can make problems worse.

Many disadvantages of using some script languages are caused by design flaws within the language syntax or implementation, and are not necessarily imposed by the use of a text-based command-line; there are a number of shells which use other shell programming languages or even full-fledged languages like Scsh (which uses Scheme).

==Interoperability among scripting languages==

Different scripting languages may share many common elements, largely due to being POSIX based, and some shells offer modes to emulate different shells. This allows a shell script written in one scripting language to be adapted into another.

One example of this is Bash, which offers the same grammar and syntax as the Bourne shell, and which also provides a POSIX-compliant mode. As such, most shell scripts written for the Bourne shell can be run in BASH, but the reverse may not be true since BASH has extensions which are not present in the Bourne shell. As such, these features are known as .

==Shell scripting on other operating systems==
Interoperability software such as Cygwin, the MKS Toolkit, Interix (which is available in the Microsoft Windows Services for UNIX), Hamilton C shell, UWIN (AT&amp;T Unix for Windows) and others allow Unix shell programs to be run on machines running Windows NT and its successors, with some loss of functionality on the MS-DOS-Windows 95 branch, as well as earlier MKS Toolkit versions for OS/2. At least three DCL implementations for Windows type operating systems—in addition to XLNT, a multiple-use scripting language package which is used with the command shell, Windows Script Host and CGI programming—are available for these systems as well. Mac OS X and subsequent are Unix-like as well.

In addition to the aforementioned tools, some POSIX and OS/2 functionality can be used with the corresponding environmental subsystems of the Windows NT operating system series up to Windows 2000 as well. A third, 16-bit subsystem often called the MS-DOS subsystem uses the Command.com provided with these operating systems to run the aforementioned MS-DOS batch files.

The console alternatives 4DOS, 4OS2, FreeDOS, Peter Norton&#x27;s NDOS and 4NT / Take Command which add functionality to the Windows NT-style cmd.exe, MS-DOS/Windows 95 batch files (run by Command.com), OS/2&#x27;s cmd.exe, and 4NT respectively are similar to the shells that they enhance and are more integrated with the Windows Script Host, which comes with three pre-installed engines, VBScript, JScript, and VBA and to which numerous third-party engines can be added, with Rexx, Perl, Python, Ruby, and Tcl having pre-defined functions in 4NT and related programs. PC DOS is quite similar to MS-DOS, whilst DR DOS is more different. Earlier versions of Windows NT are able to run contemporary versions of 4OS2 by the OS/2 subsystem.

Scripting languages are, by definition, able to be extended; for example, a MS-DOS/Windows 95/98 and Windows NT type systems allows for shell/batch programs to call tools like KiXtart, QBasic, various BASIC, Rexx, Perl, and Python implementations, the Windows Script Host and its installed engines. On Unix and other POSIX-compliant systems, awk and sed are used to extend the string and numeric processing ability of shell scripts. Tcl, Perl, Rexx, and Python have graphics toolkits and can be used to code functions and procedures for shell scripts which pose a speed bottleneck (C, Fortran, assembly language &amp;c are much faster still) and to add functionality not available in the shell language such as sockets and other connectivity functions, heavy-duty text processing, working with numbers if the calling script does not have those abilities, self-writing and self-modifying code, techniques like recursion, direct memory access, various types of sorting and more, which are difficult or impossible in the main script, and so on. Visual Basic for Applications and VBScript can be used to control and communicate with such things as spreadsheets, databases, scriptable programs of all types, telecommunications software, development tools, graphics tools and other software which can be accessed through the Component Object Model.

==See also==
* Glue code
* Interpreter directive
* Shebang symbol (#!)
* Unix shells
* PowerShell
* Windows Script Host

==References==
==External links==

* &quot;An Introduction To Shell Programming&quot; by Greg Goebel
* &quot;UNIX / Linux shell scripting tutorial&quot; by Steve Parker
* &quot;Shell Scripting Primer&quot; (Apple)
* &quot;What to watch out for when writing portable shell scripts&quot; by Peter Seebach
* Free Unix Shell scripting books
* Beginners/BashScripting, Ubuntu Linux</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q959549" start="2" end="14" title="Shell script" label="shell script"/>
<link wikidata="Q40056" start="20" end="36" title="computer program" label="computer program"/>
<link wikidata="Q14663" start="61" end="71" title="Unix shell" label="Unix shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q189053" start="75" end="99" title="command-line interpreter" label="command-line interpreter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152113" start="160" end="176" title="command language" label="command language"/>
<link wikidata="Q959549" start="403" end="410" title="Shell script" label="wrapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q189794" start="623" end="627" title="OS/2" label="OS/2"/>
<link wikidata="Q486487" start="675" end="685" title="Windows NT" label="Windows NT"/>
<link wikidata="Q238160" start="726" end="729" title="4NT (shell)" label="4NT"/>
<link wikidata="Q310897" start="744" end="751" title="cmd.exe" label="cmd.exe"/>
<link wikidata="Q204222" start="892" end="902" title="Korn shell" label="Korn shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q844595" start="908" end="920" title="Bourne shell" label="Bourne shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q189248" start="926" end="934" title="GNU Bash" label="GNU Bash"/>
<link wikidata="Q227308" start="1010" end="1013" title="Zsh" label="Zsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="1017" end="1022" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141067" start="1122" end="1130" title="Comment (computer programming)" label="Comments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411020" start="1305" end="1312" title="Shebang (Unix)" label="shebang"/>
<link wikidata="Q839478" start="1945" end="1957" title="Unix command" label="Unix command"/>
<link wikidata="Q283503" start="2004" end="2006" title="ls" label="ls"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2286" end="2293" title="#Configurable choice of scripting language" label="shebang"/>
<link wikidata="Q721795" start="2599" end="2606" title="dotfile" label="dotfile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152399" start="2892" end="2898" title="programming language syntax" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q283503" start="3577" end="3579" title="ls" label="ls"/>
<link wikidata="Q14658" start="4063" end="4068" title="POSIX" label="POSIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q300867" start="4593" end="4597" title="make (software)" label="make"/>
<link wikidata="Q951497" start="6104" end="6140" title="general-purpose programming language" label="general-purpose programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141067" start="6187" end="6195" title="Comment (computer programming)" label="comments"/>
<link wikidata="Q190686" start="6205" end="6215" title="subroutine" label="subroutine"/>
<link wikidata="Q305876" start="6690" end="6693" title="sed" label="sed"/>
<link wikidata="Q213970" start="6698" end="6701" title="awk" label="awk"/>
<link wikidata="Q42478" start="6752" end="6756" title="Perl" label="Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288" start="6833" end="6836" title="Tcl" label="Tcl"/>
<link wikidata="Q204222" start="7042" end="7051" title="KornShell" label="KornShell"/>
<link wikidata="Q844595" start="7146" end="7158" title="Bourne shell" label="Bourne shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064516" start="7223" end="7230" title="C shell" label="C shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q189248" start="7245" end="7253" title="Bash (Unix shell)" label="GNU Bash"/>
<link wikidata="Q616360" start="7320" end="7326" title="Tcl/Tk" label="Tcl/Tk"/>
<link wikidata="Q616360" start="7355" end="7359" title="wish (shell)" label="wish"/>
<link wikidata="Q188436" start="7565" end="7570" title="ALGOL" label="ALGOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q213970" start="7685" end="7688" title="awk" label="awk"/>
<link wikidata="Q305876" start="7690" end="7693" title="sed" label="sed"/>
<link wikidata="Q283302" start="7695" end="7699" title="grep" label="grep"/>
<link wikidata="Q42979" start="7705" end="7710" title="BASIC" label="BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q132874" start="7712" end="7716" title="Lisp (programming language)" label="Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="7718" end="7719" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q42478" start="7752" end="7756" title="Perl" label="Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641209" start="7871" end="7885" title="Almquist shell" label="Almquist shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q103695637" start="7900" end="7907" title="Nushell" label="Nushell"/>
<link wikidata="Q840410" start="7922" end="7932" title="PowerShell" label="PowerShell"/>
<link wikidata="Q227308" start="7947" end="7954" title="Z shell" label="Z shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q306031" start="8015" end="8028" title="Tenex C Shell" label="Tenex C Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="8084" end="8090" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q161053" start="8092" end="8096" title="Ruby (programming language)" label="Ruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="8098" end="8099" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="8101" end="8105" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q42478" start="8107" end="8111" title="Perl" label="Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q81571" start="8113" end="8119" title="Pascal (programming language)" label="Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q685820" start="8121" end="8125" title="Rexx" label="Rexx"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8208" end="8217" title="Old shell" label="Old shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314935" start="8412" end="8424" title="Remote Shell" label="Remote Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q170460" start="8441" end="8453" title="Secure Shell" label="Secure Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q211496" start="8993" end="9024" title="high-level programming language" label="high-level programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q42478" start="9345" end="9349" title="Perl" label="Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="9351" end="9357" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="9362" end="9363" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q16964257" start="9369" end="9390" title="interpreter directive" label="interpreter directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q186157" start="9646" end="9660" title="file extension" label="file extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q972090" start="11130" end="11144" title="root directory" label="root directory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192422" start="11648" end="11656" title="Pipeline (computing)" label="pipeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706314" start="11676" end="11682" title="Filter (software)" label="filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q92597" start="11953" end="11963" title="Larry Wall" label="Larry Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q42478" start="11976" end="11980" title="Perl" label="Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152399" start="12425" end="12440" title="programming language syntax" label="language syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439368" start="12642" end="12646" title="Scsh" label="Scsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q187560" start="12659" end="12665" title="Scheme (programming language)" label="Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q216192" start="13398" end="13404" title="Cygwin" label="Cygwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4272073" start="13410" end="13421" title="MKS Toolkit" label="MKS Toolkit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366728" start="13423" end="13430" title="Interix" label="Interix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644861" start="13496" end="13512" title="Hamilton C shell" label="Hamilton C shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922446" start="13514" end="13518" title="UWIN" label="UWIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q47604" start="13684" end="13690" title="MS-DOS" label="MS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q83370" start="13691" end="13701" title="Windows 95" label="Windows 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q25100572" start="13845" end="13849" title="XLNT" label="XLNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152468" start="13931" end="13950" title="Windows Script Host" label="Windows Script Host"/>
<link wikidata="Q264364" start="13955" end="13958" title="Common Gateway Interface" label="CGI"/>
<link wikidata="Q14658" start="14106" end="14111" title="POSIX" label="POSIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q194368" start="14274" end="14280" title="16-bit computing" label="16-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q238106" start="14456" end="14460" title="4DOS" label="4DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4638938" start="14462" end="14466" title="4OS2" label="4OS2"/>
<link wikidata="Q473751" start="14468" end="14475" title="FreeDOS" label="FreeDOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q62886" start="14477" end="14489" title="Peter Norton" label="Peter Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q238106" start="14497" end="14501" title="NDOS" label="NDOS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14506" end="14524" title="Take Command Console)" label="4NT / Take Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q553514" start="14830" end="14837" title="JScript" label="JScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q667566" start="14843" end="14846" title="Visual Basic for Applications" label="VBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q863568" start="15000" end="15006" title="PC DOS" label="PC DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046873" start="15042" end="15048" title="DR DOS" label="DR DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477376" start="15345" end="15352" title="KiXtart" label="KiXtart"/>
<link wikidata="Q381247" start="15354" end="15360" title="QBasic" label="QBasic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42979" start="15370" end="15375" title="BASIC" label="BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q685820" start="15377" end="15381" title="Rexx" label="Rexx"/>
<link wikidata="Q42478" start="15383" end="15387" title="Perl" label="Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="15393" end="15399" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152468" start="15421" end="15440" title="Windows Script Host" label="Windows Script Host"/>
<link wikidata="Q14658" start="15486" end="15491" title="POSIX" label="POSIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q213970" start="15511" end="15514" title="awk" label="awk"/>
<link wikidata="Q305876" start="15519" end="15522" title="sed" label="sed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288" start="15602" end="15605" title="Tcl" label="Tcl"/>
<link wikidata="Q179976" start="16078" end="16087" title="recursion" label="recursion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303697" start="16128" end="16135" title="sorting" label="sorting"/>
<link wikidata="Q667566" start="16211" end="16240" title="Visual Basic for Applications" label="Visual Basic for Applications"/>
<link wikidata="Q13743" start="16245" end="16253" title="VBScript" label="VBScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q662200" start="16488" end="16510" title="Component Object Model" label="Component Object Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532342" start="16528" end="16537" title="Glue code" label="Glue code"/>
<link wikidata="Q16964257" start="16540" end="16561" title="Interpreter directive" label="Interpreter directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411020" start="16564" end="16583" title="Shebang (Unix)" label="Shebang symbol (#!)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14663" start="16586" end="16596" title="Unix shell" label="Unix shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q840410" start="16600" end="16610" title="PowerShell" label="PowerShell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152468" start="16613" end="16632" title="Windows Script Host" label="Windows Script Host"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28940" wikidata="Q7632230" url="?curid=28940" title="Subtitle (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Subtitles]] are text derived from film or television show dialogue that is usually displayed at the bottom of the screen.

Subtitle or Subtitles may also refer to:

* Subtitle (titling), an explanatory or alternate title of a book or other work
* Subtitle (rapper) (Giovanni Marks, born 1978), an American rapper and producer
* &quot;Subtitle&quot;, a song by The Charlatans from the 1992 album &quot;Between 10th and 11th&quot;
* Subtitles Recordings, a record label run by Norwegian disc jockey Teebee

==See also==
* Surtitles</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7632230" start="0" end="13" title="Subtitle (disambiguation)" label="[[Subtitles]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632230" start="125" end="133" title="Subtitle (disambiguation)" label="Subtitle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632230" start="137" end="146" title="Subtitle (disambiguation)" label="Subtitles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135389" start="169" end="187" title="Subtitle (titling)" label="Subtitle (titling)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502689" start="249" end="266" title="Subtitle (rapper)" label="Subtitle (rapper)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899063" start="403" end="424" title="Between 10th and 11th" label="Between 10th and 11th"/>
<link wikidata="Q563273" start="499" end="505" title="Teebee" label="Teebee"/>
<link wikidata="Q334058" start="522" end="531" title="Surtitles" label="Surtitles"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28942" wikidata="Q866612" url="?curid=28942" title="Solder">
<text>Solder (; NA: ) is a fusible metal alloy used to create a permanent bond between metal workpieces. Solder is melted in order to wet the parts of the joint, where it adheres to and connects the pieces after cooling. Metals or alloys suitable for use as solder should have a lower melting point than the pieces to be joined. The solder should also be resistant to oxidative and corrosive effects that would degrade the joint over time. Solder used in making electrical connections also needs to have favorable electrical characteristics.

Soft solder typically has a melting point range of , and is commonly used in electronics, plumbing, and sheet metal work. Alloys that melt between are the most commonly used. Soldering performed using alloys with a melting point above is called &quot;hard soldering&quot;, &quot;silver soldering&quot;, or brazing.

In specific proportions, some alloys are eutectic — that is, the alloy&#x27;s melting point is the lowest possible for a mixture of those components, and coincides with the freezing point. Non-eutectic alloys can have markedly different &quot;solidus&quot; and &quot;liquidus&quot; temperatures, as they have distinct liquid and solid transitions. Non-eutectic mixtures often exist as a paste of solid particles in a melted matrix of the lower-melting phase as they approach high enough temperatures. In electrical work, if the joint is disturbed while in this &quot;pasty&quot; state before it fully solidifies, a poor electrical connection may result; use of eutectic solder reduces this problem. The pasty state of a non-eutectic solder can be exploited in plumbing, as it allows molding of the solder during cooling, e.g. for ensuring watertight joint of pipes, resulting in a so-called &quot;wiped joint&quot;.

For electrical and electronics work, solder wire is available in a range of thicknesses for hand-soldering (manual soldering is performed using a soldering iron or soldering gun), and with cores containing flux. It is also available as a room temperature paste, as a preformed foil shaped to match the workpiece which may be more suited for mechanized mass-production, or in small &quot;tabs&quot; that can be wrapped around the joint and melted with a flame where an iron isn&#x27;t usable or available, as for instance in field repairs. Alloys of lead and tin were commonly used in the past and are still available; they are particularly convenient for hand-soldering. Lead-free solders have been increasing in use due to regulatory requirements plus the health and environmental benefits of avoiding lead-based electronic components. They are almost exclusively used today in consumer electronics.

Plumbers often use bars of solder, much thicker than the wire used for electrical applications, and apply flux separately; many plumbing-suitable soldering fluxes are too corrosive (or conductive) to be used in electrical or electronic work. Jewelers often use solder in thin sheets, which they cut into snippets.

==Etymology==
The word solder comes from the Middle English word , via Old French and , from the Latin , meaning &quot;to make solid&quot;.

== Composition ==

=== Lead-based ===

Tin-lead (Sn-Pb) solders, also called &quot;soft solders&quot;, are commercially available with tin concentrations between 5% and 70% by weight. The greater the tin concentration, the greater the solder&#x27;s tensile and shear strengths. Lead mitigates the formation of tin whiskers, though the precise mechanism for this is unknown. Today, many techniques are used to mitigate the problem, including changes to the annealing process (heating and cooling), addition of elements like copper and nickel, and the application of conformal coatings. Alloys commonly used for electrical soldering are 60/40 Sn-Pb, which melts at , and 63/37 Sn-Pb used principally in electrical/electronic work. The latter mixture is a eutectic alloy of these metals, which:
# has the lowest melting point () of all the tin-lead alloys; and
# the melting point is truly a &quot;point&quot; — not a range.

In the United States, since 1974, lead is prohibited in solder and flux in plumbing applications for drinking water use, per the Safe Drinking Water Act. Historically, a higher proportion of lead was used, commonly 50/50. This had the advantage of making the alloy solidify more slowly. With the pipes being physically fitted together before soldering, the solder could be wiped over the joint to ensure water tightness. Although lead water pipes were displaced by copper when the significance of lead poisoning began to be fully appreciated, lead solder was still used until the 1980s because it was thought that the amount of lead that could leach into water from the solder was negligible from a properly soldered joint. The electrochemical couple of copper and lead promotes corrosion of the lead and tin. Tin, however, is protected by insoluble oxide. Since even small amounts of lead have been found detrimental to health as a potent neurotoxin, lead in plumbing solder was replaced by silver (food-grade applications) or antimony, with copper often added, and the proportion of tin was increased (see lead-free solder).

The addition of tin—more expensive than lead—improves wetting properties of the alloy; lead itself has poor wetting characteristics. High-tin tin-lead alloys have limited use as the workability range can be provided by a cheaper high-lead alloy.

Lead-tin solders readily dissolve gold plating and form brittle intermetallics.
60/40 Sn-Pb solder oxidizes on the surface, forming a complex 4-layer structure: tin(IV) oxide on the surface, below it a layer of tin(II) oxide with finely dispersed lead, followed by a layer of tin(II) oxide with finely dispersed tin and lead, and the solder alloy itself underneath.

Lead, and to some degree tin, as used in solder contains small but significant amounts of radioisotope impurities. Radioisotopes undergoing alpha decay are a concern due to their tendency to cause soft errors. Polonium-210 is especially troublesome; lead-210 beta decays to bismuth-210 which then beta decays to polonium-210, an intense emitter of alpha particles. Uranium-238 and thorium-232 are other significant contaminants of alloys of lead.

=== Lead-free ===

The European Union Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment Directive and Restriction of Hazardous Substances Directive were adopted in early 2003 and came into effect on July 1, 2006, restricting the inclusion of lead in most consumer electronics sold in the EU, and having a broad effect on consumer electronics sold worldwide. In the US, manufacturers may receive tax benefits by reducing the use of lead-based solder. Lead-free solders in commercial use may contain tin, copper, silver, bismuth, indium, zinc, antimony, and traces of other metals. Most lead-free replacements for conventional 60/40 and 63/37 Sn-Pb solder have melting points from 50 to 200 °C higher, though there are also solders with much lower melting points. Lead-free solder typically requires around 2% flux by mass for adequate wetting ability.

When lead-free solder is used in wave soldering, a slightly modified solder pot may be desirable (e.g. titanium liners or impellers) to reduce maintenance cost due to increased tin-scavenging of high-tin solder.

Lead-free solder is prohibited in critical applications, such as aerospace, military and medical projects, because joints are likely to suffer from metal fatigue failure under stress (such as that from thermal expansion and contraction). Although this is a property that conventional leaded solder possesses as well (like any metal), the point at which stress fatigue will usually occur in leaded solder is substantially above the level of stresses normally encountered.

Tin-silver-copper (Sn-Ag-Cu, or &quot;SAC&quot;) solders are used by two-thirds of Japanese manufacturers for reflow and wave soldering, and by about 75% of companies for hand soldering. The widespread use of this popular lead-free solder alloy family is based on the reduced melting point of the Sn-Ag-Cu ternary eutectic behavior (), which is below the 22/78 Sn-Ag (wt.%) eutectic of and the 99.3/0.7 Sn-Cu eutectic of . The ternary eutectic behavior of Sn-Ag-Cu and its application for electronics assembly was discovered (and patented) by a team of researchers from Ames Laboratory, Iowa State University, and from Sandia National Laboratories-Albuquerque.

Much recent research has focused on the addition of a fourth element to Sn-Ag-Cu solder, in order to provide compatibility for the reduced cooling rate of solder sphere reflow for assembly of ball grid arrays. Examples of these four-element compositions are 18/64/14/4 tin-silver-copper-zinc (Sn-Ag-Cu-Zn) (melting range 217–220 °C) and 18/64/16/2 tin-silver-copper-manganese (Sn-Ag-Cu-Mn; melting range of 211–215 °C).

Tin-based solders readily dissolve gold, forming brittle intermetallic joins; for Sn-Pb alloys the critical concentration of gold to embrittle the joint is about 4%. Indium-rich solders (usually indium-lead) are more suitable for soldering thicker gold layers as the dissolution rate of gold in indium is much slower. Tin-rich solders also readily dissolve silver; for soldering silver metallization or surfaces, alloys with addition of silver are suitable; tin-free alloys are also a choice, though their wetting ability is poorer. If the soldering time is long enough to form the intermetallics, the tin surface of a joint soldered to gold is very dull.

=== Hard solder ===
Hard solders are used for brazing, and melt at higher temperatures. Alloys of copper with either zinc or silver are the most common.

In silversmithing or jewelry making, special hard solders are used that will pass assay. They contain a high proportion of the metal being soldered and lead is not used in these alloys. These solders vary in hardness, designated as &quot;enameling&quot;, &quot;hard&quot;, &quot;medium&quot;, &quot;easy&quot; and &quot;repair&quot;. Enameling solder has a high melting point, close to that of the material itself, to prevent the joint desoldering during firing in the enameling process. The remaining solder types are used in decreasing order of hardness during the process of making an item, to prevent a previously soldered seam or joint desoldering while additional sites are soldered. Easy solder or repair solder are also often used for repair work for the same reason. Flux is also used to prevent joints from desoldering.

Silver solder is also used in manufacturing to join metal parts that cannot be welded. The alloys used for these purposes contain a high proportion of silver (up to 40%), and may also contain cadmium.

=== Alloys ===

Different elements serve different roles in the solder alloy:
* Antimony is added to increase strength without affecting wettability. Prevents tin pest. Should be avoided on zinc, cadmium, or galvanized metals as the resulting joint is brittle.
* Bismuth significantly lowers the melting point and improves wettability. In presence of sufficient lead and tin, bismuth forms crystals of with melting point of only 95 °C, which diffuses along the grain boundaries and may cause a joint failure at relatively low temperatures. A high-power part pre-tinned with an alloy of lead can therefore desolder under load when soldered with a bismuth-containing solder. Such joints are also prone to cracking. Alloys with more than 47% Bi expand upon cooling, which may be used to offset thermal expansion mismatch stresses. Retards growth of tin whiskers. Relatively expensive, limited availability.
* Copper improves resistance to thermal cycle fatigue, and improves wetting properties of the molten solder. It also slows down the rate of dissolution of copper from the board and part leads in the liquid solder. Copper in solders forms intermetallic compounds. Supersaturated (by about 1%) solution of copper in tin may be employed to inhibit dissolution of thin-film under-bump metallization of BGA chips, e.g. as .
* Nickel can be added to the solder alloy to form a supersaturated solution to inhibit dissolution of thin-film under-bump metallization. In tin-copper alloys, small addition of Ni (&lt;0.5 wt%) inhibits the formation of voids and interdiffusion of Cu and Sn elements. Inhibits copper dissolution, even more in synergy with bismuth. Nickel presence stabilizes the copper-tin intermetallics, inhibits growth of pro-eutectic β-tin dendrites (and therefore increases fluidity near the melting point of copper-tin eutectic), promotes shiny bright surface after solidification, inhibits surface cracking at cooling; such alloys are called &quot;nickel-modified&quot; or &quot;nickel-stabilized&quot;. Small amounts increase melt fluidity, most at 0.06%. Suboptimal amounts may be used to avoid patent issues. Fluidity reduction increase hole filling and mitigates bridging and icicles.
* Cobalt is used instead of nickel to avoid patent issues in improving fluidity. Does not stabilize intermetallic growths in solid alloy.
* Indium lowers the melting point and improves ductility. In presence of lead it forms a ternary compound that undergoes phase change at 114 °C. Very high cost (several times of silver), low availability. Easily oxidizes, which causes problems for repairs and reworks, especially when oxide-removing flux cannot be used, e.g. during GaAs die attachment. Indium alloys are used for cryogenic applications, and for soldering gold as gold dissolves in indium much less than in tin. Indium can also solder many nonmetals (e.g. glass, mica, alumina, magnesia, titania, zirconia, porcelain, brick, concrete, and marble). Prone to diffusion into semiconductors and cause undesired doping. At elevated temperatures easily diffuses through metals. Low vapor pressure, suitable for use in vacuum systems. Forms brittle intermetallics with gold; indium-rich solders on thick gold are unreliable. Indium-based solders are prone to corrosion, especially in presence of chloride ions.
* Lead is inexpensive and has suitable properties. Worse wetting than tin. Toxic, being phased out. Retards growth of tin whiskers, inhibits tin pest. Lowers solubility of copper and other metals in tin.
* Silver provides mechanical strength, but has worse ductility than lead. In absence of lead, it improves resistance to fatigue from thermal cycles. Using SnAg solders with HASL-SnPb-coated leads forms phase with melting point at 179 °C, which moves to the board-solder interface, solidifies last, and separates from the board. Addition of silver to tin significantly lowers solubility of silver coatings in the tin phase. In eutectic tin-silver (3.5% Ag) alloy and similar alloys (e.g. SAC305) it tends to form platelets of , which, if formed near a high-stress spot, may serve as initiating sites for cracks and cause poor shock and drop performance; silver content needs to be kept below 3% to inhibit such problems. High ion mobility, tends to migrate and form short circuits at high humidity under DC bias. Promotes corrosion of solder pots, increases dross formation.
* Tin is the usual main structural metal of the alloy. It has good strength and wetting. On its own it is prone to tin pest and growth of tin whiskers. Readily dissolves silver, gold and to less but still significant extent many other metals, e.g. copper; this is a particular concern for tin-rich alloys with higher melting points and reflow temperatures.
* Zinc lowers the melting point and is low-cost. However, it is highly susceptible to corrosion and oxidation in air, therefore zinc-containing alloys are unsuitable for some purposes, e.g. wave soldering, and zinc-containing solder pastes have shorter shelf life than zinc-free. Can form brittle Cu-Zn intermetallic layers in contact with copper. Readily oxidizes which impairs wetting, requires a suitable flux.
* Germanium in tin-based lead-free solders influences formation of oxides; at below 0.002% it increases formation of oxides. Optimal concentration for suppressing oxidation is at 0.005%. Used in e.g. Sn100C alloy. Patented.
* Rare-earth elements, when added in small amounts, refine the matrix structure in tin-copper alloys by segregating impurities at the grain boundaries. However, excessive addition results in the formation of tin whiskers; it also results in spurious rare earth phases, which easily oxidize and deteriorate the solder properties.
* Phosphorus is used as antioxidant to inhibit dross formation. Decreases fluidity of tin-copper alloys.

=== Impurities ===
Impurities usually enter the solder reservoir by dissolving the metals present in the assemblies being soldered. Dissolving of process equipment is not common as the materials are usually chosen to be insoluble in solder.
* Aluminium – little solubility, causes sluggishness of solder and dull gritty appearance due to formation of oxides. Addition of antimony to solders forms Al-Sb intermetallics that are segregated into dross. Promotes embrittlement.
* Antimony – added intentionally, up to 0.3% improves wetting, larger amounts slowly degrade wetting. Increases melting point.
* Arsenic – forms thin intermetallics with adverse effects on mechanical properties, causes dewetting of brass surfaces
* Cadmium – causes sluggishness of solder, forms oxides and tarnishes
* Copper – most common contaminant, forms needle-shaped intermetallics, causes sluggishness of solders, grittiness of alloys, decreased wetting
* Gold – easily dissolves, forms brittle intermetallics, contamination above 0.5% causes sluggishness and decreases wetting. Lowers melting point of tin-based solders. Higher-tin alloys can absorb more gold without embrittlement.
* Iron – forms intermetallics, causes grittiness, but rate of dissolution is very low; readily dissolves in lead-tin above 427 °C.
* Lead – causes Restriction of Hazardous Substances Directive compliance problems at above 0.1%.
* Nickel – causes grittiness, very little solubility in Sn-Pb
* Phosphorus – forms tin and lead phosphides, causes grittiness and dewetting, present in electroless nickel plating
* Silver – often added intentionally, in high amounts forms intermetallics that cause grittiness and formation of pimples on the solder surface, potential for embrittlement
* Sulfur – forms lead and tin sulfides, causes dewetting
* Zinc – in melt forms excessive dross, in solidified joints rapidly oxidizes on the surface; zinc oxide is insoluble in fluxes, impairing repairability; copper and nickel barrier layers may be needed when soldering brass to prevent zinc migration to the surface; potential for embrittlement

Board finishes vs wave soldering bath impurities buildup:
* HASL, lead-free (Hot Air Level): usually virtually pure tin. Does not contaminate high-tin baths.
* HASL, leaded: some lead dissolves into the bath
* ENIG (Electroless Nickel Immersion Gold): typically 100-200 microinches of nickel with 3-5 microinches of gold on top. Some gold dissolves into the bath, but limits exceeding buildup is rare.
* Immersion silver: typically 10–15 microinches of silver. Some dissolves into the bath, limits exceeding buildup is rare.
* Immersion tin: does not contaminate high-tin baths.
* OSP (Organic solderability preservative): usually imidazole-class compounds forming a thin layer on the copper surface. Copper readily dissolves in high-tin baths.

== Flux ==
Flux is a reducing agent designed to help reduce (return oxidized metals to their metallic state) metal oxides at the points of contact to improve the electrical connection and mechanical strength. The two principal types of flux are acid flux (sometimes called &quot;active flux&quot;), containing strong acids, used for metal mending and plumbing, and rosin flux (sometimes called &quot;passive flux&quot;), used in electronics. Rosin flux comes in a variety of &quot;activities&quot;, corresponding roughly to the speed and effectiveness of the organic acid components of the rosin in dissolving metallic surface oxides, and consequently the corrosiveness of the flux residue.

Due to concerns over atmospheric pollution and hazardous waste disposal, the electronics industry has been gradually shifting from rosin flux to water-soluble flux, which can be removed with deionized water and detergent, instead of hydrocarbon solvents. Water-soluble fluxes are generally more conductive than traditionally used electrical / electronic fluxes and so have more potential for electrically interacting with a circuit; in general it is important to remove their traces after soldering. Some rosin type flux traces likewise should be removed, and for the same reason.

In contrast to using traditional bars or coiled wires of all-metal solder and manually applying flux to the parts being joined, much hand soldering since the mid-20th century has used flux-core solder. This is manufactured as a coiled wire of solder, with one or more continuous bodies of inorganic acid or rosin flux embedded lengthwise inside it. As the solder melts onto the joint, it frees the flux and releases that on it as well.

== Operation ==

The solidifying behavior depends on the alloy composition. Pure metals solidify at a certain temperature, forming crystals of one phase. Eutectic alloys also solidify at a single temperature, all components precipitating simultaneously in so-called coupled growth. Non-eutectic compositions on cooling start to first precipitate the non-eutectic phase; dendrites when it is a metal, large crystals when it is an intermetallic compound. Such a mixture of solid particles in a molten eutectic is referred to as a mushy state. Even a relatively small proportion of solids in the liquid can dramatically lower its fluidity.

The temperature of total solidification is the solidus of the alloy, the temperature at which all components are molten is the liquidus.

The mushy state is desired where a degree of plasticity is beneficial for creating the joint, allowing filling larger gaps or being wiped over the joint (e.g. when soldering pipes). In hand soldering of electronics it may be detrimental as the joint may appear solidified while it is not yet. Premature handling of such joint then disrupts its internal structure and leads to compromised mechanical integrity.

=== Intermetallics ===

Many different intermetallic compounds are formed during solidifying of solders and during their reactions with the soldered surfaces. The intermetallics form distinct phases, usually as inclusions in a ductile solid solution matrix, but also can form the matrix itself with metal inclusions or form crystalline matter with different intermetallics. Intermetallics are often hard and brittle. Finely distributed intermetallics in a ductile matrix yield a hard alloy while coarse structure gives a softer alloy. A range of intermetallics often forms between the metal and the solder, with increasing proportion of the metal; e.g. forming a structure of . Layers of intermetallics can form between the solder and the soldered material. These layers may cause mechanical reliability weakening and brittleness, increased electrical resistance, or electromigration and formation of voids. The gold-tin intermetallics layer is responsible for poor mechanical reliability of tin-soldered gold-plated surfaces where the gold plating did not completely dissolve in the solder.

Two processes play a role in a solder joint formation: interaction between the substrate and molten solder, and solid-state growth of intermetallic compounds. The base metal dissolves in the molten solder in an amount depending on its solubility in the solder. The active constituent of the solder reacts with the base metal with a rate dependent on the solubility of the active constituents in the base metal. The solid-state reactions are more complex – the formation of intermetallics can be inhibited by changing the composition of the base metal or the solder alloy, or by using a suitable barrier layer to inhibit diffusion of the metals.

Some example interactions include:
* Gold and palladium readily dissolve in solders. Copper and nickel tend to form intermetallic layers during normal soldering profiles. Indium forms intermetallics as well.
* Indium-gold intermetallics are brittle and occupy about 4 times more volume than the original gold. Bonding wires are especially susceptible to indium attack. Such intermetallic growth, together with thermal cycling, can lead to failure of the bonding wires.
* Copper plated with nickel and gold is often used. The thin gold layer facilitates good solderability of nickel as it protects the nickel from oxidation; the layer has to be thin enough to rapidly and completely dissolve so bare nickel is exposed to the solder.
* Lead-tin solder layers on copper leads can form copper-tin intermetallic layers; the solder alloy is then locally depleted of tin and form a lead-rich layer. The Sn-Cu intermetallics then can get exposed to oxidation, resulting in impaired solderability.
*  – common on solder-copper interface, forms preferentially when excess of tin is available; in presence of nickel, compound can be formed
*  – common on solder-copper interface, forms preferentially when excess of copper is available, more thermally stable than , often present when higher-temperature soldering occurred
*  – common on solder-nickel interface
*  – very slow formation
* Sn - at higher concentration of silver (over 3%) in tin forms platelets that can serve as crack initiation sites.
*  – β-phase – brittle, forms at excess of tin. Detrimental to properties of tin-based solders to gold-plated layers.
*  – forms on the boundary between gold and indium-lead solder, acts as a barrier against further dissolution of gold

== Preform ==

A preform is a pre-made shape of solder specially designed for the application where it is to be used. Many methods are used to manufacture the solder preform, stamping being the most common. The solder preform may include the solder flux needed for the soldering process. This can be an internal flux, inside the solder preform, or external, with the solder preform coated.

== Similar substances ==

Glass solder is used to join glasses to other glasses, ceramics, metals, semiconductors, mica, and other materials, in a process called glass frit bonding. The glass solder has to flow and wet the soldered surfaces well below the temperature where deformation or degradation of either of the joined materials or nearby structures (e.g., metallization layers on chips or ceramic substrates) occurs. The usual temperature of achieving flowing and wetting is between .

== See also ==
* Body solder
* Graping
* Restriction of Hazardous Substances Directive
* Solderability
* Solder alloys
* Solder mask
* Solder fatigue
* Wood&#x27;s metal
* Solder paste

== References ==

== External links ==
* Phase diagrams of different types of solder alloys</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q866612" start="0" end="6" title="Solder" label="Solder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053766" start="10" end="12" title="North American English" label="NA"/>
<link wikidata="Q428729" start="21" end="28" title="fusible alloy" label="fusible"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="35" end="40" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="614" end="625" title="electronics" label="electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241671" start="627" end="635" title="plumbing" label="plumbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="659" end="664" title="Alloy" label="Alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13389141" start="843" end="850" title="brazing" label="brazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q628595" start="894" end="902" title="eutectic" label="eutectic"/>
<link wikidata="Q106080" start="931" end="938" title="melting" label="melting"/>
<link wikidata="Q122663030" start="1096" end="1103" title="solidus (chemistry)" label="solidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q122663030" start="1120" end="1128" title="liquidus" label="liquidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q623402" start="1916" end="1930" title="soldering iron" label="soldering iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200418" start="1934" end="1947" title="soldering gun" label="soldering gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134475" start="1976" end="1980" title="flux (metallurgy)" label="flux"/>
<link wikidata="Q215768" start="2122" end="2137" title="mass-production" label="mass-production"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886928" start="2914" end="2921" title="Jeweler" label="Jeweler"/>
<link wikidata="Q36395" start="3032" end="3046" title="Middle English" label="Middle English"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="3058" end="3068" title="Old French" label="Old French"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="3084" end="3089" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="3167" end="3170" title="Tin" label="Tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="3171" end="3175" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q76005" start="3377" end="3384" title="tensile strength" label="tensile"/>
<link wikidata="Q901396" start="3389" end="3403" title="shear strength" label="shear strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q901525" start="3438" end="3450" title="tin whiskers" label="tin whiskers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160245" start="3693" end="3710" title="conformal coating" label="conformal coating"/>
<link wikidata="Q628595" start="3881" end="3889" title="eutectic point" label="eutectic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398466" start="4180" end="4203" title="Safe Drinking Water Act" label="Safe Drinking Water Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q110315" start="4548" end="4562" title="lead poisoning" label="lead poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7877" start="4779" end="4794" title="electrochemical" label="electrochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q407752" start="4991" end="5001" title="neurotoxin" label="neurotoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="5043" end="5049" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099" start="5079" end="5087" title="antimony" label="antimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="5094" end="5100" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5159" end="5175" title="#Lead-free solder" label="lead-free solder"/>
<link wikidata="Q817136" start="5233" end="5240" title="wetting" label="wetting"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="5460" end="5464" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q129163" start="5587" end="5600" title="tin(IV) oxide" label="tin(IV) oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q204980" start="5637" end="5650" title="tin(II) oxide" label="tin(II) oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q192900" start="5883" end="5895" title="radioisotope" label="radioisotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q179856" start="5933" end="5944" title="alpha decay" label="alpha decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658917" start="5990" end="6000" title="soft error" label="soft error"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395430" start="6003" end="6015" title="Polonium-210" label="Polonium-210"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372384" start="6043" end="6051" title="lead-210" label="lead-210"/>
<link wikidata="Q306786" start="6052" end="6062" title="beta decay" label="beta decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372372" start="6067" end="6078" title="bismuth-210" label="bismuth-210"/>
<link wikidata="Q103517" start="6141" end="6155" title="alpha particle" label="alpha particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148503" start="6158" end="6169" title="Uranium-238" label="Uranium-238"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885290" start="6174" end="6185" title="thorium-232" label="thorium-232"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="6264" end="6278" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q621820" start="6279" end="6330" title="Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment Directive" label="Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment Directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q740504" start="6335" end="6380" title="Restriction of Hazardous Substances Directive" label="Restriction of Hazardous Substances Directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q942" start="6752" end="6759" title="bismuth" label="bismuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094" start="6761" end="6767" title="indium" label="indium"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="6769" end="6773" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099" start="6775" end="6783" title="antimony" label="antimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622830" start="7118" end="7132" title="wave soldering" label="wave soldering"/>
<link wikidata="Q716" start="7188" end="7196" title="titanium" label="titanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876213" start="7363" end="7372" title="aerospace" label="aerospace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807718" start="7770" end="7787" title="Tin-silver-copper" label="Tin-silver-copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622830" start="7891" end="7905" title="wave soldering" label="wave soldering"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745875" start="8340" end="8355" title="Ames Laboratory" label="Ames Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136919" start="8357" end="8378" title="Iowa State University" label="Iowa State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736748" start="8389" end="8417" title="Sandia National Laboratories" label="Sandia National Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q570628" start="8624" end="8639" title="ball grid array" label="ball grid array"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="8798" end="8807" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2216340" start="9667" end="9681" title="silversmithing" label="silversmithing"/>
<link wikidata="Q161439" start="9685" end="9692" title="jewelry" label="jewelry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415034" start="9746" end="9751" title="Metallurgical assay" label="assay"/>
<link wikidata="Q213371" start="9998" end="10007" title="Vitreous enamel" label="Enameling"/>
<link wikidata="Q44705" start="10100" end="10111" title="desoldering" label="desoldering"/>
<link wikidata="Q131172" start="10574" end="10580" title="welding" label="welded"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091" start="10687" end="10694" title="cadmium" label="cadmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099" start="10777" end="10785" title="Antimony" label="Antimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q942" start="10960" end="10967" title="Bismuth" label="Bismuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q901525" start="11543" end="11555" title="tin whiskers" label="tin whiskers"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="11603" end="11609" title="Copper" label="Copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q817136" start="11669" end="11676" title="wetting" label="wetting"/>
<link wikidata="Q570628" start="11999" end="12002" title="ball grid array" label="BGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="12022" end="12028" title="Nickel" label="Nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q740" start="12903" end="12909" title="Cobalt" label="Cobalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094" start="13041" end="13047" title="Indium" label="Indium"/>
<link wikidata="Q36200" start="13603" end="13611" title="zirconia" label="zirconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44791900" start="13995" end="14003" title="chloride" label="chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="14012" end="14016" title="Lead" label="Lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="14216" end="14222" title="Silver" label="Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="15090" end="15093" title="Tin" label="Tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q205129" start="15203" end="15211" title="tin pest" label="tin pest"/>
<link wikidata="Q901525" start="15226" end="15238" title="tin whiskers" label="tin whiskers"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="15447" end="15451" title="Zinc" label="Zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q867" start="15861" end="15870" title="Germanium" label="Germanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q190444" start="16085" end="16103" title="Rare-earth element" label="Rare-earth element"/>
<link wikidata="Q674" start="16414" end="16424" title="Phosphorus" label="Phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="16761" end="16770" title="Aluminium" label="Aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q837336" start="16961" end="16966" title="dross" label="dross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099" start="16994" end="17002" title="Antimony" label="Antimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q871" start="17121" end="17128" title="Arsenic" label="Arsenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091" start="17241" end="17248" title="Cadmium" label="Cadmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="17311" end="17317" title="Copper" label="Copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="17455" end="17459" title="Gold" label="Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="17685" end="17689" title="Iron" label="Iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="17816" end="17820" title="Lead" label="Lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="17913" end="17919" title="Nickel" label="Nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q674" start="17975" end="17985" title="Phosphorus" label="Phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q411835" start="18007" end="18016" title="phosphide" label="phosphide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="18092" end="18098" title="Silver" label="Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="18265" end="18271" title="Sulfur" label="Sulfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q221205" start="18293" end="18300" title="sulfide" label="sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="18322" end="18326" title="Zinc" label="Zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134475" start="19370" end="19374" title="Flux (metallurgy)" label="Flux"/>
<link wikidata="Q216830" start="19380" end="19394" title="reducing agent" label="reducing agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="19412" end="19418" title="redox" label="reduce"/>
<link wikidata="Q138937" start="19724" end="19729" title="rosin" label="rosin"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="20072" end="20093" title="atmospheric pollution" label="atmospheric pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069369" start="20098" end="20113" title="hazardous waste" label="hazardous waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358497" start="20128" end="20148" title="electronics industry" label="electronics industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q59349761" start="20242" end="20257" title="deionized water" label="deionized water"/>
<link wikidata="Q334637" start="20262" end="20271" title="detergent" label="detergent"/>
<link wikidata="Q43648" start="20284" end="20295" title="hydrocarbon" label="hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q146505" start="20296" end="20303" title="solvent" label="solvent"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21336" end="21350" title="coupled growth" label="coupled growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q428069" start="22296" end="22319" title="intermetallics" label="intermetallic compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275435" start="23945" end="23958" title="barrier layer" label="barrier layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5567109" start="26142" end="26154" title="Glass solder" label="Glass solder"/>
<link wikidata="Q11469" start="26171" end="26176" title="glass" label="glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q45621" start="26197" end="26204" title="ceramic" label="ceramic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="26207" end="26212" title="metal" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="26215" end="26228" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q114675" start="26231" end="26235" title="mica" label="mica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5567109" start="26278" end="26296" title="glass frit bonding" label="glass frit bonding"/>
<link wikidata="Q4936967" start="26626" end="26637" title="Body solder" label="Body solder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597350" start="26640" end="26647" title="Graping" label="Graping"/>
<link wikidata="Q740504" start="26650" end="26695" title="Restriction of Hazardous Substances Directive" label="Restriction of Hazardous Substances Directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7557224" start="26698" end="26711" title="Solderability" label="Solderability"/>
<link wikidata="Q65081509" start="26714" end="26727" title="Solder alloys" label="Solder alloys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879846" start="26730" end="26741" title="Solder mask" label="Solder mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q48997851" start="26744" end="26758" title="Solder fatigue" label="Solder fatigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q905989" start="26761" end="26778" title="Wood&amp;#x27;s metal" label="Wood&amp;#x27;s metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q977971" start="26781" end="26793" title="Solder paste" label="Solder paste"/>
</links>
</doc>
