<doc id="31183" wikidata="Q171977" url="?curid=31183" title="Tokugawa Ieyasu">
<text>Tokugawa Ieyasu (born Matsudaira Takechiyo; January 31, 1543 – June 1, 1616) was the founder and first &quot;shōgun&quot; of the Tokugawa shogunate of Japan, which ruled from 1603 until the Meiji Restoration in 1868. He was one of the three &quot;Great Unifiers&quot; of Japan, along with his former lord Oda Nobunaga and fellow Oda subordinate Toyotomi Hideyoshi. The son of a minor daimyo, Ieyasu once lived as a hostage under daimyo Imagawa Yoshimoto on behalf of his father. He later succeeded as daimyo after his father&#x27;s death, serving as ally, vassal, and general of the Oda clan, and building up his strength under Oda Nobunaga.

After Oda Nobunaga&#x27;s death, Ieyasu was briefly a rival of Toyotomi Hideyoshi, before declaring his allegiance to Toyotomi and fighting on his behalf. Under Toyotomi, Ieyasu was relocated to the Kanto plains in eastern Japan, away from the Toyotomi power base in Osaka. He built his castle in the fishing village of Edo (now Tokyo). He became the most powerful daimyo and the most senior officer under the Toyotomi regime. Ieyasu preserved his strength during Toyotomi&#x27;s failed attempts to conquer Korea. After Hideyoshi&#x27;s death and the Battle of Sekigahara, Ieyasu seized power in 1600.

He received appointment as &quot;shōgun&quot; in 1603, and voluntarily resigned from his position in 1605, although he still held the de facto control of government until his death in 1616. He implemented a set of careful rules known as the &quot;bakuhan&quot; system. This system used precisely graded rewards and punishments to encourage (or compel) the daimyo and samurai to live in peace with each other under the Tokugawa Shogunate.

==Early life (1543–1562)==

Tokugawa Ieyasu was born in Okazaki Castle on the 26th day of the twelfth month of the eleventh year of Tenbun, according to the Japanese calendar, January 31, 1543 according to the Western calendar. Originally named , he was the son of , the daimyo of Mikawa of the Matsudaira clan, and , the daughter of a neighbouring samurai lord, . His mother and father were step-siblings. They were 17 and 15 years old, respectively, when Takechiyo was born.

During the Muromachi period, the Matsudaira clan controlled a portion of Mikawa Province (the eastern half of modern Aichi Prefecture). Ieyasu&#x27;s father, Matsudaira Hirotada, was a minor local warlord based at Okazaki Castle who controlled a portion of the Tōkaidō highway linking Kyoto with the eastern provinces. His territory was surrounded by stronger and predatory neighbors, including the Imagawa clan based in Suruga Province to the east and the Oda clan to the west. Hirotada&#x27;s main enemy was Oda Nobuhide, the father of Oda Nobunaga.

In the year of Takechiyo&#x27;s birth, the Matsudaira clan split. Hirotada&#x27;s uncle, Matsudaira Nobutaka defected to the Oda clan. This gave Oda Nobuhide the confidence to attack Okazaki. Soon afterwards, Hirotada&#x27;s father-in-law died, and his heir, Mizuno Nobumoto, revived the clan&#x27;s traditional enmity against the Matsudaira and declared allegiance to Oda Nobuhide as well. As a result, Hirotada divorced Odai-no-kata and sent her back to her family. Hirotada later remarried to different wives, and Takechiyo eventually had 11 half-brothers and sisters.

===Hostage life===
As Oda Nobuhide continued to attack Okazaki, Hirotada turned to his powerful eastern neighbor, Imagawa Yoshimoto for assistance. Yoshimoto agreed to an alliance under the condition that Hirotada send his young heir to Sunpu Domain as a hostage. Oda Nobuhide learned of this arrangement and had Takechiyo abducted. Takechiyo was five years old at the time. Nobuhide threatened to execute Takechiyo unless his father severed all ties with the Imagawa clan. However, Hirotada refused, stating that sacrificing his own son would show his seriousness in his pact with the Imagawa. Despite this refusal, Nobuhide chose not to kill Takechiyo, but instead held him hostage for the next three years at the Honshōji Temple in Nagoya. It was rumored that Oda Nobunaga met Takechiyo at the temple, when Takechiyo was 6 years old, and Nobunaga was 14. However, Katsuhiro Taniguchi reported there is no concrete historical records about this story of first meeting between Takechiyo with Nobunaga.

In 1549, when Takechiyo was 6, his father Hirotada died of unknown causes. There was a popular theory that he was murdered by his vassals, who had been bribed by the Oda clan. However, recent research published in a paper by Muraoka Mikio in 2015 stated that the assassination theory was unreliable and Hirotada&#x27;s death may have been caused by a natural illness. Around the same time, Oda Nobuhide died during an epidemic. Nobuhide&#x27;s death dealt a heavy blow to the Oda clan.

In 1551, an army under the command of Imagawa Sessai laid siege to the castle where Oda Nobuhiro, Nobuhide&#x27;s illegitimate eldest son, was living. Nobuhiro was trapped by the Imagawa clan but was saved through negotiation by Oda Nobunaga, Nobuhide&#x27;s second son and heir. Sessai made an agreement with Nobunaga to take Takechiyo back to Imagawa, and he agreed. Takechiyo, now nine years old, was taken as a hostage to Sunpu. At Sunpu, he was treated fairly well as a potentially useful ally of the Imagawa clan until 1556 when he was 14 years old. Yoshimoto decided that the Matsudaira clan&#x27;s territory would be inherited by Takechiyo in the future, with the aim that Imagawa clan could rule the area by extensions of their Matsudaira clan as their vassal, this included Zuien-in (the daughter of Matsudaira Nobutada and Takechiyo&#x27;s great-aunt), who was the only member of the Anjo Matsudaira clan left in Okazaki Castle.

=== Service under Imagawa clan ===
In 1556, Takechiyo officially came of age, with Imagawa Yoshimoto presiding over his &quot;genpuku&quot; ceremony. Following tradition, he changed his name from Matsudaira Takechiyo to . He was also briefly allowed to visit Okazaki to pay his respects to the tomb of his father, and receive the homage of his nominal retainers, led by the &quot;karō&quot; Torii Tadayoshi.

One year later, at the age of 15 (according to East Asian age reckoning), he married his first wife, Lady Tsukiyama, a relative of Imagawa Yoshimoto, and changed his name again to . A year later, their son, Matsudaira Nobuyasu, was born. He was then allowed to return to Mikawa Province. There, the Imagawa ordered him to fight against the Oda clan in a series of battles.

Motoyasu fought his first battle in 1558 at the siege of Terabe. The lord of Terabe, Suzuki Shigeteru (or ), betrayed the Imagawa by defecting to Oda Nobunaga. This was nominally within Matsudaira territory, so Imagawa Yoshimoto entrusted the campaign to Motoyasu and his retainers from Okazaki. Motoyasu led the attack in person, but after taking the outer defences, he burned the main castle and withdrew. As anticipated, the Oda forces attacked his rear lines, but Motoyasu was prepared and drove off the Oda army.

He then succeeded in delivering supplies during the siege of Odaka Castle a year later. Odaka was one of five disputed frontier forts under attack by the Oda clan, and the only one that still remained under Imagawa control. Motoyasu launched diversionary attacks against the two neighboring forts, and when the garrisons of the other forts came to assist, Motoyasu&#x27;s supply column was able to reach Odaka.

By 1559, the leadership of the Oda clan had passed to Oda Nobunaga. In 1560, Imagawa Yoshimoto leading a large army of 25,000 men, invaded Oda territory. Motoyasu was assigned a separate mission to capture the stronghold of Marune in the Siege of Marune operation. As a result, he and his men were not present at the Battle of Okehazama where Yoshimoto was killed in a surprise assault by Nobunaga, In the end, Motoyasu managed to capture Marune castle. Later, in response of the news about Yoshimoto&#x27;s death, Motoyasu sent lookouts to check the state of the battle and then he retreated from Odaka Castle at midnight. After leaving Odaka Castle, Motoyasu&#x27;s forces headed for Okazaki with Asai Michitada as their guide. On the way, they were stopped by the Mizuno clan&#x27;s forces at Chiryu, but because Asai Michitada was with them, they were not attacked. Having escaped from danger, Motoyasu entered Daijuji Temple outside Okazaki Castle the following day.

With Imagawa Yoshimoto dead, and the Imagawa clan in a state of confusion, Motoyasu used the opportunity to assert his independence and marched his men back into the abandoned Okazaki Castle and reclaimed his ancestral seat. Motoyasu then decided to ally with Oda Nobunaga. Motoyasu&#x27;s wife, Lady Tsukiyama, and infant son, Matsudaira Nobuyasu, were held hostage in Sunpu by Imagawa Ujizane, Yoshimoto&#x27;s heir, so the deal was secret.

In 1561, Motoyasu openly broke his allegiance with the Imagawa clan and captured Kaminogō castle. Kaminogō was held by Udono Nagamochi. Resorting to stealth, Motoyasu forces under Hattori Hanzō attacked under cover of darkness, setting fire to the castle and capturing two of Udono&#x27;s sons. He then used them as hostages to exchange for his wife and son.

==Ieyasu-Nobunaga Alliance (1562–1582)==
Sometime in the aftermath of the Okehazama battle where Imagawa Yoshimoto was slain, Ieyasu formed the with Oda Nobunaga, daimyo lord of Owari Province and the head of Oda clan.

In 1563, Matsudaira Nobuyasu, the first son of Motoyasu, was married to Oda Nobunaga&#x27;s daughter Tokuhime. In February, Matsudaira Motoyasu changed his name to Matsudaira Ieyasu. Some historians believe that these actions provoked the pro-Imagawa faction, including the Sakurai and Okusa Matsudaira families, which led to the simultaneous uprising against Ieyasu in the following year.

===Unification of Mikawa===


During this period, the Matsudaira clan faced a threat from the Ikkō-ikki movement, where peasants banded together with militant monks under the Jōdo Shinshū sect, and rejected the traditional feudal social order. Ieyasu undertook several battles to suppress this movement in his territories, including the Battle of Azukizaka (1564). Some of Ieyasu&#x27;s vassals were in the Ikkō-ikki ranks, notablyHonda Masanobu and Natsume Yoshinobu, who had deserted him for the Ikkō-ikki rebellion out of religious sympathy. However, many of Ieyasu&#x27;s core vassals who were also followers of the sect, such as Ishikawa Ienari and Honda Tadakatsu, quickly abandoned the Ikkō faith of Jōdo Shinshū and stayed loyal to Ieyasu in order to strike the rebels. On January 15, 1564, Ieyasu decided to concentrate his forces to attack and eliminate the Ikkō-ikki from Mikawa. In the Battle of Azukizaka, Ieyasu was fighting on the front lines and was nearly killed when he was struck by several bullets however he survived because they did not penetrate his armor. Both sides were using new gunpowder weapons which the Portuguese had introduced to Japan 20 years earlier. At the end of battle, the Ikkō-ikki were defeated. By 1565, Ieyasu had become the master of all of Mikawa Province.

In 1566, as Ieyasu declared his independence from the Imagawa clan. He reformed the order of Mikawa province starting with the Matsudaira clan, after he pacified Mikawa. This decision was made after he was counseled by his senior vassal Sakai Tadatsugu to abandon the clan&#x27;s allegiance to the Imagawa clan. He also strengthened his powerbase by creating a military government system for the Tokugawa clan in Mikawa which was based on his hereditary vassals, the Fudai daimyō. The system which was called &quot;Sanbi no gunsei&quot; (三備の軍制) divided governance into three sections:

# Hatamoto-Senshi: Ieyasu&#x27;s direct vassals and personal unit of the army. Their task was to personally protect Ieyasu. The earliest commanders of this unit included Matsudaira Ietada (Tojo), Torii Mototada, Honda Tadakatsu, Sakakibara Yasumasa, Ōkubo Tadayo, Osuga Yasutaka, Uomura Iezumi, and others
# Higashi Mikawa: The eastern Mikawa province army unit, put under the control of Sakai Tadatsugu as overall commander, the commanders of this unit consisted of many Matsudaira clansmen and other hereditary vassals of Tokugawa such as Matsudaira Ietada (Fukōzu), Matsudaira Tadamasa, Matsudaira Ietada (Katahara), and others
# Nishi-Mikawa: The western Mikawa province army unit, put under the control of Ishikawa Ienari (De jure, De facto was his nephew, Ishikawa Kazumasa) as overall commander, the commanders of this unit consisted of many Matsudaira clansmen and other hereditary vassals which assigned on eastern side of the province, such as Shimada Heizo, Hiraiwa Chikayoshi, Naitō Ienaga, Sakai Tadatoshi, Matsudaira Shinichi, and others.

===Tokugawa clan===

In 1567, Ieyasu started the family name &quot;Tokugawa&quot;, changing his name to the well-known Tokugawa Ieyasu. As a member of the Matsudaira clan, he claimed descent from the Seiwa Genji branch of the Minamoto clan. As there was no proof that the Matsudaira clan were descendants of Emperor Seiwa, the Emperor initially did not approve the appointment, citing the lack of a precedent for the Serada clan of the Seiwa Genji clan to be appointed as &quot;Mikawa-no-kami&quot; (Lord of Mikawa). Ieyasu then consulted with imperial noble Konoe Motohisa through the mediation of a Mikawa native and the abbot of the Kyo Seiganji Temple. Due to Motohisa&#x27;s efforts, Yoshida Kaneyoshi discovered a genealogical document in the &quot;Manri-koji&quot; family that was precedent, saying, &quot;Tokugawa (belongs) to Minamoto clan, as another offshoot of the Fujiwara clan,&quot; and a copy was transferred to him and used for the application. Then after passing several steps, Ieyasu gained the permission of the Imperial Court and he was bestowed the courtesy title &quot;Mikawa-no-kami&quot; and the court rank of . Though the Tokugawa clan could claim some modicum of freedom, they were very much subject to the requests of Oda Nobunaga. Ieyasu remained an ally of Nobunaga and his Mikawa soldiers were part of Nobunaga&#x27;s army which captured Kyoto in 1568.

In 1568, at the same time, Ieyasu was eager to expand eastward to Tōtōmi Province. Ieyasu and Takeda Shingen, the head of the Takeda clan in Kai Province, made an alliance for the purpose of conquering all the Imagawa territory. It is said that the Tokugawa clan had made an agreement with the Takeda clan when dividing the territory that the eastern Suruga Province would become Takeda territory and the western Tōtōmi province would be Tokugawa territory, with the Ōi River as the border. On January 8, 1569, the Takeda vassal Akiyama Nobutomo invaded the Tōtōmi province from Shinano Province. The Takeda clan, through Oda Nobunaga, with whom they had a friendly relationship, asked Ieyasu, who was Nobunaga&#x27;s ally, to reconsider cooperation with the Takeda, but Ieyasu rejected the idea, and Ieyasu is considered to have been in a position of independence from Nobunaga to a certain extent.

===Tōtōmi campaign===
In 1568, Ieyasu besieged the Horikawa Castle in Tōtōmi and captured it in 1569. Ieyasu then ordered Ishikawa Hanzaburo to massacre the castle prisoners and residents, including women and children. It was recorded that around 700 people were beheaded on the banks of the Miyakoda River. Ōkubo Tadachika, who witnessed this massacre testified in his personal journal, &quot;Mikawa Monogatari&quot;, that &quot;... ...&quot;.

Later the same year, Ieyasu&#x27;s troops penetrated Tōtōmi Province. Meanwhile, Takeda Shingen&#x27;s troops captured Suruga Province (including the Imagawa capital of Sunpu). Imagawa Ujizane fled to Kakegawa Castle, which led Ieyasu to lay siege to Kakegawa. Ieyasu then negotiated with Ujizane, promising that if Ujizane surrendered himself and the remainder of Tōtōmi, Ieyasu would assist Ujizane in regaining Suruga. Ujizane had nothing left to lose, and Ieyasu immediately ended his alliance with Takeda, instead making a new alliance with Takeda&#x27;s enemy to the north, Uesugi Kenshin of the Uesugi clan. Through these political manipulations, Ieyasu gained the support of the samurai of Tōtōmi Province. Furthermore, Ieyasu also placed the &quot;Iinoya&#x27;s trio&quot; (Iinoya-Sanninshu) of clans under the command of his trusted vassal, Ii Naomasa. The Iinoya trio were powerful clans that originated from the eastern side of Mikawa who greatly contributed to Ieyasu&#x27;s expansion during his conquest of the former Imagawa territories in Tōtōmi Province.

In 1570, Ieyasu established Hamamatsu as the capital of his territory, placing his son Matsudaira Nobuyasu in charge of Okazaki.

=== Campaign against Asakura-Azai clan ===
Asakura Yoshikage, the head of the Asakura clan and regent of Ashikaga Yoshiaki, refused to come to Kyōto. This caused Nobunaga to declare both of them rebels. Several reports from &quot;Mikawa Monogatari&quot;, &quot;Nobunaga Koki&quot;, &quot;Tokugawa Jikki&quot;, and a supplement from &quot;Ietada Nikki&quot; recorded that Ieyasu and his forces also participated in Oda&#x27;s punitive campaign against Asakura where they fought and captured the Mount Tenzutsu castle. The Oda-Tokugawa forces managed to kill 1,370 enemies on April 25. They continued the next day where they besieged Kanegasaki castle. However the Azai clan sent reinforcements to relieve the siege so Nobunaga retreated without contacting Ieyasu. After dawn, Ieyasu withdrew from battle guided by Kinoshita Tokichi (later named Toyotomi Hideyoshi), an Oda vassal.

Later, in July 1570, Azai Nagamasa, the brother-in-law of Nobunaga, who had broken his alliance with the Oda clan during the siege of Kanegasaki and Asakura combined to fight the combined armies of Nobunaga and Ieyasu who led 5,000 of his men to support Nobunaga at the battle. As the Oda clan engaged the Azai clan army on the right, Tokugawa&#x27;s forces engaged the Asakura clan&#x27;s army on the left. At first, Asakura&#x27;s army gained the advantage as they steadily pushed back the Tokugawa army. However, Honda Tadakatsu suddenly launched a lone, suicidal charge, while Sakakibara Yasumasa launched his force in a timely counterattack on Asakura&#x27;s flank; they managed to beat Asakura&#x27;s forces. Since Ieyasu&#x27;s army was now free to move, they exploited the gap between Asakura and Azai&#x27;s forces and sent Tadakatsu and Yasumasa to attack the flank of Azai&#x27;s formation, which caused Oda-Tokugawa&#x27;s forces to be able to win the battle.

=== Suruga campaign against Takeda clan ===

In October 1571, Takeda Shingen broke the alliance with the Oda-Tokugawa forces and allied with the Odawara Hōjō clan. He decided to make a drive for Kyoto at the urging of the shōgun Ashikaga Yoshiaki, starting by invading Tokugawa lands in Tōtōmi. Takeda Shingen&#x27;s first objectives in his campaign against Ieyasu were Nishikawa Castle, Yoshida Castle and Futamata Castle. In 1572, after besieging Futamata, Shingen would press on past Futamata towards the major Tokugawa home castle at Hamamatsu. Ieyasu asked for help from Nobunaga, who sent him some 3,000 troops. Early in 1573, the two armies met at the Battle of Mikatagahara, north of Hamamatsu. The considerably larger Takeda army, under the expert direction of Shingen, overwhelmed Ieyasu&#x27;s troops and caused heavy casualties. Despite his initial reluctance, Ieyasu was convinced by his generals to retreat. The battle was a major defeat, but in the interest of maintaining the appearance of a dignified withdrawal, Ieyasu brazenly ordered the men in his castle to light torches, sound drums, and leave the gates open, to properly receive the returning warriors. To the surprise and relief of the Tokugawa army, this spectacle made the Takeda generals suspicious that they were being led into a trap, so they did not besiege the castle and instead made camp for the night. This error allowed a band of Tokugawa soldiers to raid the camp in the ensuing hours, further upsetting the already disoriented Takeda army, and ultimately resulting in Shingen&#x27;s decision to call off the offensive altogether. Takeda Shingen would not get another chance to advance on Hamamatsu, much less Kyoto, since he died from unknown causes shortly after the siege of Noda Castle later that same year.

In 1574, Shingen was succeeded by his son Takeda Katsuyori and the conflict continued as the Tokugawa forces under Honda Tadakatsu and Sakakibara Yasumasa seized many of the Takeda clan&#x27;s castles, including Komyo Castle. At some point, Ieyasu tried to capture Inui Castle in Tōtōmi Province, but strong resistance from its garrison commander, Amano Kagehira, forced Ieyasu to abort the siege. During their retreat, Kagehira launched a counterattack to pursue Ieyasu, but this was repelled by Mizuno Tadashige and Torii Mototada who led the rearguard.

In April 1575, Ōga Yashirō, a deputy governor of over 20 villages in Oku district of Mikawa under Matsudaira Nobuyasu, was arrested by Ōkubo Tadayo and paraded around Hamamatsu Castle. He was then executed by being mutilated alive with a saw, while Tadayo crucified his wife and children. According to the investigation, Yashirō was implicated in allegations of colluding with Takeda Katsuyori to betray Ieyasu and invade the Tokugawa clan&#x27;s territory. According to a letter, Yashiro had teamed up with Takeda Katsuyori of Kai to seize Okazaki Castle. However, one of Yashiro&#x27;s colleagues, Yamada Hachizō, betrayed Yashiro and passed this information to Nobuyasu. Meanwhile, Ieyasu himself also learned about Yashirō&#x27;s further crimes of corruptions in governance through a vassal&#x27;s report. In June, during Takeda Katsuyori&#x27;s raid on Mikawa Province when he attacked Yoshida Castle and besieged Nagashino Castle, Ieyasu appealed to Nobunaga for help and Nobunaga came personally with 30,000 men. The Oda-Tokugawa forces 38,000 strong won a great victory and successfully defended Nagashino Castle. Though the Takeda forces had been destroyed, Katsuyori survived the battle and retreated back to Kai Province. For the next seven years, Ieyasu and Katsuyori fought a series of small battles, as the result, Ieyasu&#x27;s troops managed to wrest control of Suruga Province from the Takeda clan.

=== Nobuyasu Incident ===

In 1579, Lady Tsukiyama, Ieyasu&#x27;s wife, and his heir Matsudaira Nobuyasu were accused by Nobunaga of conspiring with Takeda Katsuyori to assassinate Nobunaga, whose daughter Tokuhime was married to Nobuyasu. Ieyasu ordered his wife to be executed and forced his son to commit &quot;seppuku&quot; because of these accusations.

There are various theories regarding this incident. According to the &quot;Mikawa Monogatari&#x27;&quot;, which was written by Ōkubo Tadachika, Tokuhime (wife of Nobuyasu), who was not on good terms with her mother-in-law Tsukiyama-dono, wrote in a letter to her father, Nobunaga, that her mother-in-law and her husband were secretly conspiring with Takeda Katsuyori.

However, this hypothesis was considered implausible by various historians in the modern era. According to Katsuhiro Taniguchi, the more plausible theory was that there was friction within the house of Tokugawa clan between two factions with conflicting ideals, as proposed by the Japanese writer Tenkyu Goro. One faction was active on the front lines and had many opportunities to advance their careers, dubbed the &quot;Hamamatsu Castle Faction.&quot; The other faction was the &quot;Okazaki Castle Faction,&quot; which consisted of Tokugawa vassals responsible for logistical support due to past injuries and other factors that caused them to play a lesser role in the politics of Tokugawa clan. According to this theory, the conflict between these two factions eventually led to a conflict between Ieyasu, representing the Hamamatsu faction, and his son Nobuyasu, representing the Okazaki faction, finally ending with Nobuyasu&#x27;s death in prison. Nobuyasu planned to exile Ieyasu with the help of the Okazaki Castle faction. Before and after his son&#x27;s execution, Ieyasu punished or executed many of those who worked at Okazaki Castle, although some escaped. Taniguchi theorized that Tsukiyama also participated in the coup d&#x27;état that was going on in Okazaki Castle. Furthermore, Sakai Tadatsugu, the most prominent general of Ieyasu, also may have played a role in confirming Oda Nobunaga&#x27;s suspicion of the alleged betrayal against the Oda clan being planned by Nobuyasu Tsukiyama. Ieyasu may have concluded that if a high-ranking fudai daimyō such as Tadatsugu had confirmed the accusations against Lady Tsukiyama, then they must be true.

Another theory has said that Tadatsugu was actually conspiring with the Ieyasu&#x27;s mother, Odai no Kata, to get rid of Lady Tsukiyama. Arthur Lindsay Sadler theorized this was a deliberate act of spite from Tadatsugu due to many senior Tokugawa clan generals&#x27; dislike of Nobuyasu.

In the same year, Ieyasu named his third son, Tokugawa Hidetada, as his heir since his second son had been adopted by Toyotomi Hideyoshi, who would later become a powerful daimyo.

=== Takeda clan annihilation ===

In 1580, Ieyasu built five fortresses in order to isolate Takatenjin Castle from external supplies and reinforcements. In addition to those 5 new fortresses, Ieyasu renovated an old castle named Ogasayama fort, which had originally been built by Ieyasu far before the conquest of Tōtōmi Province against Imagawa clan to capture Kakegawa Castle. With the six fortresses, which were referred to as the &quot;six fortresses of Takatenjin&quot;, completed, Ieyasu assigned Ishikawa Yasumichi to the Ogasayama fort, Honda Yasushige to the Nogasaka fort, Osuga Yasutaka to the Higamine, Shishigahana, and Nakamura forts, while Sakai Ietada was appointed to garrison the Mitsuiyama fort. The Takatenjin castle which was defended by Okabe Motonobu, immediately suffered from a period of starvation as the siege by Oda-Tokugawa forces intensified. In response, Motonobu tried to negotiate a truce with Ieyasu by offering Takisakai and Koyama Castle in exchange for Takatenjin castle being spared from the siege. After Ieyasu consulted with Nobunaga on this matter, he refused Motonobu&#x27;s plea. Nobunaga stated his reason in a letter saying that if Takeda Katsuyori sent his forces to assist Motonobu, then there would be an opportunity to bait the Takeda army into coming outside the castle and annihilate them on the field. Meanwhile, Nobunaga also stated that if Katsuyori neglected helping Motonobu at all, it would damage the Takeda clan&#x27;s credibility because they could not save their own vassals.

In 1581, Ieyasu forces managed to subdue Tanaka castle, and recapture Takatenjin castle, where Okabe Motonobu was killed during the fight.

The end of the war with Takeda Katsuyori came in 1582, when a combined Oda-Tokugawa force attacked and conquered Kai Province, where Katsuyori was cornered and defeated at the Battle of Tenmokuzan, and then committed &quot;seppuku&quot;. With the Takeda clan practically annihilated as political entity, Nobunaga gave Ieyasu the right to govern Suruga Province in recognition of his service in the fight against the Takeda clan.

== Tokugawa expansions (1582–1584) ==

In late June 1582, before the incident at Honnō-ji temple, Oda Nobunaga invited Ieyasu to tour the Kansai region in celebration of the demise of the Takeda clan. Before the meeting could take place, Ieyasu learned that Nobunaga had been killed at Honnō-ji temple by Akechi Mitsuhide.

=== &quot;Shinkun Iga-goe&quot; journey ===
Tokugawa Ieyasu heard that Nobunaga had been killed by Akechi Mitsuhide while in Hirakata, Osaka, but at the time, he had only a few companions with him, notably Sakai Tadatsugu, Ii Naomasa, and Honda Tadakatsu, Sakakibara Yasumasa and some others. The Iga provincial route was dangerous because of the &quot;Ochimusha-gari&quot;, or &quot;Samurai hunters&quot; gangs. Ieyasu and his party, therefore, chose the shortest route back to Mikawa Province by crossing Iga Province. The exact route differs in many versions according to primary sources &quot;Tokugawa Nikki&quot; or &quot;Mikawa Todai-Hon&quot;:

* The &quot;Tokugawa Nikki&quot; theory stated that Ieyasu took the roads to Shijonawate and Son&#x27;enji, then followed the Kizu River until they spent a night in the Yamaguchi Castle. The next day they reached a stronghold of the Kōka ikki clan branch from Tarao who allowed them to take refuge for the night. On the last day, Ieyasu&#x27;s group used a ship from Shiroko to reach Okazaki Castle. However, The &quot;Tokugawa Nikki&quot; theory is doubted by modern historians, since it was not the shortest route for Ieyasu to reach Mikawa from his starting position in Sakai, and it was considered by historical researchers to be a very risky path due to the existence of Iga ikki clans which were hostile to the Oda and Tokugawa clans.
* The &quot;Mikawa Toda-Hon&quot; theory stated that Ieyasu went north from Ogawadate, crossed Koka, and entered Seishu Seki (from Shigaraki), passing through Aburahi and entering Tsuge in Iga. This theory was championed by modern Japanese historians such as Tatsuo Fujita from Mie University, who took this material to formulate three different theories about the details of Ieyasu&#x27;s trek. This theory is also supported by a group of historical researchers from Mie city, who happened to be descendants of the Kōka ikki clans. The researchers stated that by taking this path, before Ieyasu&#x27;s group reached Kada pass where they could be escorted by the Kōka clan Jizamurai, Ieyasu mostly depended on the protection of his high-rank vassals, particularly the four Shitennō generals of the Tokugawa clan, rather than the popular theory about getting help from the &quot;Iga Ninja&quot; clans.

Regardless which theory was true, historians agreed that when his path ended at Kada (a mountain pass between Kameyama and Iga), the Tokugawa group suffered one last attack by Ochimusha-gari outlaws as they reached the territory of Kōka ikki clans of Jizamurai who were friendly to the Tokugawa clan. The Koka ikki samurais assisted Ieyasu in eliminating the threat of the Ochimusha-gari outlaws and escorted them until they reached Iga Province, where they were further protected by other allied clans from Iga ikki who accompanied Ieyasu and his group until they safely reached Mikawa.

Portuguese missionary Luís Fróis recorded in his work &quot;History of Japan&quot; that during this journey, Tokugawa retainers including Sakai Tadatsugu, Ii Naomasa and Honda Tadakatsu fought their way out of raids and harassment from Ochimusha-gari outlaws while escorting Ieyasu, while paying bribes of gold and silver to those Ochimusha-gari outlaws that could be bribed. Matsudaira Ietada recorded in his journal, &quot;Ietada nikki&quot; (家忠日記), the Ieyasu&#x27;s escorts suffered around 200 casualties during their journey, and when they arrived at Ietada&#x27;s residence in Mikawa, they only had about 34 personnel left, including high ranking Tokugawa generals including Tadatsugu, Naomasa, Tadakatsu, Sakakibara, Ōkubo Tadayo, Hattori Hanzō, and others.

=== Tenshō-Jingo war ===
After Ieyasu reached Mikawa, he immediately moved to shift his focus on former Takeda clan territory as he expected unrest there. As a preemptive measure, Ieyasu dispatched Honda Nobutoshi to contact Kawajiri Hidetaka, who ruled Suwa District as a vassal of the Oda clan, to request cooperation.

Meanwhile, Ieyasu had Yoda Nobushige, the former Takeda clan governor of the Saku district who had been hidden in the Tokugawa territory and had maintained contact with Ieyasu organize contacts with the other remaining vassals of the Takeda clan to restore order in the chaos following the death of Nobunaga. At that moment, Nobushige was settled in the secluded village of Osawa. At the same time, Uesugi and the Hōjō clans also mobilized their forces to invade Shinano Province, Kōzuke Province, and Kai Province (currently Gunma Prefecture), which were ruled by the remnants of the many small clans that formerly served the Takeda clan, when they learned of the death of Nobunaga. This caused a triangle conflict between those three factions known as the .

==== Preliminary movements ====
At first, the Hōjō clan, who ruled the Kantō region, led an army of 55,000 men to invade the Shinano Province through Usui, as they aimed to prevent a Tokugawa incursion of Kai. By June 13, 1582, the Hōjō clan had captured Iwadono Castle in Tsuru District, and instructed Watanabe Shozaemon, a local magistrate from the Tsuru District, to assist them in their conquest. Subsequently, Sanada Masayuki led his army and captured the Numata Castle for the Uesugi clan. On June 14 however, Kawajiri Hidetaka killed Honda Nobutoshi. This was followed by an uprising from many of the clans in Kai province against Hidetaka the following day, which resulted in Hidetaka being killed on June 18. The Hōjō also gained support from the Hoshina clan, which was a former Takeda vassal, led by Hoshina Masatoshi and his sons Hoshina Masanao and Naitō Masaaki. By the end of June, they had secured all of the territory except for the areas controlled by the Sanada in Numata and Agatsuma.

Meanwhile, Ieyasu immediately marched his 8,000 soldiers to the disputed regions and then split his army into two parts, with the separate detachment led by Sakai Tadatsugu and Ogasawara Nobumine going to pacify the Shinano Province, while Ieyasu took the main force to pacify Kai. Tadatsugu and Nobumine met with unexpected resistance from Suwa Yoritada, a former Takeda vassal who was now allied with the Hōjō clan. They were beaten by Yoritada, who were then reinforced by the Hōjō clan, forcing Tadatsugu to retreat. As Tadatsugu&#x27;s forces retreated, they were pursued by 43,000 men of the Hōjō clan army. Okabe Masatsuna, a member of the Suruga clan samurai who once served under Baba Nobuharu, took the initiative to defend the rear of Tadatsugu&#x27;s army from the enemy charges and repelled them. As they successfully retreated without further losses, they rejoined Ieyasu&#x27;s main forces in the area of Wakamiko in Suwamachi (modern day Yamanashi Prefecture). On June 5, Ieyasu instructed two members of Takekawa clan from Kai who were hiding in Kiriyama, Tōtōmi Province, Orii Tsugumasa and Yonekura Tadatsugu, to proceed with the work of enticing the Kai samurai to the Tokugawa side. The next day, Ieyasu also sent a letter to Masatsuna instructing him to begin the construction of a castle at Shimoyama, Minobu Town in the Kai Kawachi domain, the former base of Anayama Nobutada, one of Tokugawa&#x27;s retainers who was killed by outlaws during his escape after the Honnō-ji Incident. Suganuma Castle (Terazawa, Minobu Town) was built along the Fuji River and the Suruga Highway (Kawachi Road). After the death of Nobutada and the senior members of the Obikane clan, to which they had pledged loyalty, the Anayama clan was left leaderless, so they decided to pledge allegiance to Ieyasu. Ieyasu then dispatched Sone Masatada, formerly one of Shingen Takeda&#x27;s three most prominent generals, to the Erinji area with 500 men to confront a Hōjō troop that numbered 3,000 men. Masatada managed to defeat them and inflicted between 600 and 700 casualties. On June 12, Masatada joined forces with another former Takeda vassal, Okabe Masatsuna, and a senior Tokugawa general, Osuga Yasutaka. The same day, Yoda Nobushige set off to Saku District and rallied around 3,000 Takeda clan retainers as Ieyasu instructed. Several days later, Osuga Yasutaka, a senior Tokugawa vassal, inspected Masatada&#x27;s troops, where he commended the cooperation of Masatada lieutenant, Kubota Masakatsu. Later on June 28, Ieyasu also dispatched the Anayama clan, to resist the Hōjō clan. He also sent his generals Ōkubo Tadayo, Ishikawa Yasumichi and Honda Hirotaka along with his son Yasushige as reinforcements for them to resist the Hōjō. At some point during this war, the Tokugawa clan also gained support fromt the Tomohisa clan.

Uesugi Kagekatsu of the Uesugi clan also made his move by supporting 
former Takeda clan forces under the leadership of Ogasawara Dōsetsusai from the Ogasawara clan and Yashiro Hidemasa at Chikuma and the Nishina clan of Azumino. They defeated and expelled Kiso Yoshimasa, who had been granted the control of both Chikuma and Azumino by Oda Nobunaga. They then faced another branch of Ogasawara clan which was led by Ogasawara Sadayoshi and his retainers which opposed the steps taken by Dōsetsusai. Sadayoshi&#x27;s group appealed to the Tokugawa clan and offered their allegiance to Ieyasu. On June 24, Kagekatsu advanced into northern Shinano and entered Naganuma castle.

As the triangle battle was underway between the three factions, order was restored in Owari province as the rebellion of Akechi Mitsuhide had already been suppressed in the Battle of Yamazaki. Ieyasu also informed the Oda clan of the developments in Shinano and Kai. In response, on July 7, as the Oda clan learned of the defeat of Takigawa Kazumasu by the Hōjō clan at the Battle of Kanagawa, Toyotomi Hideyoshi sent a letter to Ieyasu to give him authorization to lead military operations to secure the two provinces of Kai and Shinano from Hōjō and Uesugi clans.

==== Conflict chronology ====
Ieyasu deployed his forces to various fortresses in the Kōfu Basin to oppose Ujinao, who had camped his army in the area of present-day Hokuto City. Hattori Hanzō led Iga clan warriors to Katsuyama Castle (Kamisone-cho, Kofu City), Minakuchi Castle, and Kotohirayama Castle (Misakuchi-cho, Kofu City), where he monitored the Nakamichi road connecting Kai and Suruga. Ieyasu managed to recruit more samurai clans who had formerly served under various Takeda generals such as Ichijō Nobutatsu, Yamagata Masakage, and Hara Masatane with the assistance of Ii Naomasa. Naomasa dealt with around 41 letters of submission to the Tokugawa clan. Furthermore, Naomasa also received another letter of submission from Obata Nobusada, the leader of the Takeda clan&#x27;s red armored cavalry troops.

On July 9, Masayuki changed his allegiance from the Uesugi to the Hōjō when he surrendered to Hojo Ujinao, and began building a system of forifications to station his vassals in Ueno Province. Subsequently, on July 12, as the troops under Hōjō Ujinao advanced across the Usui Pass, Nobushige resisted them, but then he abandoned the Komoro Castle and retreated to a fortress which he deemed more suitable to defend against the Hōjō army. Later on July 16, Sadayoshi launched an attack on Fukashi Castle, forcing Dōsetsusai along with Hidemasa to surrender. Ujinao advanced his troops while leaving the siege against the castle to his general, Daidōji Masashige. Meanwhile, the Hōjō negotiated a truce with the Uesugi in July 19, so they could focus their front towards the Tokugawa in Kai province, much to the dismay of Masayuki, as he had hoped to secure his territory in Numata instead of from the Uesugi. The resistances of local warlords against Hōjō increased during this time, as an Ogasawara clan branch in Mishima Izu province under Ogasawara Hirokatsu also resisted the Hōjō clan. The Hōjō clan beat them in battle as Hirokatsu&#x27;s father was killed so Hirokatsu was forced to retreat to Mitsuba Castle in Suruga province. Meanwhile, the Enoshita clan, another local clan subject to the former Takeda clan, which was led by Enoshita Norikiyo, also showed their resistance against the Hōjō when they fought and beat a detachment of Hōjō troops at the Battle of Sakaguchi.

On August 6, the main body of the Tokugawa army led by Ieyasu met with the Hōjō clan&#x27;s main army that was stationed at Wakamiko castle. This is where a series of engagements occurred. 8,000 Tokugawa soldiers fought against approximately 50,000 Hojo soldiers led by Hōjō Ujinao. As Ieyasu&#x27;s forces lined up at Shinpu and Nomi Castle to the north and fortified their defenses, various skirmishes broke out, where the smaller Tokugawa forces managed to stall the much larger Hōjō forces. In the middle of these engagements, Sakakibara Yasumasa stormed a castle belonging to the Hōjō, while Matsudaira Ietada was harassing the Hōjō food supplies. The Tokugawa forces then engaged in the battle of Kurokoma village against the large Hōjō army who had recently received reinforcements from the Satomi clan, with 10,000 fresh soldiers led by Satomi Yoshiyori, the ruler of the Awa Province (Chiba). To break the stalemate on the frontline, Hōjō Ujinao ordered a 10,000 troop detachment led by Hōjō Ujitada to march around the periphery of Kurokoma, intending to encircle the Tokugawa army. Ieyasu realized the Hōjō plan to encircle him, and dispatched Mizuno Katsunari and Torii Mototada to lead 2,000 soldiers to intercept them, where they managed to rout the Hōjō troops and prevent the encirclement. Katsunari along with Yasusada Miyake caused panic among the Ujinao soldiers with their assault. Hōjō Ujikatsu saw this and went to reinforce and rescue Ujitada. Katsunari and Miyake managed to repel Ujikatsu&#x27;s reinforcements too. Despite quarrels with Mototada who viewed Katsunari as being reckless and not following orders, Katsunari was praised for his outstanding performance and received rewards. Due to this daring raid by Mototada and Katsunari, the Hōjō army ultimately failed to encircle to Tokugawa army. In the end, the Tokugawa clan managed to force a stalemate, as the alliance of the Hōjō and the Satomi clans which far outnumbered the Tokugawa could not dislodge them from Kurokoma.

On August 12, after a series of Tokugawa clan victories over the Hōjō clan, former Takeda clan generals including Kiso Yoshimasa, Hoshina Masanao, Yoda Nobushige, and many others, gained the confidence to openly declare their allegiance to Ieyasu. Seeing the trends, Masanao&#x27;s father and brother, Masatoshi and Masaaki also defected to Tokugawa. In response, Ieyasu assigned his Hatamoto officer, Shibata Yasutada, to be a military inspector under Nobushige. At the same time, a Tokugawa army detachment from the Iga Province commanded by Hattori Hanzō invaded the Saku District, where they were aided by local Shinano samurai warriors from the Tsugane clan led by Öbi Sukemitsu. Up to this point, Ieyasu was generally still at a disadvantage in the war. In the Saku district, he only had Yoda Nobushige who was struggling by himself in guerilla warfare against the Hōjō, as the bulk of new Tokugawa supporters such as the Takekawa and Tsugane clans of Kai also suffered from a shortage of provisions while the number of anti-Hōjō forces continued to grow. In response, Yoda Nobushige took the initiative by contacting Masayuki to entice him to the Tokugawa side. By taking advantage of the Hōjō setbacks, Masayuki had placed Yazawa Tsunayori in Numata Castle and his son Sanada Nobuyuki in Iwabitsu Castle, as he started to collude with Ieyasu and Nobushige in secret.

In early September, Hattori Hanzō and Öbi Sukemitsu launched a night attack on Egusuku Castle (also known as Shishiku Castle), capturing it. Later, Hanzō also captured Sanogoya Castle in Izu Province under the cover of heavy rain, causing Ieyasu to elicit praise for this achievement. In the same month, in Yamanashi Prefecture, former Takeda clan vassals led by Kōno Morimasa managed to defeat the Hōjō clan at Misaka Pass.

On October 19, Sanada Masayuki openly declared his allegiance to the Tokugawa clan by attacking Nezu Masatsuna, a lieutenant of Hōjō Ujinao, and cooperated with Yoda Nobushige to resist the Hōjō clan forces around Komoro, as Ieyasu instructed. It was believed by historians that information about Masayuki&#x27;s defection had reached the Hojo clan in early October, as there are documents and letters from Sone Masatada and Yoda Nobushige praising Sanada Masateru for his success to convince Masayuki to join the Tokugawa side. In response to Masayuki&#x27;s betrayal, a commander of Hōjō forces named Fujita Ujikuni tried to capture Numata castle. However, he failed with Masayuki successfully resisting his attempt.

On October 21, the Tokugawa troops in the Saku district managed to capture Mochizuki Castle. In response, the Hōjō side recalled Hojo Tsunanari and others from Kai Province, and ordered Nyudo Urano, Lord of Ooto Castle in Agatsuma County, to immediately attack Iwabitsu Castle. Masayuki and Yoda Nobutaka then cut off communication between Komoro Castle and Tomono Castle. Later on October 24, Ieyasu issued a &quot;Shuinjō&quot; (Red Seal Permit) to Masanao which granted him control of half of Ina district. This forced the Naito clan that had remained in Takatō Castle to switch their allegiance to the Tokugawa side. In November, Masanao attacked Minowa Castle, and caused the lord of the castle, Fujisawa Yorichika, who was on the side of Hōjō, to commit suicide. Masanao also expelled his grandson and annexed the Minowa territory. As a result, Masanao took control of the Kamiina district around Takato Castle. On October 26, the Tokugawa clan managed to capture Ashida Castle, while Masayuki provided military supplies to secure the castle. Nobushige also captured Uchiyama Castle, successfully cutting off the Hojo army&#x27;s supply route. Eventually, together with Masayuki, they occupied Usui Pass, and then captured Iwamurata Castle. The battle in the Saku district was then in Tokugawa&#x27;s favor, and Masayuki retreated to his main territory.

Between November 1582 to January 1583, in conjunction with the main battles at Wakamiko and Kurokoma which were still ongoing, Komai Masanao worked together with Torii Mototada and Ii Naomasa, along with Suwa Yoritada, who had joined the Tokugawa rank, to attack the Chikuma District which was controlled by Ogasawara Sadayoshi. On February 10, Sadayoshi confirmed his allegiance to them when he joined the Tokugawa side. Overall, the duration of Ieyasu&#x27;s fight against the Hōjō and the Satomi clan was 80 days, and his ranks gradually swelled as more than 800 former vassals of the Takeda clan (900 according to Susumu Shimazaki) from Kōfu joined the Tokugawa clan to oppose the Hōjō.

=== Aftermath of Tenshō-Jingo war ===
The problems for the Hōjō clan increased by the day as Ieyasu established contact with daimyo lords from north-east Japan including the Satake, Yuki, and Utsunomiya clans, who threatened to invade the Hōjō from behind while the Hōjō were still engaging Ieyasu in battle. As the war turned in favor of Ieyasu, combined with the defection of Sanada Masayuki to the Tokugawa side, the Hōjō negotiated a truce with Ieyasu.

The Hōjō clan sent Hōjō Ujinobu as representative, while the Tokugawa sent Ii Naomasa as representative for the preliminary meetings. Representatives from the Oda clan, Oda Nobukatsu, Oda Nobutaka, and Toyotomi Hideyoshi who mediated the negotiation from October 1582, also assisted the ratification of the truce. Sanada Nobutada, a younger brother of Sanada Masayuki, was given 5,000 koku of territory by Ieyasu, and Okabe Masatsuna was rewarded with a 7,600 koku domain in between Kai and Shinano provinces. In the aftermath of the war, Ieyasu once again sent Tadatsugu to subdue Suwa Yoritada at Suwa in Shinano in December, where Tadatsugu defeated Yoritada and secured his surrender to the Tokugawa clan.

In March 1583, according to the Meishō genkō-roku record, after the destruction of the Takeda clan in the Tenmokuzan, Ieyasu organized a kishōmon (blood oath) with many samurai clans, local lords, low rank officials, ninja mercenaries, and even noble ladies that were formerly vassals of the Takeda clan in order to put them under the command of Tokugawa clan retainers. Since the ritual took place after the Tenshō-Jingo war and in the same location, this oath taking ritual was named &quot;Tenshō-Jingo kishōmon&quot;. During the process of the oath-taking Tokugawa, Ieyasu planned to give control of most of the former Takeda samurai to Ii Naomasa to command, having consulted and reached agreement with Sakai Tadatsugu, a senior Tokugawa clan vassal. However, Ieyasu&#x27;s decision garnered protest from Sakakibara Yasumasa, who went so far as to threaten Naomasa. Tadatsugu immediately defended Ieyasu&#x27;s decision in response and warned Yasumasa that if he did any harm to Naomasa, Tadatsugu would personally slaughter the Sakakibara clan; Yasumasa backed down and did not protest further. As there were no more protests, Ieyasu decided to assign the new recruits to various commands, as following: 
* 70 former Takeda samurai from Tsuchiya clan, and also the clan of Ishiguro Shōgen to Ii Naomasa. (another source mentioned that total of 120 Takeda samurai warriors came under the command of Naomasa.)
* 11 former Takeda samurai from Komai clan led by Komai Masanao to Sakakibara Yasumasa.
* 60 former Takeda samurai of Asari clan led by Asari Masatane to Honda Tadakatsu.
* The largest number of Takeda clans vassals were under the direct control of Ieyasu himself, including clans which were led by Yoda Nobushige or Hoshina Masanao (along with the local daimyo lords from Shinano who followed Masanao)., the Kurihara to Kurihara Nobumori, 49 samurai from the Jō clan led by father and son Jō Kageshige and Jō Masashige, samurai who formerly guarded the frontiers of Takeda clan led Watanabe Hitoyanosuke, and many others. Among those who were assigned as Hatamoto, or direct vassal of Ieyasu, they were allowed to retain their positions, and even increased the domains&#x27; revenue they controlled, particularly from the new territories which the Tokugawa clan conquered. This was apparent from the Saegusa clan, where the son of the clan leader, Saegusa Masayoshi, retained his territory, while his father Saegusa Torayoshi was appointed as one of four magistrates in the Tokugawa clan.

Aside from the already established workforces from the former Takeda clan, Ieyasu also established new offices such as the Hachiōji sen&#x27;nin-dōshin, which formed from a patchwork membership of 9 small clans of Takeda retainers. This group continued to serve the Tokugawa clan faithfully until their disbandment during the Meiji Restoration in 1868.

In 1583, Ieyasu had a detachment of Ii Naomasa&#x27;s troops conquer the Takatō area of Shinano, which had still not submitted to the Tokugawa clan. Meanwhile, Nobushige led the attack against the Tomono clan, and defeated them. In the middle of operation, Yoda Nobushige was killed in action. Yoda Yasukuni, who succeeded him as head of the Yoda clan, was given the surname Matsudaira and Komoro Castle. The territory he was allowed to inherit was 60,000 koku, one of the largest for any of Ieyasu&#x27;s vassals at the time. Yashiro Hidemasa, who surrendered to Ogasawara Sadayoshi, also joined the Tokugawa clan later on April 1, 1584, together with his younger brother Ogasawara Mitsutoshi.

Ieyasu did not take a side during the Toyotomi Hideyoshi and Shibata Katsuie conflict, where Hideyoshi defeated Katsuie at the Battle of Shizugatake.

==Ieyasu and Hideyoshi (1584–1598)==
=== Earthquakes and conflict with Hideyoshi===
As the Tokugawa clan&#x27;s territory expanded, many of their regions were hit by earthquakes and heavy rains from 1583 to 1584. In particular, from May to July, heavy rains fell constantly from the Kantō region to the Tōkai region, in what was dubbed the &quot;heaviest flood in 50 years&quot; in the historical record of &quot;Ietada-nikki&quot;. It was under these circumstances that the Tokugawa clan was forced to fight against the Hōjō clan and the Toyotomi government, because in 1584 Ieyasu had decided to support Oda Nobukatsu, the eldest surviving son and heir of Oda Nobunaga, against Toyotomi Hideyoshi. The &quot;Ryumonji Kojiki&quot;, written by successive chief priests at Ryumonji Temple in Tahara, Mikawa Province, records that in 1582, many people were mobilized in the Battle of Komaki and Nagakute, which led to the devastation of farmland and famine. The devastation of the Tokugawa clan&#x27;s territory made it difficult to continue fighting against the Toyotomi government, and they were forced to rebuild their country. This was a dangerous situation for the Tokugawa clan which could have resulted in their annihilation due to the Oda clan collapsing after Nobunaga&#x27;s death.

Tokugawa troops took the traditional Oda stronghold of Owari. Hideyoshi responded by sending an army into Owari. Ieyasu decided to confront Hideyoshi&#x27;s forces in Komaki, because his general, Sakakibara Yasumasa, suggested the area was favorable for the Tokugawa force to fight incoming enemies from the west. Additionally, Ieyasu and Nobukatsu formed an anti-Hideyoshi alliance with Chōsokabe Motochika, through contact with Kōsokabe Chikayasu.
At first, Ieyasu ordered his generals Mizuno Tadashige and Mizuno Katsunari to capture Hoshizaki Castle. Then, as the Toyotomi army vanguard under the command of Toyotomi Hidetsugu started entering the area of Komaki, Ieyasu sent Yasumasa and Osuga Yasutaka in for surprise attack and inflicted heavy losses on the Hidetsugu army before they were stopped by Hori Hidemasa. Hidemasa decided to retreat when Ieyasu brought his main forces forward. Later, as another Toyotomi vanguard led by Mori Nagayoshi entered the area, Ieyasu had his senior generals, Sakai Tadatsugu, Okudaira Nobumasa, and Matsudaira Ietada, beat Nagayoshi&#x27;s troops, forcing him retreat. In the last phase of this series of engagements, Nagayoshi returned with another Toyotomi general Ikeda Tsuneoki. However, both of them were repeatedly beaten on the field at Nagakute by Mizuno Katsunari, and later, Ii Naomasa, caused the Toyotomi forces to suffer heavy losses with both Tsuneoki and Nagayoshi killed in action. Furious with the decimation of Nagayoshi&#x27;s and Tsuneoki&#x27;s forces, Hideyoshi mobilized his main army to crush Ieyasu&#x27;s army in Nagakute. However, Ieyasu had already retreated before Hideyoshi&#x27;s main forces arrived.

After the Battle of Komaki and Nagakute in April, the front line in northern Owari reached a stalemate. At this time, Kanie Castle was located about three miles between Ieyasu&#x27;s Kiyosu Castle and Nobuo&#x27;s Nagashima Castle, and was connected to the Mie moat and three castles: Ono Castle, Shimojima Castle, and Maeda Castle. At that time, Kanie Castle was facing the sea and was one of the leading ports in Owari, along with Atsuta and Tsushima. Then on June 18, Ieyasu and Nobuo led 20,000 soldiers and besieged three castles: Kanie Castle, Maeda Castle, and Shimojima Castle. Kanie Castle was defended by Maeda Nagatane and Takigawa Kazumasu. Tadatsugu, Okanabe Mori, and Yamaguchi Shigemasa spearheaded the attack towards Shimojima castle, while Sakakibara Yasumasa, Osuga Yasutaka were deployed to capture any fleeing defenders. During this siege, Ieyasu&#x27;s hatamoto retainers, including Mizuno Katsunari blockaded, the port of the castle, and hijacked two ships belonging to Kuki Yoshitaka, to prevent any outside help for Kanie Castle. After the fall of Shimojima castle on June 22, Oda Nobuo and Tokugawa Ieyasu launched an all-out attack on Kanie Castle. The soldiers led by Tadatsugu, who had been deployed at the main gate, were exhausted after days of fierce fighting, and in the evening, the soldiers of Yasumasa Sakakibara and Ietada Matsudaira entered Kaimonjiguchi in their place. On June 23, Ieyasu entered the castle with Sakakibara Yasumasa, subduing the castle.

=== Becoming a vassal of Toyotomi Regency ===
The conflict with Hideyoshi was long, and lasted until Nobukatsu decided to surrender to Hideyoshi. With this, Ieyasu lost his motivation to further oppose Hideyoshi, and decided to also submit. After peace negotiations between Tokugawa Ieyasu and Toyotomi Hideyoshi in the aftermath of the Battle of Komaki and Nagakute, Naomasa, Tadakatsu, and Yasumasa gained fame in Kyoto. The following month, the three of them were joined by Tadatsugu Sakai while accompanying Ieyasu on a trip to Kyoto, where the four of them became famous.

However, on November 13, 1585, Ishikawa Kazumasa defected from Ieyasu to Hideyoshi. Ogasawara Sadayoshi, who also defected and followed Kazumasa, led over 3,000 troops to attack Takato. In Takato Castle there were only 40 cavalrymen and 360 soldiers other than the elderly Hoshina Masatoshi, but Masatoshi himself took command and defeated the Ogasawara forces in open battle. This prevented the collapse of Tokugawa rule in Shinano and Ieyasu awarded Masanao with the sword of Tsunehisa on December 24 in recognition of his military achievements. These incidents caused Ieyasu to undertake massive reforms of the Tokugawa clan governmental structure by incorporating more Takeda clan vassals into his administrations, both civil and military. At first, Ieyasu ordered Torii Mototada, who served as the county magistrate of Kai, to collect military laws, weapons, and military equipment from the time of Takeda Shingen and bring them to Hamamatsu Castle in Hamamatsu City, Shizuoka Prefecture. Later, he appointed two former Takeda vassals, Naruse Masakazu and Okabe Masatsuna, as magistrates under authority of Ii Naomasa and Honda Tadakatsu. He ordered all former Takeda vassals who served him to impart any military doctrines and structures they knew from their service to the Takeda clan., He ordered three of his prime generals, Ii Naomasa, Honda Tadakatsu, and Sakakibara Yasumasa, to serve as the supreme commanders of these new military regiments. The same year, Hideyoshi forced his younger sister Asahi no kata to divorce her husband who then committed suicide and sent her to Ieyasu with the offer of marrying her.

In 1586, in response to Ishikawa Kazumasa&#x27;s defection from the Tokugawa clan, former Takeda clan vassals from Kai and Shinano province including Yonekura Tadatsugu to reaffirm their loyalty to Ieyasu by presenting their family members as hostages.

Later the same year, Hideyoshi sent his own mother as a hostage to Ieyasu. If Ieyasu continued to refuse to go to Kyoto after such a gesture, it would give Hideyoshi a just cause for war. Ieyasu finally decided to become Hideyoshi&#x27;s vassal.

=== Ruling Kanto and supressing rebellions ===

In 1590 May, Ieyasu participated in the campaign against the Hōjō clan. Odawara, which was the last Hōjō clan stronghold, saw almost no significant military action, with the exception of Ii Naomasa&#x27;s night raid attack. This happened after a group of miners from Kai Province dug under the castle walls, allowing troops under Naomasa to enter and engage the enemy. After the surrender of the Hōjō clan, Ieyasu sent Naomasa and Sakakibara Yasumasa with 1,500 soldiers to witness the seppuku of the defeated enemy generals, Hōjō Ujimasa and Hōjō Ujiteru. As result of his distinguished service during the campaign, Naomasa was awarded with an increase in his domain to 120,000 koku. Daidōji Masashige, a senior Hōjō clan retainer, was also forced to commit seppuku by Hideyoshi, however, his children were spared from execution at the behest of Ieyasu. The eldest son, Daidōji Naoshige, became Ieyasu&#x27;s vassal after the death of Ujinao.

On October 28 of the same year, a against the Toyotomi government in Mutsu Province was incited by Hienuki Hirotada and Waga Yoshitada. In response, Hideyoshi sent a punitive expedition with an army 30,000 strong led by Ieyasu Tokugawa, Toyotomi Hidetsugu, Date Masamune, Ishida Mitsunari, Ōtani Yoshitsugu, Gamō Ujisato, Uesugi Kagekatsu, Satake Yoshishige, and Maeda Toshiie, in order to pacify the rebellion.

In 1591, Ieyasu gave up control of his five provinces (Mikawa, Tōtōmi, Suruga, Shinano, and Kai) and moved all his soldiers and vassals to his eight new provinces in the Kantō region. The proclamation of this decision happened on the same day as Hideyoshi entered Odawara castle after the Hōjō clan formally surrendered. The moment Ieyasu was appointed to rule Kantō, he immediately assigned his premier vassals including Ii Naomasa, Honda Tadakatsu, Sakakibara Yasumasa, and Sakai Ietsugu, the son of Sakai Tadatsugu, to each control a large area of the former Hōjō clan territories in Kantō. Historians saw this step as aimed at bringing order to the newly subdued population of the area, while also guarding the eastern domains from any influence or threat from the Satomi clan which had not yet submitted to Toyotomi rule at that time. Meanwhile, Ieyasu himself established his personal seat of power in Edo town, which at that time was an underdeveloped town in Kantō.
Historian Adam Sadler saw this step as the riskiest Ieyasu ever made—to leave his home province and rely on the uncertain loyalty of the former Hōjō clan samurai in Kantō. In the end, it worked out brilliantly for Ieyasu. He reformed the Kantō region, controlled and pacified the Hōjō samurai, and improved the underlying economic infrastructure. Also, because Kantō was somewhat isolated from the rest of Japan, Ieyasu was able to ally with daimyo of north-eastern Japan including Date Masamune, Mogami Yoshiaki, Satake Yoshishige and Nanbu Nobunao; he was also able to maintain a unique level of autonomy from Toyotomi Hideyoshi&#x27;s rule. Within a few years, Ieyasu had become the second most powerful daimyo in Japan. An anecdotal proverb says, &quot;Ieyasu won the Empire by retreating.&quot; Modern Japanese historians reject that this was a deliberate move by Ieyasu since it was an order from Hideyoshi. Nevertheless, Watanabe Daimon stated that the general opinion was that Ieyasu was reluctant about his transfer to Kantō. Daimon stated that this perception was unfounded. Instead, Daimon suspected that Ieyasu actually responded to this transfer positively as he saw potential in making undeveloped Edo into his seat of power. Similarly, Andō Yūichirō viewed this transfer as an advantage for the Tokugawa regime in the long run, as this move was not only doubled the territory that he controlled, but it further added numerous new vassals in Kantō to the already impressive political and military power of the Tokugawa regime, which had already absorbed the armies of the Imagawa and Takeda clans before. Yūichirō added that aside from the samurai from Imagawa, Takeda, and Hōjō, the Mikawa samurai clans who were traditional followers of the Tokugawa clan also lost their sense of independence after being transferred into a new unfamiliar territory, which increased their sense of dependence on Ieyasu, in effect further minimizing the possibility of them going renegade and betraying Ieyasu, as Ishikawa Kazumasa had done several years earlier.

After the Waga-Hienuki rebellion, the Kunohe rebellion lead by Kunohe Masazane broke out on March 13, 1591. This caused the punitive expedition army to split their forces as Ieyasu, Naomasa, Ujisato, and some commanders changed their focus to suppress Masazane&#x27;s rebellion first. Ieyasu, who at that time was also busy suppressing rebellions with his main commanders, including Sakakibara Yasumasa, Ii Naomasa, and Honda Tadakatsu, arrived at Iwatesawa, Tamazukuri district, Mutsu (modern day Iwadeyama, Miyagi Prefecture) on August 18, where he camped until October and led the troops. During the operation against the Kunohe clan rebels, Naomasa Ii became the vanguard with Nanbu Nobunao. As they advanced towards Kunohe castle, they faced a small force of Kunohe rebels which they easily defeated. Naomasa suggested to siege the castle until they surrender, which was met with agreement. On 4 September, the rebels executed the prisoners inside the castle and incited mass suicide after setting fire to the castle. The castle burned for three days and nights killing all within. The rebellions were suppressed by June 20, with Waga Yoshitada being slain in battle, while Hienuki Hirotada was sentenced to &quot;Kaieki law&quot; which stated that his and his clan&#x27;s status and rights as samurai were stripped. As the operation ended, Ieyasu returned to Edo on October 29 and began managing his new territory in the Kantō region. Ieyasu managed to establish his home base in Kantō, and built sustainable economic infrastructure in the region. Ieyasu also employed Gotō Shōzaburō, head of the gold mining and metal industries of Sengoku period, to mint gold coins and establish a bank-like institution for the Tokugawa clan&#x27;s government.

In 1592, Toyotomi Hideyoshi invaded Korea as a prelude to his plan to attack China. The Tokugawa clan samurai didn&#x27;t take part in this campaign, as Hideyoshi had ordered the eastern provinces&#x27; daimyo including Ieyasu, Uesugi Kagekatsu, and Date Masamune to maintain logistical support for the war effort in Nagoya Castle.

In 1593, Toyotomi Hideyoshi fathered a son and heir, Toyotomi Hideyori. Later, though still in early 1593, Ieyasu himself was summoned to Hideyoshi&#x27;s court in Nagoya (in Kyushu, not the similarly spelled city in Owari Province) as a military advisor and was given command of troops meant as reserves for the Korean campaign. Ieyasu stayed in Nagoya intermittedly for the next five years.

In July 1595, the &quot;Toyotomi Hidetsugu Incident&quot; occurred. In response to this major incident shaking the Toyotomi government, Hideyoshi ordered various daimyo to come to Kyoto in an attempt to calm the situation. Ieyasu also came to Kyoto on Hideyoshi&#x27;s orders. From this point on, Ieyasu spent longer and longer periods in Fushimi Castle than in his underdeveloped residence, Edo Castle. Due to this chain of events, Ieyasu&#x27;s position in the Toyotomi government had risen, but by being at the center of the government, Ieyasu was able to learn directly about the central government&#x27;s political system.

== Ruler of Japan (1598–1603)==


In 1598, with his health clearly failing, Hideyoshi called a meeting that would determine the Council of Five Elders, who would be responsible for ruling on behalf of his son after his death. The five that were chosen as tairō (regents) for Hideyori were Maeda Toshiie, Mōri Terumoto, Ukita Hideie, Uesugi Kagekatsu, and Ieyasu, who was the most powerful of the five. This change in the pre-Sekigahara power structure, became pivotal as Ieyasu turned his attention towards Kansai; and at the same time, other ambitious (albeit ultimately unrealized) plans, such as the Tokugawa initiative establishing official relations with New Spain (modern-day Mexico), continued to unfold and advance.

===Death of Hideyoshi and Toshiie===
Toyotomi Hideyoshi, after three more months of deteriorating health, died on September 18, 1598. He was nominally succeeded by his young son Hideyori but as he was just five years old, the real power was in the hands of the regents. There were several incidents involving Ieyasu after the death of Hideyoshi:

* The government of Japan under Toyotomi&#x27;s rule had an incident when seven military generals (Fukushima Masanori, Katō Kiyomasa, Ikeda Terumasa, Hosokawa Tadaoki, Asano Yoshinaga, Katō Yoshiaki, and Kuroda Nagamasa) came into conflict with Ishida Mitsunari. It was said that the reason for this was that they were dissastisfied with Mitsunari because he wrote poor assessments and underreported their achievements during the Imjin War against Korea and the Chinese empire. At first, these generals gathered at Kiyomasa&#x27;s mansion in Osaka Castle, and from there they marched to Mitsunari&#x27;s mansion. However, Mitsunari learned of this through a report from a servant of Toyotomi Hideyori named Jiemon Kuwajima and he fled to Satake Yoshinobu&#x27;s mansion together with Shima Sakon and others to hide. When the seven generals found that Mitsunari was not in the mansion, they searched the mansions of various feudal lords in Osaka Castle, and Katō&#x27;s army approached the Satake residence. Mitsunari and his party then escaped from the Satake residence and barricaded themselves at Fushimi Castle. The next day, the seven generals surrounded Fushimi Castle with their soldiers as they knew Mitsunari was hiding there. Ieyasu, who was in charge of political affairs in Fushimi Castle at that moment, attempted to arbitrate the situation. The seven generals requested Ieyasu hand over Mitsunari, which Ieyasu refused. Ieyasu then negotiated a promise to let Mitsunari retire and to review the assessment of the Battle of Ulsan Castle in Korea. Ieyasu had his second son, Yūki Hideyasu, escort Mitsunari to Sawayama Castle.
* Tokugawa ordered his general, Sakakibara Yasumasa, to lead an army from Kantō to camp in Seta, Ōmi Province as a means of showing off and intimidating the bureaucratic faction which was led by Ishida Mitsunari, because Ōmi was the traditional hometown of the Mitsunari clan.
* In 1599, a riot occurred within the Ukita clan when several of Ukita clan vassals, including Togawa Tatsuyasu, Sadatsuna Oka and others, rebelled against Hideie. At first, Ieyasu sent his general Sakakibara Yasumasa to intermediate the disputes between Ukita Hideie and his various rebellious vassals. However, the situation was not resolved for a long time so Ieyasu ordered Yasumasa to return to his post and decided to resolve the case himself. Ieyasu managed to solve the case and averted a civil war between two factions. However, in the aftermath of this incident many of Hideie retainers such as Sakazaki Naomori changed their allegiance to Tokugawa Ieyasu and left Hideie. These defections caused massive setbacks for the Ukita clan politically and militarily, while strengthening Ieyasu.
* In April 1599, Ieyasu cited Hideyoshi&#x27;s will as pretext for him to review the decision regarding the Mōri clan territories that Mitsunari had pushed through, and pressed Mōri Terumoto to allocate part of Nagato Province and Suō Province to Mōri Hidemoto. In June, Ieyasu&#x27;s manifesto to curtail Terumoto&#x27;s domains was implemented, as Hidemoto had been given the former Mōri Motokiyo territory of Nagato, Yoshiki District in Suō, Aki, and Bingo, leaving Kikkawa Hiroie&#x27;s territory intact, and returned Kobayakawa Takakage&#x27;s estate to Terumoto.
* Ieyasu had his general and diplomat, Ii Naomasa, establish contact with the scions of Kuroda clan, Kuroda Yoshitaka and Kuroda Nagamasa, and gained their political support.
* On September 12, 1599, when Ieyasu returned to Fushimi castle from Osaka castle, there was an alleged assassination attempt by three Toyotomi Hideyoshi vassals named Katsuhisa Hijikata, Asano Nagamasa, and Ōno Harunaga. Their attempt to assassinate Ieyasu failed due to Ieyasu&#x27;s tight security and bodyguards. When they were apprehended, further investigation also linked the assassination attempt with Maeda Toshimasa, son of Maeda Toshiie. Ieyasu consulted with Honda Masanobu about the proper punishment for each conspirator, Masanobu instead advised Ieyasu to show leinency towards the three perpetrators. In the end, Ieyasu accepted Masanobu&#x27;s counsel and decided that he would not execute them, in exchange, he placed Hijikata and Katsuhisa on house arrest on northern side of the Kantō region. Meanwile, Nagamasa was given a far more lenient punishment than his compatriots by only being ordered to move his residence, Musashi Fuchū, as Ieyasu saw Nagamasa had an important political position in the government. As for Toshimasa, Ieyasu prepared a harsh punishment and he prepared to dispatch his army to Kaga in order to subjugate Toshinaga, who was one of the Five Elders. In response, Toshinaga sent his subordinate, Nagatomo Yokoyama, to Ieyasu and immediately apologized to Ieyasu. Furthermore, he sent his mother, Hoshunin, as a hostage to Edo, and arranged for his adopted heir, Toshitsune, to marry Hidetada&#x27;s daughter, Tamahime. Due to those four men later supporting Ieyasu in the Sekigahara war against Mitsunari, modern historian Daimon Watanabe saw Tokugawa&#x27;s lenient attitude towards his would-be assassins as a political move to gather more allies to would support him in the future war.
* Tokugawa married his sixth son, Matsudaira Tadateru, to Irohahime, the first daughter of Date Masamune. Ieyasu also gained support from Mogami Yoshiaki, brother-in-law of Masamune and a powerful eastern daimyo, who had held a grudge against the Toyotomi clan since Hideyoshi executed his daughter in the Hidetsugu Incident of 1595. Hidetsugu had been accused of treason and forced to commit seppuku at Mount Kōya. In the aftermath of this incident, his entire family was also executed at Sanjogawara. Yoshiaki&#x27;s daughter, Komahime, was only 15 years old and had recently married Hidetsugu, was executed as a result. Yoshiaki begged for her life to be spared as she hadn&#x27;t even met Hidetsugu yet, but was his request was refused. Komahime was beheaded along with the others, and her body dumped in the Sanjogawara River. As result of the execution, Yoshiaki&#x27;s wife, Osaki-dono, was struck with deep grief by the sudden death of her daughter and died on August 16. After this, Yoshiaki grew closer to Ieyasu and became one of his strongest supporters.
* Another incident occurred in 1595 with the Shimazu clan, when Shimazu Tadatsune, the third son of Shimazu Yoshihiro and heir to the main Shimazu family, assassinated a clan&#x27;s chief vassal named Ijuin Tadamune. The background to this incident seems to be that Tadamune, who was on close terms with Ishida Mitsunari, had infringed on the Shimazu clan&#x27;s domain. However, the incident did not end there, and Tadamune&#x27;s eldest son, Ijuin Tadamasa, started a rebellion. As the civil war reached deadlock, Ieyasu mediated the two sides, which resulted in Tadamasa surrendering in March 1600.

===Conflict with Mitsunari===

Meanwhile, opposition to Ieyasu centered around Ishida Mitsunari, one of Hideyoshi&#x27;s &quot;Go-Bugyō&quot;, or top administrators of Hideyoshi&#x27;s government, and a powerful daimyo who was not one of the regents. Mitsunari plotted Ieyasu&#x27;s death and news of this plot reached some of Ieyasu&#x27;s generals. They attempted to kill Mitsunari but he fled and gained protection from Ieyasu. It is not clear why Ieyasu protected a powerful enemy from his own men, but Ieyasu was a master strategist and may have concluded that he would be better off with Mitsunari leading the enemy army rather than one of the more legitimate regents.

Nearly all of Japan&#x27;s daimyo and samurai were now split into two factions; the Western Army (Mitsunari&#x27;s group) and the Eastern Army (Ieyasu&#x27;s group). Ieyasu had the support of the anti-Mitsunari group, and formed them into his potential allies. Ieyasu&#x27;s allies were Katō Kiyomasa, Fukushima Masanori, Mogami Yoshiaki, Hachisuka Iemasa, the Kuroda clan, the Hosokawa clan and many daimyo from eastern Japan. Mitsunari had allied himself with three other regents: Ukita Hideie, Mōri Terumoto, and Uesugi Kagekatsu, as well as with Ōtani Yoshitsugu, the Chosokabe clan, the Shimazu clan and many daimyo from the western end of Honshū.

War became imminent when Uesugi Kagekatsu, one of Hideyoshi&#x27;s appointed regents, defied Ieyasu by building up his military at Aizu. When Ieyasu officially condemned him and demanded that he come to Kyoto to explain himself, Kagekatsu&#x27;s chief advisor, Naoe Kanetsugu, responded with a counter-condemnation that mocked Ieyasu&#x27;s abuses and violations of Hideyoshi&#x27;s rules. This infuriated Ieyasu.

In July 1600, Ieyasu was back in Edo and his allies moved their armies to defeat the Uesugi clan, which were accused of planning to revolt against the Toyotomi administration. On September 8, Ieyasu received information that Mitsunari had captured Fushimi castle and his allies had moved their army against Ieyasu. Ieyasu held a meeting with the Eastern Army daimyo, and they agreed to follow Ieyasu. Later, on September 15, Mitsunari&#x27;s Western army arrived at Ogaki Castle. On September 29, Ieyasu&#x27;s Eastern Army took Gifu Castle. On October 7, Ieyasu and his allies marched along the Tōkaidō, while his son Hidetada went along through Nakasendō with 38,000 soldiers (a battle against Sanada Masayuki in Shinano Province delayed Hidetada&#x27;s forces, and they did not arrive in time for the main Battle of Sekigahara).

===Battle of Sekigahara===

The Battle of Sekigahara was the biggest battle as well as one of the most important in Japanese feudal history. It began on October 21, 1600. The Eastern Army led by Tokugawa Ieyasu initially numbered 75,000 men, with the Western Army at a strength of 120,000 men under Ishida Mitsunari. Ieyasu had also secretly acquired a supply of arquebuses.

Knowing that the Tokugawa forces were heading towards Osaka, Mitsunari decided to abandon his positions and marched to Sekigahara. Even though the Western Army had tremendous tactical advantages, Ieyasu had already been in contact with many of the daimyo in the Western Army for months, promising them land and leniency after the battle should they switch sides. Ieyasu had also secretly communicated with Toyotomi Hideyoshi&#x27;s nephew, Kobayakawa Hideaki. With a total of 170,000 soldiers facing each other, the Battle of Sekigahara ensued and ended with an overwhelming Tokugawa victory. At the conclusion of the battle, Ieyasu marched to Osaka castle, where Mōri Terumoto, the grand commander of Western army, surrendered to him.

The Western bloc quickly collapsed, and over the next few days Ishida Mitsunari and other western leaders such as Konishi Yukinaga and Ankokuji Ekei were captured and executed. However, Ieyasu was angry at his son Hidetada, whose army was late to arrive, leading to an unexpectedly long siege against Ueda castle. Sakakibara Yasumasa offered an explanation and testified in defense of Hidetada. Meanwhile, Ieyasu pardoned his enemies who defended Ueda castle, including Sanada Masayuki and Sanada Yukimura, at the behest of Ii Naomasa and Sanada Nobuyuki.

=== Aftermath of Sekigahara battle ===
Ieyasu redistributed the domain fiefs of all the daimyo lords who supported him during the war, such as increasing Ii Naomasa domain to 180,000 koku. Ikeda Terumasa&#x27;s to 520,000 Koku. Tōdō Takatora got a new domain which was assessed at total of 200,000 koku, Yuki Hideyasu went from 101,000 to 569,000 koku, Matsudaira Tadayoshi went from 100,000 to 520,000 koku, Gamō Hideyuki increased from 180,000 to 600,000 koku, Maeda Toshinaga went from 835,000 to 1,100,000 koku, Katō Kiyomasa&#x27;s domain grew from 195,000 to 515,000 koku, and Kuroda Nagamasa&#x27;s grew from 180,000 to 523,000 koku. Meanwhile, Fukushima Masanori had his 200,000 domain increased to 498,000 in Aki, Hiroshima. Ieyasu also promoted many of his own hereditary vassals to domains of at least 10,000 koku for their stipends. After the battle, Ieyasu left some Western Army daimyo unharmed, such as the Shimazu clan, but others were completely destroyed. Toyotomi Hideyori (the son of Hideyoshi) lost most of his territory which was under management of western daimyo, and was degraded to an ordinary daimyo, rather than a Sesshō or Kampaku (regent) of the Japanese empire. In later years, the vassals who had pledged allegiance to Ieyasu before Sekigahara became known as the &quot;fudai daimyō&quot;, while those who pledged allegiance to him after the battle (after his power was unquestioned) were known as &quot;tozama daimyō&quot;. &quot;Tozama daimyō&quot; were considered inferior to &quot;fudai daimyō&quot;. This redistribution of domains was done verbally, instead of formal letter of intent. Historian Watanabe Daimon suspected this was because Ieyasu was still wary of the existence of Toyotomi clan which had been inherited by Toyotomi Hideyori.

On September 20, Ieyasu entered Otsu castle, where he welcomed and met with Kyōnyo, the head of Hongan-ji temple at that time, with Kanamori Nagachika as an intermediary. He met Ieyasu again the following year (1601), and Ieyasu visited Kyōnyo on July 5 and August 16. However, for the rest of 1601, the relationship between them grew worse as Kyōnyo was accused of pro-Mitsunari sympathy. It was only in February 1602 that the communication between Ieyasu with Kyōnyo opened again. This was after the intercession from aide Honda Masanobu, where the three of them discussed the condition of the Hongan-ji temple development after the split of the sect into two factions. Ieyasu worried the strife within the temple could affect the stability of Japan after the Sekigahara war.

In 1602, Ieyasu changed his surname from &quot;Minamoto&quot; to &quot;Fujiwara&quot;. The reason for this changing was because Emperor Go-Yōzei wanted to appoint Ieyasu to be a court noble. However, there was no precedent in the Tokugawa bloodline as the Minamoto clan which Ieyasu ancestry claimed, was a samurai clan rather than a noble family. To resolve this problem, a fabrication was made that said the Tokugawa clan also descended from Fujiwara clan, which was a noble family. By changing his name to Fujiwara, Ieyasu was able to be appointed to the rank of Junior Fifth Rank.

== Establishment of the Tokugawa Shogunate (1603–1616) ==
On March 24, 1603, Tokugawa Ieyasu received the title of &quot;shōgun&quot; from Emperor Go-Yōzei. Ieyasu was 60 years old and had outlasted all the other great men of his times: Oda Nobunaga, Takeda Shingen, Toyotomi Hideyoshi, and Uesugi Kenshin. As &quot;shōgun&quot;, he used his remaining years to create and solidify the Tokugawa shogunate, which ushered in the Edo period, and was the third shogunal government (after the Kamakura and the Ashikaga). He claimed descent from the Minamoto clan who had founded the Kamakura shogunate, by way of the Nitta clan. His descendants would marry into the Taira clan and the Fujiwara clan.

Following a well established Japanese pattern, Ieyasu abdicated his official position as &quot;shōgun&quot; in 1605. His successor was his son and heir, Tokugawa Hidetada. There may have been several factors that contributed to his decision, including his desires to avoid being tied up in ceremonial duties, to make it harder for his enemies to attack his real power center, and to secure a smoother succession for his son.

In 1604, Tōdō Takatora and Date Masamune advised the Shogunate government to introduce a rule across Japan that each feudal lord was obliged to maintain a residence in Edo, the capital of the shogunate, which Ieyasu immediately accepted and implemented officially.

===&quot;Ōgosho&quot; (1605–1616) ===


From 1605 onwards, Ieyasu, who had retired from the official position of shogun and became a , remained the effective ruler of Japan until his death. Ieyasu retired to Sunpu Castle in Sunpu, but he also supervised the building of Edo Castle, a massive construction project which lasted for the rest of Ieyasu&#x27;s life. The result was the largest castle in all of Japan. The cost of building the castle was borne by all the other daimyo, while Ieyasu reaped the benefits. The central donjon, or &quot;tenshu&quot;, burned in the 1657 &quot;Meireki&quot; fire. Today, the Imperial Palace stands on the site of the castle. Edo became the center of political power and the &quot;de facto&quot; capital of Japan, although the historic capital of Kyoto remained the &quot;de jure&quot; capital as the seat of the emperor. Furthermore, Ieyasu had the Imperial Court appoint his eldest remaining son, Hidetada, as Shogun, announcing to the world that the position of shogun would be hereditary to the Tokugawa clan from then on. At the same time, he requested Toyotomi Hideyori meet the new shogun, but Hideyori refused. In the end, the matter was resolved by sending his sixth son, Matsudaira Tadateru to Osaka Castle. At the same time, the next generation of Tokugawa clan vassals, including Ii Naotaka and Itakura Shigemasa, were also appointed.

In 1608, Ieyasu assigned control of the Tsu Domain to Takatora. It was reported that the landholdings which Takatora received in Iga province had previously belonged to a lord named Tsutsui Sadatsugu. Ieyasu stripped Tsutsui Sadatsugu of ownership rights before giving them to Takatora. The initial pretext was Sadatsugu&#x27;s sloppy governance of the domain however, historians have argued that the real reason was because Sadatsugu behaved suspiciously by visiting Toyotomi Hideyori at Osaka Castle, without approval of the shogun, while the land which Sadatsugu occupied was considered to be an important military strategic location. Furthermore, it is thought that Ieyasu stripped the land and gave it to the Todo clan as political strategy against the Toyotomi clan, even though he was a patron of the Toyotomi family, Tōdō Takatora was considered a close ally of Ieyasu. Thus by putting him in control of portions of Iga province, the influence of the shogunate could be expanded to more strategic locations without directly provoking the Toyotomi faction in Osaka.

In 1611, (Keicho 16), Ieyasu, at the head of 50,000 men, visited Kyoto to witness the enthronement of Emperor Go-Mizunoo. While in Kyoto, Ieyasu ordered the remodeling of the Imperial Court, buildings, and forced the remaining western daimyo to sign an oath of fealty to him. On April 12, Ieyasu presented three articles of legislation to the daimyo in Kyoto. These Three Laws, as they were called, referred to the first shogun&#x27;s set of laws and those that signed would strictly abide by the laws issued by the shogunate from then on. Second, the lords swore to not conceal those who disobeyed the shogun&#x27;s orders, and third: to not hide or give shelter to any enemy of the state. 22 daimyo from the Hokuriku region and Western provinces agreed to the three articles of legislation and submitted an oath. Daimyo from Oshu and Kanto were not included in this list, because they were engaged in the construction of Edo Castle and did not come to Kyoto. In January of the following year, 11 major feudal lords from Oshu and Kanto swore to the Three Laws. 50 small and medium-sized fudai and tozama feudal lords also swore to the Three Laws, and Ieyasu succeeded in making all the feudal lords in the country his vassals. Ieyasu did not have Hideyori work on national construction, nor did he have him swear to the Three Laws. Watanabe Daimon saw that the Three Laws issued by Ieyasu was a maneuver to isolate Hideyori politically by making all other influential daimyo lords obey him.

In 1613, he composed the , a document which put the court daimyo under strict supervision, leaving them as mere ceremonial figureheads.

In 1615, Ieyasu prepared the , a document setting out the future of the Tokugawa regime.

===Relations with Catholics ===

As Ōgosho, Ieyasu also supervised diplomatic affairs with the Netherlands, Spain, and England. Ieyasu chose to distance Japan from European influence starting in 1609, although the shogunate did still grant preferential trading rights to the Dutch East India Company and permitted them to maintain a &quot;factory&quot; for trading purposes.

From 1605 until his death, Ieyasu frequently consulted English shipwright and pilot, William Adams. Adams, a Protestant fluent in Japanese, assisted the shogunate in negotiating trading relations, but was cited by members of the competing Jesuit and Spanish-sponsored mendicant orders as an obstacle to improved relations between Ieyasu and the Roman Catholic Church.

In 1612, the Nossa Senhora da Graça incident occurred in Nagasaki, where the bugyō official of Sakai Hasegawa Fujihiro had trouble with Portuguese captain André Pessoa. The conflict escalated when Pessoa and the merchants from Macau petitioned Ieyasu directly to complain about Hasegawa and Murayama Tōan, a magistrate of Ieyasu. When the Jesuits learned of this affair, they were horrified when they found out about Pessoa&#x27;s petition as they knew that Hasegawa&#x27;s sister Onatsu was a favorite concubine of Ieyasu. Later, Pessoa ceased his decision when he learned the intrigue of shogunate. However, Fujihiro refused to forgive Pessoa&#x27;s action to petition him. Fujihiro encouraged Arima Harunobu, who wanted to retaliate for the prior Macau incident, to petition Ieyasu for the capture of Pessoa and the seizure of his merchant ship. Ieyasu, who had entrusted Harunobu with the purchase of agarwood, was initially concerned that a retaliatory act would cut off trade with Portuguese ships. Thus, the shogunate took a lenient attitude to Pessoa, as Honda Masazumi, with authorization from Ieyasu, gave Pessoa&#x27;s envoy written assurances that Japanese sailors would be forbidden to travel to Macau, and any who did could be handled according to Portuguese laws. However, Ieyasu later gave Harunobu permission to capture Pessoa after he had been guaranteed that Manila ships of Spanish merchants would be able to replenish raw silk and other goods carried by Portuguese ships and also expected Dutch ships to continue arriving. Then Ieyasu gave authorization to Hasegawa and Arima Harunobu. After several days of battle, which resulted in Pessoa&#x27;s death, the remaining Portuguese merchants and missionaries were increasingly concerned about their fates, especially since Ieyasu had personally ordered their execution. Harunobu, who was Catholic, interceded on behalf of the Jesuits. Ieyasu changed his decision and the merchants were allowed to leave for Macau with their property. Ieyasu&#x27;s Jesuit translator, João Rodrigues Tçuzu, was replaced by William Adams. Ieyasu then expelled João Rodrigues from Japan.

In 1612, the Okamoto Daihachi incident occurred where Okamoto Daihachi (岡本大八, baptismal name Paulo), a Christian aide to the rōjū Honda Masazumi, and Arima Harunobu, were implicated in series of crimes including bribery, conspiracy, forgery, and attempt to murder Hasegawa Fujihiro. Ieyasu was angered when he heard that Catholic followers had gathered at Okamoto&#x27;s execution to offer prayers and sing hymns.

in 1614, Ieyasu was sufficiently concerned about Spanish territorial ambitions and signed the Christian Expulsion Edict. The edict banned the practice of Christianity and led to the expulsion of all foreign missionaries although some smaller Dutch trading operations remained in Nagasaki.

=== Conflict with Hideyori ===

The last remaining threat to Ieyasu&#x27;s rule was Toyotomi Hideyori, the son and rightful heir to Hideyoshi. He was now a young daimyo living in Osaka Castle. Many samurai who opposed Ieyasu rallied around Hideyori, claiming that he was the rightful ruler of Japan. Ieyasu found fault with the opening ceremony of a temple (Great Buddha of Kyoto) built by Hideyori; it was as if he prayed for Ieyasu&#x27;s death and the ruin of the Tokugawa clan. Ieyasu ordered Hideyori to leave Osaka Castle, but those in the castle refused and summoned samurai to gather within the castle. Then in 1614, Ieysau put Osaka Castle to siege against Hideyori.

Tokugawa forces, with a huge army led by Ieyasu and &quot;shōgun&quot; Tokugawa Hidetada, laid siege to Osaka Castle in what is now known as &quot;the Winter Siege of Osaka&quot;. Eventually, the Tokugawa were able to force negotiations and an armistice after cannon fire threatened Hideyori&#x27;s mother, Yodo-dono. However, once the treaty had been agreed on, the Tokugawa filled in the castle&#x27;s outer moats with sand so their troops could walk across. Through this ploy, Tokugawa gained a huge tract of land through negotiation and deception that they could not have gained through siege and combat. Ieyasu returned to Sunpu Castle, but after Toyotomi Hideyori refused another order to leave Osaka, Ieyasu and his allied army of 155,000 soldiers attacked Osaka Castle again in &quot;the Summer Siege of Osaka&quot;.

In late 1615, Osaka Castle fell and nearly all the defenders were killed, including Hideyori, his mother (Toyotomi Hideyoshi&#x27;s widow, Yodo-dono), and his infant son. His wife, Senhime (a granddaughter of Ieyasu), pleaded to save Hideyori and Yodo-dono&#x27;s lives. Ieyasu refused and either required them to commit seppuku, or killed both of them. Eventually, Senhime was sent back to the Tokugawa clan alive. With the Toyotomi line finally extinguished, no threats remained to the Tokugawa clan&#x27;s domination of Japan.

=== Final year &amp; death ===
After the conflict with Toyotomi Hideyori, Ieyasu implemented the Buke shohatto code, which stated that each daimyo lord was only allowed to possess one castle.

In 1616, Tokugawa Ieyasu died at the age of 73. The cause of death is thought to have been cancer or syphilis. The first Tokugawa &quot;shōgun&quot; was posthumously deified with the name Tōshō Daigongen (), the &quot;Great Gongen, Light of the East&quot;. (A &quot;Gongen&quot; is believed to be a buddha who has appeared on Earth in the shape of a &quot;kami&quot; to save sentient beings). In life, Ieyasu had expressed the wish to be deified after his death to protect his descendants from evil. His remains were buried at the Gongens&#x27; mausoleum at Kunōzan, Kunōzan Tōshō-gū (). Many people believe that after the first anniversary of his death, his remains were reburied at Nikkō Shrine, Nikkō Tōshō-gū (), and that his remains are still there. Neither shrine has offered to open the graves, and the location of Ieyasu&#x27;s physical remains is still a mystery. The mausoleum&#x27;s architectural style became known as &quot;gongen-zukuri&quot;, that is &quot;gongen&quot;-style.

He was first given the Buddhist name Tosho Dai-Gongen (), then, after his death, it was changed to Hogo Onkokuin (). During this time, the chief physician who cared for him, Sotetsu Katayama, diagnosed Ieyasu with stomach cancer. However, Ieyasu misinterpreted Katayama&#x27;s diagnose of his illness as a tapeworms infestation. Thus, he did not take the medicine Sotetsu had prepared, and instead continued his own method of therapy which he believed could cure his perceived tapeworms problem. This resulted in Ieyasu&#x27;s health continually deteriotating. Although his son, Hidetada, also warned him about his medical method, this only served to anger Ieyasu, who was prideful as possessing a lot of knowledge in the medical field. This conflict over his medical care ended when Ieyasu exiled Sotetsu to the Shinshu Takashima Domain.

At the time of his death, Ieyasu had an estimated personal wealth of about 4 million koku, which extended to 8 million koku for the total of the Tokugawa clan. He also possessed about 42 tons of gold as the Tokugawa Shogunate had implemented the centralization of gold and silver mine ownership, unlike previous eras of government in Japan, in which possession of mine ownership was managed by local lords through the shogunate authorization.

The Tokugawa shogunate would rule Japan for the next 260 years.

== Personal information ==

A historical evaluation of Ieyasu by Junji Mitsunari, a historian on faculty at Kyushu University, has compared Ieyasu&#x27;s upbringing to that of another Sengoku era leader, Mōri Terumoto. Mitsunari viewed Terumoto, who had been raised in the comfortable and stable domains of the Mōri clan, as contrasting with the hardships Ieyasu faced during his childhood, who experienced instability in Mikawa province, where he spent much his youth as a hostage of other warlords which formed each leader&#x27;s character into different ways. Mitsunari viewed this contrast of leadership style as being reflected in the Sekigahara battle, where the indecisiveness of Terumoto cost the Western army greatly, while Ieyasu&#x27;s bold decision and his willingness to take risks gave him the edge during the war. John T. Kuehn saw Ieyasu as being capable of complex long game strategies, both politically and militarily, as shown during his conflict against Ishida Mitsunari. Kuehn saw the Siege of Fushimi Castle as Ieyasu&#x27;s deliberate strategy to sacrifice the castle and to bait Mitsunari into a set-piece battle, where his battle hardened forces had an advantage over Mitsunari&#x27;s forces.

On the other hand, Kazuto Hongō has compared Ieyasu to Nobunaga as Ieyasu had insight to ensure the stability of the nation by the optimization and utilization of the abilities of his vassals rather than relying on the power of single individuals, as well as establishing succession system. Tetsuo Owada personally praised how Ieyasu managed to be quickly accepted by the citizens of the Kantō region and his ability to rule there without unrest after he transferred there, by continuing the lenient tax policies of the Hōjō clan in order to gain sympathy.

Hamada Koichiro from Himeji Dokkyo University has recorded that there is a systematic attempt of historiography studies in the aftermath of the Meiji Restoration to portray Ieyasu in a negative light as a &quot;cunning old man&quot; who used the temple&#x27;s bell of Hokoji as casus belli to wage war against Hideyori. Koichiro saw this tendency of Ieyasu to resort to underhanded tactics as being quite justified to some extent for different reasons. One example was his attempt at suppressing the Mikawa Ikkō-ikki rebellion by breaking his promise of leniency to Jōdo Shinshū&#x27;s followers in exchange for their surrender. However, Koichiro also points out that Ieyasu was also capable of bravery as showed by personally entering the battlefield during the rebellion, while also pointing out several anecdotes about Ieyasu as a youth showing promise as a capable military tactician when he still under the wing of the Imagawa clan.

Ieyasu was capable of great loyalty: once he allied with Oda Nobunaga, he never went against him, and both leaders profited from their long alliance. He was known for being loyal towards his personal friends and vassals, whom he rewarded. Ieyasu was said to have a close friendship with his vassal Hattori Hanzō. However, he also remembered those who had wronged him in the past. It is said that Ieyasu once executed a man who came into his possession because he had insulted him when Ieyasu was young.

According to professor Watanabe Daimon, one of the biggest strengths of Ieyasu&#x27;s policies was his benevolence towards his subordinates and his capability to forgive his enemies and even his own generals who betrayed him during the Mikawa Ikkō-ikki uprising. This allowed him to gain the loyalty of the Mikawa samurai clans. As an example, during the battle of Mikatagahara, those who shielded Ieyasu and even gave their lives to allow his retreat were the ones who once fought against Ieyasu in the past and had been pardoned. Ieyasu also protected many former Takeda retainers from the wrath of Oda Nobunaga, who was known to harbour a bitter grudge towards the Takeda. He managed successfully to transform many of the retainers of the Takeda, Hōjō, and Imagawa clans —all whom he had defeated himself or helped to defeat— into loyal vassals. At the same time, he was also ruthless when crossed. For example, he ordered the executions of his first wife and his eldest son, a son-in-law of Oda Nobunaga; Nobunaga was also an uncle of Hidetada&#x27;s wife Oeyo. However, according to George Sansom, Ieyasu was cruel, relentless and merciless in the elimination of Toyotomi survivors after the Siege of Osaka. For days, scores of men and women were hunted down and executed, including an eight-year-old son of Toyotomi Hideyori by a concubine, who was beheaded. However, Ieyasu also known to be capable of forgiveness, such as how he gave pardon to Watanabe Moritsuna after he rebelled against Ieyasu during the Ikkō-ikki uprisings in Mikawa.

Unlike Toyotomi Hideyoshi, he harbored no desires to conquer outside of Japan, only wanting to bring order, an end to open warfare, and to rule Japan.

Ieyasu&#x27;s favorite pastime was falconry. He regarded it as excellent training for a warrior.

Ieyasu swam often; even late in his life he is reported to have swum in the moat of Edo Castle.

=== Armors &amp; weapons ===
Many sets of armors are said to have been used by Ieyasu, and at least 10 pieces of armor were used by Ieyasu during his life and recorded in history.

While warlords at the time preferred flashy armor and frontlets to show off their presence, the &#x27;Hada Gusoku&#x27; armor used by Ieyasu in the Siege of Osaka is a jet black armor with very few decorations, and is said to represent Ieyasu&#x27;s frugal personality.

Like Hideyoshi, Ieyasu also presented armor to Europe, and there is a record of the &quot;Moji-i Domaru Armor&quot; at Ambras Castle in Austria being a gift from &quot;the Emperor and Empress of Japan to Holy Roman Emperor Rudolf II.&quot; This armor has the same characteristics as the aforementioned &quot;Hanairo Hinomaru-i Domaru Armor&quot; and armor presented by Hidetada to King James I of England in 1613, and is believed to have been presented by Ieyasu between 1608 and 1612. The armor has the characters for on the front of the torso and left sleeve, and on the back of the torso and right sleeve, woven with red thread.

=== Quotes ===
Life is like unto a long journey with a heavy burden. Let thy step be slow and steady, that thou stumble not. Persuade thyself that imperfection and inconvenience are the lot of natural mortals, and there will be no room for discontent, neither for despair. When ambitious desires arise in thy heart, recall the days of extremity thou hast passed through. Forbearance is the root of all quietness and assurance forever. Look upon the wrath of thy enemy. If thou only knowest what it is to conquer, and knowest not what it is to be defeated; woe unto thee, it will fare ill with thee. Find fault with thyself rather than with others.

The strong manly ones in life are those who understand the meaning of the word patience. Patience means restraining one&#x27;s inclinations. There are seven emotions: joy, anger, anxiety, adoration, grief, fear, and hate, and if a man does not give way to these he can be called patient. I am not as strong as I might be, but I have long known and practiced patience. And if my descendants wish to be as I am, they must study patience.

It is said that he fought, as a warrior or a general, in 90 battles.

He was interested in various kenjutsu skills, was a patron of the Yagyū Shinkage-ryū school, and also had them as his personal sword instructors.

=== Religion ===

Tokugawa Ieyasu was known for his devotion to the Jōdo-shū school of Buddhism throughout his life, having been born into the Matsudaira clan which followed Jōdō Buddhism. As a way of demonstrating his constant favor towards the sect, he moved his familial temple to the Zōjō-ji Temple in Edo and funded massive renovations to older Jōdo temples, including the head temple of Chion-in in Kyoto, while also financing the creation of several new temples. After confiding in the abbot of Zōjō-ji temple about wanting to become a deity to protect his country, he was given advice to regularly recite the nembutsu for the purpose of being born into Amida Buddha&#x27;s Pure Land of Sukhavati, where he would be able to easily attain Buddhahood and protect his descendants and the entire nation of Japan. Ieyasu readily accepted this advice, and constantly repeated the nembutsu until the day he died. Despite his personal devotion to Jōdo-shū, Ieyasu was not a strict sectarian, placing his secretary Denchōrō, a Rinzai Zen monk, in charge of all religious affairs in Japan, Buddhist and Shinto alike.

Later in life he also took to scholarship and Confucianism, patronizing scholars like Hayashi Razan.

While at first tolerant of Christianity, his attitude changed after 1613, and persecution of Christians sharply increased, with Ieyasu completely banning Catholicism in 1614. The hostility of Ieyasu towards Catholics was shown when he replaced Jesuit translator João Rodrigues Tçuzu with William Adams in his court. This change of attitude is believed to be due to the Okamoto Daihachi incident, where a Catholic daimyo and shogun&#x27;s official were accused of a series of crimes. After the execution of Daihachi, Ieyasu reportedly said:

=== Honours ===
* Senior First Rank (April 14, 1617; posthumously)

== Family ==
===Parents===
===Siblings===
====Mother Side====
=== Wives and concubines ===
=== Children ===
===Speculated children===
===Adopted children===
=== Ancestry ===
==In popular culture==
Ieyasu&#x27;s life and accomplishments were used as a model for the Japanese statesman Lord Yoshi Toranaga, portrayed in James Clavell&#x27;s historical novel &quot;Shōgun&quot;. The 1980 television miniseries adaptation of the novel, starring Toshiro Mifune as Toranaga, and the 2024 miniseries, starring Hiroyuki Sanada as Toranaga, both used Ieyasu as a key reference.

The NHK show is a Japanese historical drama television series depicting a semi-fictional history of Tokugawa Ieyasu which starred Jun Matsumoto as Ieyasu.

Tokugawa Ieyasu appears as a leader of Japan in every &quot;Civilization&quot; game except &quot;Civilization V&quot;.

The Age of Empires III: The Asian Dynasties expansion pack has a Japanese campaign which focuses on the unification of Japan and the establishment of the Tokugawa Shogunate with a fictional protagonist Sakuma Kichiro serving under Tokugawa Ieyasu.

In Dinosaur King, Tokugawa Ieyasu appears in episode 63 of season 2

==See also==

* Shitennō (Tokugawa clan)
* East Asian age reckoning
* List of Tōshō-gū
* Testament of Ieyasu

== Appendix ==
=== Footnotes ===
=== References ===
=== Bibliography ===
* 
* 
* 
* Sansom, George (1961). &quot;A History of Japan, 1334–1615&quot;. Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
* Bolitho, Harold (1974). &quot;Treasures Among Men: The Fudai Daimyo in Tokugawa Japan&quot;. New Haven: Yale University Press. . .
* 
* 
* McClain, James (1991). &quot;The Cambridge History of Japan&quot; Volume 4. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
* McLynn, Frank (2008). &quot;The Greatest Shogun&quot;, &quot;BBC History Magazine&quot;, Vol. 9, No. 1, pp 52–53.
* あおもりの文化財 徳川家康自筆日課念仏 – 青森県庁ホームページ 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Totman, Conrad D. (1967). &quot;Politics in the Tokugawa Bakufu, 1600–1843&quot;. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. .
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q171977" start="0" end="15" title="Tokugawa Ieyasu" label="Tokugawa Ieyasu"/>
<link wikidata="Q171977" start="22" end="42" title="Tokugawa Ieyasu" label="Matsudaira Takechiyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q131767" start="109" end="115" title="shōgun" label="shōgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q205662" start="129" end="147" title="Tokugawa shogunate" label="Tokugawa shogunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8707" start="190" end="207" title="Meiji Restoration" label="Meiji Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q171411" start="305" end="317" title="Oda Nobunaga" label="Oda Nobunaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132077" start="329" end="332" title="Oda clan" label="Oda"/>
<link wikidata="Q187550" start="345" end="363" title="Toyotomi Hideyoshi" label="Toyotomi Hideyoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q61982" start="384" end="390" title="daimyo" label="daimyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054305" start="436" end="453" title="Imagawa Yoshimoto" label="Imagawa Yoshimoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132077" start="583" end="591" title="Oda clan" label="Oda clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q187550" start="706" end="724" title="Toyotomi Hideyoshi" label="Toyotomi Hideyoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q132480" start="842" end="847" title="Kantō region" label="Kanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q35765" start="910" end="915" title="Osaka" label="Osaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q865913" start="926" end="936" title="Edo Castle" label="his castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q215646" start="963" end="966" title="Edo (Tokyo)" label="Edo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="972" end="977" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521658" start="1053" end="1061" title="Toyotomi clan" label="Toyotomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q576338" start="1142" end="1155" title="Japanese invasions of Korea (1592–1598)" label="conquer Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q234188" start="1194" end="1214" title="Battle of Sekigahara" label="Battle of Sekigahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="1380" end="1388" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1493" end="1500" title="Tokugawa shogunate#Government" label="bakuhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013445" start="1741" end="1755" title="Okazaki Castle" label="Okazaki Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192853" start="1817" end="1823" title="Tenbun" label="Tenbun"/>
<link wikidata="Q13788" start="1842" end="1859" title="Japanese calendar" label="Japanese calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q61982" start="1956" end="1962" title="daimyo" label="daimyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q768158" start="1966" end="1972" title="Mikawa Province" label="Mikawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141077" start="1980" end="1995" title="Matsudaira clan" label="Matsudaira clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q38142" start="2034" end="2046" title="samurai" label="samurai lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q334845" start="2174" end="2190" title="Muromachi period" label="Muromachi period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141077" start="2196" end="2211" title="Matsudaira clan" label="Matsudaira clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q80434" start="2280" end="2296" title="Aichi Prefecture" label="Aichi Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064935" start="2321" end="2340" title="Matsudaira Hirotada" label="Matsudaira Hirotada"/>
<link wikidata="Q963514" start="2424" end="2431" title="Tōkaidō (road)" label="Tōkaidō"/>
<link wikidata="Q34600" start="2448" end="2453" title="Kyoto" label="Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764434" start="2562" end="2574" title="Imagawa clan" label="Imagawa clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q864170" start="2584" end="2599" title="Suruga Province" label="Suruga Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132077" start="2620" end="2628" title="Oda clan" label="Oda clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153962" start="2673" end="2685" title="Oda Nobuhide" label="Oda Nobuhide"/>
<link wikidata="Q171411" start="2701" end="2713" title="Oda Nobunaga" label="Oda Nobunaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132077" start="2841" end="2849" title="Oda clan" label="Oda clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153962" start="2861" end="2873" title="Oda Nobuhide" label="Oda Nobuhide"/>
<link wikidata="Q871566" start="2975" end="2990" title="Mizuno Nobumoto" label="Mizuno Nobumoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366163" start="3138" end="3150" title="Odai no Kata" label="Odai-no-kata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054305" start="3403" end="3420" title="Imagawa Yoshimoto" label="Imagawa Yoshimoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3034530" start="3526" end="3538" title="Sunpu Domain" label="Sunpu Domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153962" start="3553" end="3565" title="Oda Nobuhide" label="Oda Nobuhide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764434" start="3749" end="3761" title="Imagawa clan" label="Imagawa clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q270806" start="4005" end="4020" title="Anjō" label="Honshōji Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q11751" start="4024" end="4030" title="Nagoya" label="Nagoya"/>
<link wikidata="Q171411" start="4052" end="4064" title="Oda Nobunaga" label="Oda Nobunaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q842029" start="4818" end="4832" title="Sessai Chōrō" label="Imagawa Sessai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188472" start="4864" end="4876" title="Oda Nobuhiro" label="Oda Nobuhiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054305" start="5804" end="5821" title="Imagawa Yoshimoto" label="Imagawa Yoshimoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q483226" start="5847" end="5854" title="genpuku" label="genpuku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013445" start="5980" end="5987" title="Okazaki Castle" label="Okazaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316445" start="6101" end="6105" title="karō" label="karō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052955" start="6112" end="6127" title="Torii Tadayoshi" label="Torii Tadayoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q850273" start="6177" end="6201" title="East Asian age reckoning" label="East Asian age reckoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q4415657" start="6231" end="6245" title="Lady Tsukiyama" label="Lady Tsukiyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188704" start="6337" end="6356" title="Matsudaira Nobuyasu" label="Matsudaira Nobuyasu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132077" start="6470" end="6478" title="Oda clan" label="Oda clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3893140" start="6552" end="6567" title="siege of Terabe" label="siege of Terabe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6589" end="6605" title="Suzuki Shigeteru" label="Suzuki Shigeteru"/>
<link wikidata="Q171411" start="6650" end="6662" title="Oda Nobunaga" label="Oda Nobunaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q11441955" start="7084" end="7096" title="Ōtaka Castle" label="Odaka Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132077" start="7466" end="7474" title="Oda clan" label="Oda clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q171411" start="7489" end="7501" title="Oda Nobunaga" label="Oda Nobunaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054305" start="7512" end="7529" title="Imagawa Yoshimoto" label="Imagawa Yoshimoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964948" start="7673" end="7688" title="Siege of Marune" label="Siege of Marune"/>
<link wikidata="Q349422" start="7752" end="7771" title="Battle of Okehazama" label="Battle of Okehazama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054305" start="8413" end="8430" title="Imagawa Yoshimoto" label="Imagawa Yoshimoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764434" start="8445" end="8457" title="Imagawa clan" label="Imagawa clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013445" start="8584" end="8598" title="Okazaki Castle" label="Okazaki Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q171411" start="8668" end="8680" title="Oda Nobunaga" label="Oda Nobunaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q4415657" start="8704" end="8718" title="Lady Tsukiyama" label="Lady Tsukiyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038629" start="8778" end="8783" title="Sunpu Castle" label="Sunpu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100078" start="8787" end="8802" title="Imagawa Ujizane" label="Imagawa Ujizane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510141" start="8933" end="8941" title="Siege of Kaminogō Castle" label="Kaminogō"/>
<link wikidata="Q316952" start="9032" end="9045" title="Hattori Hanzō" label="Hattori Hanzō"/>
<link wikidata="Q171411" start="9361" end="9373" title="Oda Nobunaga" label="Oda Nobunaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q514506" start="9390" end="9404" title="Owari Province" label="Owari Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132077" start="9421" end="9429" title="Oda clan" label="Oda clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040026" start="9533" end="9541" title="Tokuhime (Oda)" label="Tokuhime"/>
<link wikidata="Q947533" start="9917" end="9926" title="Ikkō-ikki" label="Ikkō-ikki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475695" start="9973" end="9987" title="Sōhei" label="militant monks"/>
<link wikidata="Q912221" start="9998" end="10010" title="Jōdo Shinshū" label="Jōdo Shinshū"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762407" start="10160" end="10186" title="Battle of Azukizaka (1564)" label="Battle of Azukizaka (1564)"/>
<link wikidata="Q845447" start="10254" end="10268" title="Honda Masanobu" label="Honda Masanobu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980311" start="10273" end="10290" title="Natsume Yoshinobu" label="Natsume Yoshinobu"/>
<link wikidata="Q467417" start="10477" end="10492" title="Honda Tadakatsu" label="Honda Tadakatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762407" start="10721" end="10740" title="Battle of Azukizaka (1564)" label="Battle of Azukizaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="10957" end="10967" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141077" start="11254" end="11269" title="Matsudaira clan" label="Matsudaira clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q768158" start="11289" end="11295" title="Mikawa Province" label="Mikawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132756" start="11364" end="11379" title="Sakai Tadatsugu" label="Sakai Tadatsugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q643640" start="11594" end="11606" title="Fudai daimyō" label="Fudai daimyō"/>
<link wikidata="Q572662" start="11715" end="11723" title="Hatamoto" label="Hatamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q665518" start="11909" end="11923" title="Torii Mototada" label="Torii Mototada"/>
<link wikidata="Q467417" start="11925" end="11940" title="Honda Tadakatsu" label="Honda Tadakatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062738" start="11942" end="11961" title="Sakakibara Yasumasa" label="Sakakibara Yasumasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q869401" start="11963" end="11975" title="Ōkubo Tadayo" label="Ōkubo Tadayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6788035" start="12254" end="12280" title="Matsudaira Ietada (Fukōzu)" label="Matsudaira Ietada (Fukōzu)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814515" start="12282" end="12301" title="Matsudaira Tadamasa" label="Matsudaira Tadamasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11239164" start="12303" end="12331" title="Matsudaira Ietada (Katahara)" label="Matsudaira Ietada (Katahara)"/>
<link wikidata="Q873166" start="12475" end="12492" title="Ishikawa Kazumasa" label="Ishikawa Kazumasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q849070" start="12682" end="12700" title="Hiraiwa Chikayoshi" label="Hiraiwa Chikayoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010346" start="12702" end="12714" title="Naitō Ienaga" label="Naitō Ienaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q11644106" start="12716" end="12731" title="Sakai Tadatoshi" label="Sakai Tadatoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141077" start="12922" end="12937" title="Matsudaira clan" label="Matsudaira clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164991" start="12967" end="12978" title="Seiwa Genji" label="Seiwa Genji"/>
<link wikidata="Q599881" start="12993" end="13006" title="Minamoto clan" label="Minamoto clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q349243" start="13075" end="13088" title="Emperor Seiwa" label="Emperor Seiwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304081" start="13838" end="13852" title="courtesy title" label="courtesy title"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452077" start="13888" end="13898" title="List of Japanese court ranks, positions and hereditary titles" label="court rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412769" start="13915" end="13928" title="Tokugawa clan" label="Tokugawa clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q171411" start="14013" end="14025" title="Oda Nobunaga" label="Oda Nobunaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048864" start="14218" end="14233" title="Tōtōmi Province" label="Tōtōmi Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q276404" start="14246" end="14260" title="Takeda Shingen" label="Takeda Shingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210114" start="14278" end="14289" title="Takeda clan" label="Takeda clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q858076" start="14293" end="14305" title="Kai Province" label="Kai Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764434" start="14362" end="14369" title="Imagawa clan" label="Imagawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q864170" start="14503" end="14518" title="Suruga Province" label="Suruga Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044017" start="14619" end="14627" title="Ōi River" label="Ōi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342966" start="14681" end="14697" title="Akiyama Nobutomo" label="Akiyama Nobutomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8081570" start="15361" end="15376" title="Ōkubo Tadachika" label="Ōkubo Tadachika"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048864" start="15552" end="15567" title="Tōtōmi Province" label="Tōtōmi Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q276404" start="15580" end="15594" title="Takeda Shingen" label="Takeda Shingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q864170" start="15618" end="15633" title="Suruga Province" label="Suruga Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764434" start="15649" end="15656" title="Imagawa clan" label="Imagawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038629" start="15668" end="15673" title="Sunpu Castle" label="Sunpu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100078" start="15676" end="15691" title="Imagawa Ujizane" label="Imagawa Ujizane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2969457" start="15700" end="15715" title="Kakegawa Castle" label="Kakegawa Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2188124" start="15737" end="15758" title="Siege of Kakegawa" label="lay siege to Kakegawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210114" start="16002" end="16008" title="Takeda clan" label="Takeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q311080" start="16079" end="16093" title="Uesugi Kenshin" label="Uesugi Kenshin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150058" start="16101" end="16112" title="Uesugi clan" label="Uesugi clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334437" start="16350" end="16360" title="Ii Naomasa" label="Ii Naomasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q185125" start="16600" end="16609" title="Hamamatsu" label="Hamamatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q242783" start="16692" end="16699" title="Okazaki, Aichi" label="Okazaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322768" start="16745" end="16762" title="Asakura Yoshikage" label="Asakura Yoshikage"/>
<link wikidata="Q434415" start="16807" end="16824" title="Ashikaga Yoshiaki" label="Ashikaga Yoshiaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274982" start="17325" end="17351" title="Siege of Kanegasaki (1570)" label="besieged Kanegasaki castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872031" start="17365" end="17374" title="Azai clan" label="Azai clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q187550" start="17546" end="17564" title="Toyotomi Hideyoshi" label="Toyotomi Hideyoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142446" start="17604" end="17617" title="Azai Nagamasa" label="Azai Nagamasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132077" start="17688" end="17696" title="Oda clan" label="Oda clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274982" start="17708" end="17727" title="Siege of Kanegasaki (1570)" label="siege of Kanegasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872031" start="17889" end="17898" title="Azai clan" label="Azai clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772267" start="17953" end="17972" title="Asakura clan" label="Asakura clan&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q276404" start="18618" end="18632" title="Takeda Shingen" label="Takeda Shingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q431928" start="18701" end="18718" title="Late Hōjō clan" label="Odawara Hōjō clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q434415" start="18785" end="18802" title="Ashikaga Yoshiaki" label="Ashikaga Yoshiaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412769" start="18825" end="18833" title="Tokugawa clan" label="Tokugawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048864" start="18843" end="18849" title="Tōtōmi Province" label="Tōtōmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q748831" start="18926" end="18942" title="Nishikawa Castle" label="Nishikawa Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q849190" start="18944" end="18958" title="Yoshida Castle (Mikawa Province)" label="Yoshida Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371339" start="18963" end="18978" title="Futamata Castle" label="Futamata Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014528" start="18995" end="19013" title="Siege of Futamata" label="besieging Futamata"/>
<link wikidata="Q185125" start="19094" end="19103" title="Hamamatsu" label="Hamamatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q690464" start="19215" end="19237" title="Battle of Mikatagahara" label="Battle of Mikatagahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014485" start="20312" end="20332" title="siege of Noda Castle" label="siege of Noda Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q662482" start="20398" end="20414" title="Takeda Katsuyori" label="Takeda Katsuyori"/>
<link wikidata="Q10565565" start="20853" end="20869" title="Mizuno Tadashige" label="Mizuno Tadashige"/>
<link wikidata="Q869401" start="21048" end="21060" title="Ōkubo Tadayo" label="Ōkubo Tadayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152352" start="21080" end="21096" title="Hamamatsu Castle" label="Hamamatsu Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055597" start="21795" end="21818" title="Siege of Yoshida Castle" label="attacked Yoshida Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q428369" start="21823" end="21848" title="Battle of Nagashino" label="besieged Nagashino Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q858076" start="22132" end="22144" title="Kai Province" label="Kai Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q864170" start="22291" end="22306" title="Suruga Province" label="Suruga Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210114" start="22316" end="22327" title="Takeda clan" label="Takeda clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4415657" start="22366" end="22380" title="Lady Tsukiyama" label="Lady Tsukiyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040026" start="22536" end="22544" title="Tokuhime (1559–1636)" label="Tokuhime"/>
<link wikidata="Q133462" start="22644" end="22651" title="seppuku" label="seppuku"/>
<link wikidata="Q8081570" start="22816" end="22831" title="Ōkubo Tadachika" label="Ōkubo Tadachika"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040026" start="22833" end="22841" title="Tokuhime (Oda)" label="Tokuhime"/>
<link wikidata="Q643640" start="24613" end="24625" title="fudai daimyō" label="fudai daimyō"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366163" start="24817" end="24829" title="Odai no Kata" label="Odai no Kata"/>
<link wikidata="Q710416" start="24861" end="24882" title="Arthur Lindsay Sadler" label="Arthur Lindsay Sadler"/>
<link wikidata="Q314464" start="25059" end="25076" title="Tokugawa Hidetada" label="Tokugawa Hidetada"/>
<link wikidata="Q187550" start="25131" end="25149" title="Toyotomi Hideyoshi" label="Toyotomi Hideyoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2969457" start="25556" end="25571" title="Kakegawa Castle" label="Kakegawa Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q10522159" start="25739" end="25754" title="Honda Yasushige (1554-1611)" label="Honda Yasushige"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073455" start="25953" end="25967" title="Okabe Motonobu" label="Okabe Motonobu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275430" start="26792" end="26819" title="Siege of Takatenjin (1581)" label="recapture Takatenjin castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q858076" start="26985" end="26997" title="Kai Province" label="Kai Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113509" start="27048" end="27068" title="Battle of Tenmokuzan" label="Battle of Tenmokuzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q864170" start="27217" end="27232" title="Suruga Province" label="Suruga Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q169598" start="27383" end="27398" title="Honnō-ji Incident" label="Honnō-ji temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q171411" start="27400" end="27412" title="Oda Nobunaga" label="Oda Nobunaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q164256" start="27440" end="27453" title="Kansai region" label="Kansai region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210114" start="27490" end="27501" title="Takeda clan" label="Takeda clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q313320" start="27607" end="27623" title="Akechi Mitsuhide" label="Akechi Mitsuhide"/>
<link wikidata="Q270912" start="27751" end="27759" title="Hirakata" label="Hirakata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062738" start="27882" end="27901" title="Sakakibara Yasumasa" label="Sakakibara Yasumasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q18128911" start="27979" end="27993" title="Ochimusha" label="Ochimusha-gari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047128" start="28133" end="28145" title="Iga Province" label="Iga Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q85882491" start="28511" end="28520" title="Kōka ikki" label="Kōka ikki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013445" start="28662" end="28676" title="Okazaki Castle" label="Okazaki Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q193428" start="28851" end="28856" title="Sakai" label="Sakai"/>
<link wikidata="Q117496752" start="28954" end="28962" title="Iga ikki" label="Iga ikki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152942" start="29297" end="29311" title="Mie University" label="Mie University"/>
<link wikidata="Q85882491" start="29535" end="29544" title="Kōka ikki" label="Kōka ikki"/>
<link wikidata="Q13432011" start="29692" end="29701" title="Jizamurai" label="Jizamurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040806" start="29792" end="29800" title="Shitennō (Tokugawa clan)" label="Shitennō"/>
<link wikidata="Q646858" start="30031" end="30039" title="Kameyama, Mie" label="Kameyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q85882491" start="30153" end="30162" title="Kōka ikki" label="Kōka ikki"/>
<link wikidata="Q13432011" start="30172" end="30181" title="Jizamurai" label="Jizamurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047128" start="30354" end="30366" title="Iga Province" label="Iga Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q117496752" start="30429" end="30437" title="Iga ikki" label="Iga ikki"/>
<link wikidata="Q553687" start="30532" end="30542" title="Luís Fróis" label="Luís Fróis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132756" start="30648" end="30663" title="Sakai Tadatsugu" label="Sakai Tadatsugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334437" start="30665" end="30675" title="Ii Naomasa" label="Ii Naomasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q467417" start="30680" end="30695" title="Honda Tadakatsu" label="Honda Tadakatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6788035" start="30886" end="30903" title="Matsudaira Ietada (Fukōzu)" label="Matsudaira Ietada"/>
<link wikidata="Q869401" start="31234" end="31246" title="Ōkubo Tadayo" label="Ōkubo Tadayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q316952" start="31248" end="31261" title="Hattori Hanzō" label="Hattori Hanzō"/>
<link wikidata="Q6379555" start="31501" end="31518" title="Kawajiri Hidetaka" label="Kawajiri Hidetaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131473" start="31530" end="31543" title="Suwa District, Nagano" label="Suwa District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150058" start="31997" end="32003" title="Uesugi clan" label="Uesugi"/>
<link wikidata="Q834364" start="32012" end="32016" title="Hōjō clan" label="Hōjō"/>
<link wikidata="Q289250" start="32061" end="32077" title="Shinano Province" label="Shinano Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054838" start="32079" end="32094" title="Kōzuke Province" label="Kōzuke Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q858076" start="32100" end="32112" title="Kai Province" label="Kai Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q132480" start="32430" end="32442" title="Kantō region" label="Kantō region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144171" start="32775" end="32790" title="Sanada Masayuki" label="Sanada Masayuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q11554573" start="32821" end="32834" title="Numata Castle" label="Numata Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661264" start="33116" end="33128" title="Hoshina clan" label="Hoshina clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2040645" start="33171" end="33188" title="Hoshina Masatoshi" label="Hoshina Masatoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405649" start="33202" end="33217" title="Hoshina Masanao" label="Hoshina Masanao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204342" start="34055" end="34068" title="Baba Nobuharu" label="Baba Nobuharu"/>
<link wikidata="Q132720" start="34320" end="34340" title="Yamanashi Prefecture" label="Yamanashi Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390843" start="34749" end="34765" title="Anayama Nobutada" label="Anayama Nobutada"/>
<link wikidata="" start="35199" end="35212" title=":jp:曽根昌世" label="Sone Masatada"/>
<link wikidata="" start="35513" end="35528" title=":jp:岡部正綱" label="Okabe Masatsuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q869401" start="35983" end="35995" title="Ōkubo Tadayo" label="Ōkubo Tadayo"/>
<link wikidata="" start="36190" end="36203" title=":jp:知久氏" label="Tomohisa clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376605" start="36206" end="36222" title="Uesugi Kagekatsu" label="Uesugi Kagekatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975340" start="36356" end="36370" title="Ogasawara clan" label="Ogasawara clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q179757" start="36395" end="36402" title="Chikuma, Nagano" label="Chikuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q534667" start="36427" end="36434" title="Azumino" label="Azumino"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416834" start="36463" end="36477" title="Kiso Yoshimasa" label="Kiso Yoshimasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11653206" start="36864" end="36879" title="Naganuma castle" label="Naganuma castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q514506" start="36968" end="36982" title="Owari Province" label="Owari province"/>
<link wikidata="Q39040" start="37055" end="37073" title="Battle of Yamazaki" label="Battle of Yamazaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q953624" start="37214" end="37231" title="Takigawa Kazumasu" label="Takigawa Kazumasu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058786" start="37256" end="37274" title="Battle of Kanagawa" label="Battle of Kanagawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q187550" start="37276" end="37294" title="Toyotomi Hideyoshi" label="Toyotomi Hideyoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q201932" start="37535" end="37539" title="Kōfu" label="Kōfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q10855031" start="37667" end="37683" title="Katsuyama Castle" label="Katsuyama Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2969895" start="37711" end="37727" title="Minakuchi Castle" label="Minakuchi Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266090" start="37953" end="37969" title="Ichijō Nobutatsu" label="Ichijō Nobutatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061204" start="37971" end="37988" title="Yamagata Masakage" label="Yamagata Masakage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055475" start="37994" end="38007" title="Hara Masatane" label="Hara Masatane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156668" start="38506" end="38517" title="Hōjō Ujinao" label="Hōjō Ujinao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197137" start="38600" end="38613" title="Komoro Castle" label="Komoro Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258118" start="38910" end="38927" title="Daidōji Masashige" label="Daidōji Masashige"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156668" start="40022" end="40033" title="Hōjō Ujinao" label="Hōjō Ujinao"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975367" start="40550" end="40561" title="Satomi clan" label="Satomi clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053044" start="40632" end="40652" title="Awa Province (Chiba)" label="Awa Province (Chiba)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8190277" start="40907" end="40923" title="Mizuno Katsushige" label="Mizuno Katsunari"/>
<link wikidata="Q665518" start="40928" end="40942" title="Torii Mototada" label="Torii Mototada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416834" start="41876" end="41890" title="Kiso Yoshimasa" label="Kiso Yoshimasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047128" start="42280" end="42292" title="Iga Province" label="Iga Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q7403130" start="42332" end="42345" title="Saku District, Shinano" label="Saku District"/>
<link wikidata="Q860928" start="43325" end="43337" title="Izu Province" label="Izu Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q132720" start="43445" end="43465" title="Yamanashi Prefecture" label="Yamanashi Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11672954" start="44842" end="44855" title="Takatō Castle" label="Takatō Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q994006" start="44935" end="44948" title="Minowa Castle" label="Minowa Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097503" start="45912" end="45928" title="Chikuma District, Shinano" label="Chikuma District"/>
<link wikidata="Q201932" start="46286" end="46290" title="Kōfu" label="Kōfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975363" start="46511" end="46517" title="Satake clan" label="Satake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975399" start="46519" end="46523" title="Yūki clan" label="Yuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044815" start="46964" end="46977" title="Oda Nobukatsu" label="Oda Nobukatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614349" start="46979" end="46991" title="Oda Nobutaka" label="Oda Nobutaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q855048" start="47180" end="47184" title="koku" label="koku"/>
<link wikidata="Q846338" start="47394" end="47398" title="Suwa, Nagano" label="Suwa"/>
<link wikidata="" start="47538" end="47555" title=":jp:名将言行録" label="Meishō genkō-roku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210114" start="47593" end="47604" title="Takeda clan" label="Takeda clan"/>
<link wikidata="" start="47631" end="47664" title=":jp:天正壬午起請文" label="organized a kishōmon (blood oath)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975351" start="48539" end="48554" title="Sakakibara clan" label="Sakakibara clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11423296" start="48748" end="48761" title="Tsuchiya clan" label="Tsuchiya clan"/>
<link wikidata="" start="48969" end="48982" title=":jp:駒井政直" label="Komai Masanao"/>
<link wikidata="Q572662" start="49575" end="49583" title="Hatamoto" label="Hatamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q8707" start="50336" end="50353" title="Meiji Restoration" label="Meiji Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820189" start="50561" end="50572" title="Tomono clan" label="Tomono clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q187550" start="51098" end="51116" title="Toyotomi Hideyoshi" label="Toyotomi Hideyoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q707587" start="51121" end="51136" title="Shibata Katsuie" label="Shibata Katsuie"/>
<link wikidata="Q225562" start="51187" end="51208" title="Battle of Shizugatake" label="Battle of Shizugatake"/>
<link wikidata="Q132480" start="51494" end="51506" title="Kantō region" label="Kantō region"/>
<link wikidata="Q398989" start="51514" end="51526" title="Tōkai region" label="Tōkai region"/>
<link wikidata="Q834364" start="51732" end="51741" title="Hōjō clan" label="Hōjō clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044815" start="51817" end="51830" title="Oda Nobukatsu" label="Oda Nobukatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q171411" start="51869" end="51881" title="Oda Nobunaga" label="Oda Nobunaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q187550" start="51891" end="51909" title="Toyotomi Hideyoshi" label="Toyotomi Hideyoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132077" start="52452" end="52460" title="Oda clan" label="Oda clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q514506" start="52557" end="52562" title="Owari Province" label="Owari"/>
<link wikidata="Q389537" start="52669" end="52675" title="Komaki" label="Komaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070082" start="52890" end="52909" title="Chōsokabe Motochika" label="Chōsokabe Motochika"/>
<link wikidata="Q11365662" start="52932" end="52950" title="Kōsokabe Chikayasu" label="Kōsokabe Chikayasu"/>
<link wikidata="Q10565565" start="52990" end="53006" title="Mizuno Tadashige" label="Mizuno Tadashige"/>
<link wikidata="Q8190277" start="53011" end="53027" title="Mizuno Katsushige" label="Mizuno Katsunari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2969408" start="53039" end="53055" title="Hoshizaki Castle" label="Hoshizaki Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q967501" start="53114" end="53132" title="Toyotomi Hidetsugu" label="Toyotomi Hidetsugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8190166" start="53310" end="53323" title="Hori Hidemasa" label="Hori Hidemasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071391" start="53441" end="53455" title="Mori Nagayoshi" label="Mori Nagayoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635471" start="53523" end="53540" title="Okudaira Nobumasa" label="Okudaira Nobumasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036482" start="53714" end="53728" title="Ikeda Tsuneoki" label="Ikeda Tsuneoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q6729103" start="54795" end="54809" title="Maeda Nagatane" label="Maeda Nagatane"/>
<link wikidata="Q953624" start="54814" end="54831" title="Takigawa Kazumasu" label="Takigawa Kazumasu"/>
<link wikidata="Q572662" start="55054" end="55062" title="hatamoto" label="hatamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q921113" start="55172" end="55186" title="Kuki Yoshitaka" label="Kuki Yoshitaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q187550" start="55968" end="55986" title="Toyotomi Hideyoshi" label="Toyotomi Hideyoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353633" start="56011" end="56040" title="Battle of Komaki and Nagakute" label="Battle of Komaki and Nagakute"/>
<link wikidata="Q873166" start="56283" end="56300" title="Ishikawa Kazumasa" label="Ishikawa Kazumasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q838180" start="57759" end="57772" title="Asahi no kata" label="Asahi no kata"/>
<link wikidata="Q5353737" start="58169" end="58183" title="Ōmandokoro" label="his own mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622890" start="58468" end="58498" title="Siege of Odawara (1590)" label="campaign against the Hōjō clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q858076" start="58695" end="58707" title="Kai Province" label="Kai Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q133462" start="58914" end="58921" title="seppuku" label="seppuku"/>
<link wikidata="Q736948" start="58954" end="58966" title="Hōjō Ujimasa" label="Hōjō Ujimasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790462" start="58971" end="58983" title="Hōjō Ujiteru" label="Hōjō Ujiteru"/>
<link wikidata="Q907389" start="59442" end="59456" title="Mutsu Province" label="Mutsu Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q967501" start="59610" end="59628" title="Toyotomi Hidetsugu" label="Toyotomi Hidetsugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q311183" start="59630" end="59643" title="Date Masamune" label="Date Masamune"/>
<link wikidata="Q334107" start="59645" end="59661" title="Ishida Mitsunari" label="Ishida Mitsunari"/>
<link wikidata="Q386265" start="59663" end="59679" title="Ōtani Yoshitsugu" label="Ōtani Yoshitsugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q906580" start="59681" end="59693" title="Gamō Ujisato" label="Gamō Ujisato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376605" start="59695" end="59711" title="Uesugi Kagekatsu" label="Uesugi Kagekatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133798" start="59713" end="59730" title="Satake Yoshishige" label="Satake Yoshishige"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196817" start="59736" end="59749" title="Maeda Toshiie" label="Maeda Toshiie"/>
<link wikidata="Q768158" start="59841" end="59847" title="Mikawa Province" label="Mikawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048864" start="59849" end="59855" title="Tōtōmi Province" label="Tōtōmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q864170" start="59857" end="59863" title="Suruga Province" label="Suruga"/>
<link wikidata="Q289250" start="59865" end="59872" title="Shinano Province" label="Shinano"/>
<link wikidata="Q858076" start="59878" end="59881" title="Kai Province" label="Kai"/>
<link wikidata="Q132480" start="59956" end="59968" title="Kantō region" label="Kantō region"/>
<link wikidata="Q834364" start="60075" end="60084" title="Hōjō clan" label="Hōjō clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975367" start="60555" end="60566" title="Satomi clan" label="Satomi clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q215646" start="60694" end="60697" title="Edo (Tokyo)" label="Edo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="61166" end="61171" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q311183" start="61242" end="61255" title="Date Masamune" label="Date Masamune"/>
<link wikidata="Q839377" start="61257" end="61272" title="Mogami Yoshiaki" label="Mogami Yoshiaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133798" start="61274" end="61291" title="Satake Yoshishige" label="Satake Yoshishige"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137467" start="61296" end="61309" title="Nanbu Nobunao" label="Nanbu Nobunao"/>
<link wikidata="Q187550" start="61372" end="61390" title="Toyotomi Hideyoshi" label="Toyotomi Hideyoshi"/>
<link wikidata="" start="61688" end="61703" title=":jp:渡邊大門" label="Watanabe Daimon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510166" start="62861" end="62877" title="Kunohe rebellion" label="Kunohe rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474209" start="63321" end="63330" title="Iwadeyama, Miyagi" label="Iwadeyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q47896" start="63332" end="63349" title="Miyagi Prefecture" label="Miyagi Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137467" start="63504" end="63517" title="Nanbu Nobunao" label="Nanbu Nobunao"/>
<link wikidata="" start="64042" end="64052" title=":jp:改易" label="Kaieki law"/>
<link wikidata="" start="64398" end="64412" title=":jp:後藤庄三郎" label="Gotō Shōzaburō"/>
<link wikidata="Q576338" start="64605" end="64618" title="Japanese invasions of Korea (1592–98)" label="invaded Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="64654" end="64659" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q311183" start="64827" end="64840" title="Date Masamune" label="Date Masamune"/>
<link wikidata="Q648629" start="64894" end="64907" title="Nagoya Castle" label="Nagoya Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q313641" start="64963" end="64980" title="Toyotomi Hideyori" label="Toyotomi Hideyori"/>
<link wikidata="Q711685" start="65074" end="65080" title="Nagoya Castle (Hizen Province)" label="Nagoya"/>
<link wikidata="Q13987" start="65085" end="65091" title="Kyushu" label="Kyushu"/>
<link wikidata="Q514506" start="65127" end="65141" title="Owari Province" label="Owari Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q967501" start="65328" end="65346" title="Toyotomi Hidetsugu" label="Toyotomi Hidetsugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154511" start="66061" end="66083" title="Council of Five Elders" label="Council of Five Elders"/>
<link wikidata="Q956844" start="66188" end="66193" title="tairō" label="tairō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196817" start="66222" end="66235" title="Maeda Toshiie" label="Maeda Toshiie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142657" start="66237" end="66250" title="Mōri Terumoto" label="Mōri Terumoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329792" start="66252" end="66264" title="Ukita Hideie" label="Ukita Hideie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376605" start="66266" end="66282" title="Uesugi Kagekatsu" label="Uesugi Kagekatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q164256" start="66440" end="66446" title="Kansai region" label="Kansai"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="66593" end="66602" title="New Spain" label="New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="66615" end="66621" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q313641" start="66836" end="66844" title="Toyotomi Hideyori" label="Hideyori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194995" start="67104" end="67122" title="Fukushima Masanori" label="Fukushima Masanori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069843" start="67124" end="67137" title="Katō Kiyomasa" label="Katō Kiyomasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385927" start="67139" end="67153" title="Ikeda Terumasa" label="Ikeda Terumasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147154" start="67155" end="67171" title="Hosokawa Tadaoki" label="Hosokawa Tadaoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q11557324" start="67173" end="67188" title="Asano Yoshinaga (Lord of Hiroshima)" label="Asano Yoshinaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371657" start="67190" end="67203" title="Katō Yoshiaki" label="Katō Yoshiaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q950496" start="67209" end="67224" title="Kuroda Nagamasa" label="Kuroda Nagamasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q576338" start="67435" end="67444" title="Japanese invasions of Korea (1592–1598)" label="Imjin War"/>
<link wikidata="Q321242" start="67547" end="67559" title="Osaka Castle" label="Osaka Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q313641" start="67688" end="67705" title="Toyotomi Hideyori" label="Toyotomi Hideyori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071525" start="67743" end="67759" title="Satake Yoshinobu" label="Satake Yoshinobu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926883" start="67789" end="67800" title="Shima Sakon" label="Shima Sakon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196273" start="68104" end="68118" title="Fushimi Castle" label="Fushimi Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130929" start="68591" end="68604" title="Yūki Hideyasu" label="Yūki Hideyasu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975390" start="68958" end="68968" title="Ukita clan" label="Ukita clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062738" start="69118" end="69137" title="Sakakibara Yasumasa" label="Sakakibara Yasumasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7402879" start="69525" end="69541" title="Sakazaki Naomori" label="Sakazaki Naomori"/>
<link wikidata="Q914637" start="69827" end="69836" title="Mōri clan" label="Mōri clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142657" start="69896" end="69909" title="Mōri Terumoto" label="Mōri Terumoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q907382" start="69930" end="69945" title="Nagato Province" label="Nagato Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053037" start="69950" end="69962" title="Suō Province" label="Suō Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133105" start="69966" end="69979" title="Mōri Hidemoto" label="Mōri Hidemoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q859974" start="70104" end="70117" title="Mōri Motokiyo" label="Mōri Motokiyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049766" start="70188" end="70202" title="Kikkawa Hiroie" label="Kikkawa Hiroie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143508" start="70241" end="70260" title="Kobayakawa Takakage" label="Kobayakawa Takakage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975305" start="70376" end="70387" title="Kuroda clan" label="Kuroda clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q907019" start="70389" end="70405" title="Kuroda Yoshitaka" label="Kuroda Yoshitaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067546" start="70651" end="70665" title="Asano Nagamasa" label="Asano Nagamasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8081663" start="70671" end="70683" title="Ōno Harunaga" label="Ōno Harunaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082927" start="70873" end="70888" title="Maeda Toshimasa" label="Maeda Toshimasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q845447" start="70934" end="70948" title="Honda Masanobu" label="Honda Masanobu"/>
<link wikidata="Q837867" start="72229" end="72248" title="Matsudaira Tadateru" label="Matsudaira Tadateru"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369543" start="72253" end="72262" title="Irohahime" label="Irohahime"/>
<link wikidata="Q535065" start="72599" end="72609" title="Mount Kōya" label="Mount Kōya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061406" start="73307" end="73319" title="Shimazu clan" label="Shimazu clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185372" start="73326" end="73343" title="Shimazu Tadatsune" label="Shimazu Tadatsune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156288" start="73362" end="73379" title="Shimazu Yoshihiro" label="Shimazu Yoshihiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q334107" start="73944" end="73960" title="Ishida Mitsunari" label="Ishida Mitsunari"/>
<link wikidata="Q838173" start="73992" end="74000" title="Go-Bugyō" label="Go-Bugyō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069843" start="74828" end="74841" title="Katō Kiyomasa" label="Katō Kiyomasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194995" start="74843" end="74861" title="Fukushima Masanori" label="Fukushima Masanori"/>
<link wikidata="Q839377" start="74863" end="74878" title="Mogami Yoshiaki" label="Mogami Yoshiaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073557" start="74880" end="74896" title="Hachisuka Iemasa" label="Hachisuka Iemasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975305" start="74902" end="74913" title="Kuroda clan" label="Kuroda clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736120" start="74919" end="74932" title="Hosokawa clan" label="Hosokawa clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329792" start="75024" end="75036" title="Ukita Hideie" label="Ukita Hideie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142657" start="75038" end="75051" title="Mōri Terumoto" label="Mōri Terumoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376605" start="75057" end="75073" title="Uesugi Kagekatsu" label="Uesugi Kagekatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q386265" start="75091" end="75107" title="Ōtani Yoshitsugu" label="Ōtani Yoshitsugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q981303" start="75113" end="75127" title="Chosokabe clan" label="Chosokabe clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061406" start="75133" end="75145" title="Shimazu clan" label="Shimazu clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13989" start="75186" end="75192" title="Honshu" label="Honshū"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376605" start="75220" end="75236" title="Uesugi Kagekatsu" label="Uesugi Kagekatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205071" start="75326" end="75330" title="Aizu" label="Aizu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348611" start="75456" end="75470" title="Naoe Kanetsugu" label="Naoe Kanetsugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q865913" start="75643" end="75646" title="Edo Castle" label="Edo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150058" start="75695" end="75706" title="Uesugi clan" label="Uesugi clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521658" start="75761" end="75769" title="Toyotomi clan" label="Toyotomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275284" start="75845" end="75872" title="Siege of Fushimi" label="had captured Fushimi castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067359" start="76076" end="76088" title="Ogaki Castle" label="Ogaki Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871100" start="76134" end="76150" title="Battle of Gifu Castle" label="took Gifu Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q963514" start="76206" end="76213" title="Tōkaidō (road)" label="Tōkaidō"/>
<link wikidata="Q314464" start="76229" end="76237" title="Tokugawa Hidetada" label="Hidetada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154479" start="76257" end="76266" title="Nakasendō" label="Nakasendō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144171" start="76306" end="76321" title="Sanada Masayuki" label="Sanada Masayuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q289250" start="76325" end="76341" title="Shinano Province" label="Shinano Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q234188" start="76419" end="76439" title="Battle of Sekigahara" label="Battle of Sekigahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q839176" start="76512" end="76518" title="List of Japanese battles" label="battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q334107" start="76742" end="76758" title="Ishida Mitsunari" label="Ishida Mitsunari"/>
<link wikidata="Q168289" start="76806" end="76814" title="arquebus" label="arquebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412769" start="76836" end="76844" title="Tokugawa clan" label="Tokugawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q35765" start="76873" end="76878" title="Osaka" label="Osaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q187550" start="77225" end="77243" title="Toyotomi Hideyoshi" label="Toyotomi Hideyoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369568" start="77259" end="77277" title="Kobayakawa Hideaki" label="Kobayakawa Hideaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142657" start="77483" end="77496" title="Mōri Terumoto" label="Mōri Terumoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q942553" start="77670" end="77686" title="Konishi Yukinaga" label="Konishi Yukinaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151711" start="77691" end="77704" title="Ankokuji Ekei" label="Ankokuji Ekei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144171" start="78026" end="78041" title="Sanada Masayuki" label="Sanada Masayuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3948081" start="78046" end="78061" title="Sanada Yukimura" label="Sanada Yukimura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141305" start="78095" end="78110" title="Sanada Nobuyuki" label="Sanada Nobuyuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385927" start="78302" end="78316" title="Ikeda Terumasa" label="Ikeda Terumasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377984" start="78341" end="78354" title="Tōdō Takatora" label="Tōdō Takatora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130929" start="78417" end="78430" title="Yūki Hideyasu" label="Yuki Hideyasu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520435" start="78522" end="78535" title="Gamō Hideyuki" label="Gamō Hideyuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069843" start="78629" end="78642" title="Katō Kiyomasa" label="Katō Kiyomasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351074" start="78831" end="78845" title="Aki District, Hiroshima" label="Aki, Hiroshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061406" start="79035" end="79047" title="Shimazu clan" label="Shimazu clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q313641" start="79087" end="79104" title="Toyotomi Hideyori" label="Toyotomi Hideyori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346974" start="79255" end="79272" title="Sesshō and Kampaku" label="Sesshō or Kampaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q643640" start="79415" end="79427" title="fudai daimyō" label="fudai daimyō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195912" start="79549" end="79562" title="tozama daimyō" label="tozama daimyō"/>
<link wikidata="Q332308" start="79718" end="79734" title="letter of intent" label="letter of intent"/>
<link wikidata="Q313641" start="79873" end="79890" title="Toyotomi Hideyori" label="Toyotomi Hideyori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627016" start="79989" end="79998" title="Hongan-ji" label="Hongan-ji"/>
<link wikidata="Q8190652" start="80025" end="80043" title="Kanamori Nagachika" label="Kanamori Nagachika"/>
<link wikidata="Q845447" start="80418" end="80432" title="Honda Masanobu" label="Honda Masanobu"/>
<link wikidata="Q111730901" start="80655" end="80669" title="Sekigahara Campaign" label="Sekigahara war"/>
<link wikidata="Q349440" start="80800" end="80816" title="Emperor Go-Yōzei" label="Emperor Go-Yōzei"/>
<link wikidata="Q599881" start="80928" end="80941" title="Minamoto clan" label="Minamoto clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q641628" start="81116" end="81129" title="Fujiwara clan" label="Fujiwara clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q349440" start="81397" end="81413" title="Emperor Go-Yōzei" label="Emperor Go-Yōzei"/>
<link wikidata="Q171411" start="81495" end="81507" title="Oda Nobunaga" label="Oda Nobunaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q276404" start="81509" end="81523" title="Takeda Shingen" label="Takeda Shingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q187550" start="81525" end="81543" title="Toyotomi Hideyoshi" label="Toyotomi Hideyoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q311080" start="81549" end="81563" title="Uesugi Kenshin" label="Uesugi Kenshin"/>
<link wikidata="Q205662" start="81643" end="81661" title="Tokugawa shogunate" label="Tokugawa shogunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="81684" end="81694" title="Edo period" label="Edo period"/>
<link wikidata="Q736839" start="81745" end="81753" title="Kamakura shogunate" label="Kamakura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154406" start="81762" end="81770" title="Ashikaga shogunate" label="Ashikaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q599881" start="81801" end="81814" title="Minamoto clan" label="Minamoto clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274150" start="81869" end="81879" title="Nitta clan" label="Nitta clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079102" start="81918" end="81928" title="Taira clan" label="Taira clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q641628" start="81937" end="81950" title="Fujiwara clan" label="Fujiwara clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q314464" start="82106" end="82123" title="Tokugawa Hidetada" label="Tokugawa Hidetada"/>
<link wikidata="Q311183" start="82406" end="82419" title="Date Masamune" label="Date Masamune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038629" start="82853" end="82865" title="Sunpu Castle" label="Sunpu Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q174691" start="82869" end="82874" title="Shizuoka, Shizuoka" label="Sunpu"/>
<link wikidata="Q865913" start="82915" end="82925" title="Edo Castle" label="Edo Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q91165" start="83171" end="83177" title="keep" label="donjon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192766" start="83227" end="83234" title="Meireki" label="Meireki"/>
<link wikidata="Q500681" start="83258" end="83273" title="Tokyo Imperial Palace" label="Imperial Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q132555" start="83454" end="83461" title="de jure" label="de jure"/>
<link wikidata="Q877175" start="83974" end="83984" title="Ii Naotaka" label="Ii Naotaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q11532526" start="83989" end="84006" title="Itakura Shigemasa" label="Itakura Shigemasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060551" start="84070" end="84080" title="Tsu Domain" label="Tsu Domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748477" start="84212" end="84229" title="Tsutsui Sadatsugu" label="Tsutsui Sadatsugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q313641" start="84498" end="84515" title="Toyotomi Hideyori" label="Toyotomi Hideyori"/>
<link wikidata="Q321242" start="84519" end="84531" title="Osaka Castle" label="Osaka Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202178" start="85190" end="85202" title="Enthronement of the Japanese Emperor" label="enthronement"/>
<link wikidata="Q320229" start="85206" end="85224" title="Emperor Go-Mizunoo" label="Emperor Go-Mizunoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q381025" start="85814" end="85829" title="Hokuriku region" label="Hokuriku region"/>
<link wikidata="Q205662" start="86806" end="86821" title="Tokugawa shogunate" label="Tokugawa regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="86919" end="86930" title="Dutch Republic" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q600093" start="86932" end="86937" title="Habsburg Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="86943" end="86950" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q159766" start="87099" end="87123" title="Dutch East India Company" label="Dutch East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q313866" start="87285" end="87298" title="William Adams (pilot)" label="William Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="87439" end="87445" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q28653" start="87468" end="87484" title="mendicant orders" label="mendicant orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="87545" end="87566" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q11325648" start="87582" end="87613" title="Nossa Senhora da Graça incident" label="Nossa Senhora da Graça incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q4274622" start="87646" end="87669" title="Sakai bugyō" label="bugyō official of Sakai"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="87796" end="87801" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968573" start="87860" end="87873" title="Murayama Tōan" label="Murayama Tōan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="87908" end="87915" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q358375" start="88474" end="88482" title="agarwood" label="agarwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058809" start="88632" end="88646" title="Honda Masazumi" label="Honda Masazumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197394" start="89160" end="89174" title="Arima Harunobu" label="Arima Harunobu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="89426" end="89434" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710206" start="89605" end="89625" title="João Rodrigues Tçuzu" label="João Rodrigues Tçuzu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223487" start="89720" end="89745" title="Okamoto Daihachi incident" label="Okamoto Daihachi incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196812" start="89832" end="89836" title="rōjū" label="rōjū"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058809" start="89837" end="89851" title="Honda Masazumi" label="Honda Masazumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q38234" start="90401" end="90409" title="Nagasaki" label="Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q313641" start="90496" end="90513" title="Toyotomi Hideyori" label="Toyotomi Hideyori"/>
<link wikidata="Q187550" start="90544" end="90553" title="Hideyoshi" label="Hideyoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q321242" start="90591" end="90603" title="Osaka Castle" label="Osaka Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045971" start="90770" end="90791" title="Hōkō-ji (Kyoto)" label="Great Buddha of Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412769" start="90879" end="90892" title="Tokugawa clan" label="Tokugawa clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q314464" start="91160" end="91177" title="Tokugawa Hidetada" label="Tokugawa Hidetada"/>
<link wikidata="Q475780" start="91184" end="91205" title="Siege of Osaka" label="siege to Osaka Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q247408" start="91396" end="91405" title="Yodo-dono" label="Yodo-dono"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038629" start="91717" end="91729" title="Sunpu Castle" label="Sunpu Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q313641" start="91741" end="91758" title="Toyotomi Hideyori" label="Toyotomi Hideyori"/>
<link wikidata="Q187550" start="92021" end="92039" title="Toyotomi Hideyoshi" label="Toyotomi Hideyoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147080" start="92096" end="92103" title="Senhime" label="Senhime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521658" start="92340" end="92348" title="Toyotomi clan" label="Toyotomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q289817" start="92543" end="92556" title="Buke shohatto" label="Buke shohatto"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="92730" end="92736" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q41083" start="92740" end="92748" title="syphilis" label="syphilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080343" start="92905" end="92911" title="Gongen" label="Gongen"/>
<link wikidata="Q56247062" start="92938" end="92944" title="Buddhahood" label="buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q524158" start="92995" end="92999" title="kami" label="kami"/>
<link wikidata="Q712162" start="93206" end="93222" title="Kunōzan Tōshō-gū" label="Kunōzan Tōshō-gū"/>
<link wikidata="Q696641" start="93337" end="93351" title="Nikkō Tōshō-gū" label="Nikkō Tōshō-gū"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080343" start="93575" end="93588" title="Gongen" label="gongen-zukuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080343" start="93604" end="93628" title="Gongen" label="&amp;quot;gongen&amp;quot;-style"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="93654" end="93662" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q189588" start="93845" end="93859" title="stomach cancer" label="stomach cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3034531" start="94452" end="94468" title="Takashima Domain" label="Takashima Domain"/>
<link wikidata="" start="95045" end="95060" title=":jp:光成準治" label="Junji Mitsunari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188786" start="95088" end="95105" title="Kyushu University" label="Kyushu University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142657" start="95184" end="95197" title="Mōri Terumoto" label="Mōri Terumoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q914637" start="95291" end="95300" title="Mōri clan" label="Mōri clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275284" start="95986" end="96009" title="Siege of Fushimi Castle" label="Siege of Fushimi Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11459346" start="96490" end="96502" title="Tetsuo Owada" label="Tetsuo Owada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5765247" start="96778" end="96802" title="Himeji Dokkyo University" label="Himeji Dokkyo University"/>
<link wikidata="Q8707" start="96901" end="96918" title="Meiji Restoration" label="Meiji Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q45635" start="97035" end="97046" title="casus belli" label="casus belli"/>
<link wikidata="Q912221" start="97323" end="97335" title="Jōdo Shinshū" label="Jōdo Shinshū"/>
<link wikidata="Q171411" start="97753" end="97765" title="Oda Nobunaga" label="Oda Nobunaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q316952" start="97994" end="98007" title="Hattori Hanzō" label="Hattori Hanzō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210114" start="98766" end="98772" title="Takeda clan" label="Takeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q834364" start="98950" end="98954" title="Hōjō clan" label="Hōjō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764434" start="98960" end="98972" title="Imagawa clan" label="Imagawa clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q314464" start="99239" end="99247" title="Tokugawa Hidetada" label="Hidetada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325288" start="99260" end="99264" title="Oeyo" label="Oeyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521658" start="99368" end="99376" title="Toyotomi clan" label="Toyotomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q313641" start="99513" end="99530" title="Toyotomi Hideyori" label="Toyotomi Hideyori"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814400" start="99652" end="99670" title="Watanabe Moritsuna" label="Watanabe Moritsuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q187550" start="99754" end="99772" title="Toyotomi Hideyoshi" label="Toyotomi Hideyoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q211011" start="99934" end="99942" title="falconry" label="falconry"/>
<link wikidata="Q865913" start="100081" end="100091" title="Edo Castle" label="Edo Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q249608" start="102364" end="102372" title="kenjutsu" label="kenjutsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q492116" start="102401" end="102419" title="Yagyū Shinkage-ryū" label="Yagyū Shinkage-ryū"/>
<link wikidata="Q912208" start="102550" end="102558" title="Jōdo-shū" label="Jōdo-shū"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="102569" end="102577" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141077" start="102625" end="102640" title="Matsudaira clan" label="Matsudaira clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q249139" start="102770" end="102784" title="Zōjō-ji" label="Zōjō-ji Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q215646" start="102788" end="102791" title="Edo (Tokyo)" label="Edo"/>
<link wikidata="Q873645" start="102875" end="102883" title="Chion-in" label="Chion-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315754" start="103099" end="103107" title="Nianfo" label="nembutsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q236242" start="103143" end="103162" title="Amitābha" label="Amida Buddha&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q732344" start="103163" end="103172" title="Pure land" label="Pure Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329565" start="103176" end="103185" title="Sukhavati" label="Sukhavati"/>
<link wikidata="Q56247062" start="103227" end="103237" title="Buddhahood" label="Buddhahood"/>
<link wikidata="Q639625" start="103507" end="103517" title="Rinzai school" label="Rinzai Zen"/>
<link wikidata="Q812767" start="103582" end="103588" title="Shinto" label="Shinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="103643" end="103655" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q558279" start="103683" end="103696" title="Hayashi Razan" label="Hayashi Razan"/>
<link wikidata="Q427945" start="103726" end="103738" title="Christianity in Japan" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q718714" start="103792" end="103802" title="Kirishitan" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="103853" end="103864" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223487" start="104068" end="104093" title="Okamoto Daihachi incident" label="Okamoto Daihachi incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452077" start="104258" end="104275" title="List of Japanese court ranks, positions and hereditary titles" label="Senior First Rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q316802" start="104626" end="104639" title="James Clavell" label="James Clavell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336124" start="104670" end="104676" title="Shōgun (novel)" label="Shōgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778567" start="104693" end="104725" title="Shōgun (1980 miniseries)" label="television miniseries adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q37001" start="104749" end="104763" title="Toshiro Mifune" label="Toshiro Mifune"/>
<link wikidata="Q56276181" start="104785" end="104800" title="Shōgun (2024 TV series)" label="2024 miniseries"/>
<link wikidata="Q705522" start="104811" end="104826" title="Hiroyuki Sanada" label="Hiroyuki Sanada"/>
<link wikidata="Q212128" start="104882" end="104885" title="NHK" label="NHK"/>
<link wikidata="Q629917" start="104896" end="104921" title="Jidaigeki" label="Japanese historical drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q347428" start="105008" end="105021" title="Jun Matsumoto" label="Jun Matsumoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868663" start="105094" end="105106" title="Civilization (series)" label="Civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385" start="105131" end="105145" title="Civilization V" label="Civilization V"/>
<link wikidata="" start="105158" end="105197" title="Age of Empires III: The Asian Dynasties" label="Age of Empires III: The Asian Dynasties"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="105406" end="105419" title="Dinosaur King#Media" label="Dinosaur King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040806" start="105488" end="105512" title="Shitennō (Tokugawa clan)" label="Shitennō (Tokugawa clan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q850273" start="105515" end="105539" title="East Asian age reckoning" label="East Asian age reckoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q22906509" start="105542" end="105558" title="List of Tōshō-gū" label="List of Tōshō-gū"/>
<link wikidata="Q4843956" start="105561" end="105580" title="Testament of Ieyasu" label="Testament of Ieyasu"/>
<link wikidata="Q349345" start="105666" end="105672" title="George Bailey Sansom" label="Sansom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479937" start="105742" end="105767" title="Stanford University Press" label="Stanford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q5660127" start="105772" end="105787" title="Harold Bolitho" label="Bolitho, Harold"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="105998" end="106024" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631715" start="106089" end="106109" title="BBC History (magazine)" label="BBC History Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="106312" end="106336" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31184" wikidata="Q229448" url="?curid=31184" title="Tissue">
<text>Tissue may refer to:

==Biology==
* Tissue (biology), an ensemble of similar (or dissimilar in structure but same in origin) cells that together carry out a specific function
* &quot;Triphosa haesitata&quot;, a species of geometer moth (&quot;tissue moth&quot;) found in North America
* &quot;Triphosa dubitata&quot;, a species of geometer moth (&quot;tissue&quot;) found in Afro-Eurasia

==Paper products==
* Tissue paper, a type of thin, gauzy translucent paper used for wrapping and cushioning items
* Tissue (cloth), a thin, transparent, and lightweight fabric
* Facial tissue, tissue paper used for cleaning the face
* Japanese tissue, tissue paper from Japan made of vegetable fibers
* Toilet paper, tissue paper used for cleaning the anus
* Wrapping tissue, tissue paper used for wrapping and cushioning items

==Other==
* Aerial tissue, an acrobatic art form and one of the circus arts
* &quot;The Tissue (Tomaranai Seishun)&quot;, a 2011 song by Shiritsu Ebisu Chugaku
* &quot;Tissue&quot;, a 2017 poem by Imtiaz Dharker</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q229448" start="0" end="6" title="Tissue" label="Tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q40397" start="36" end="52" title="Tissue (biology)" label="Tissue (biology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13549366" start="183" end="201" title="Triphosa haesitata" label="Triphosa haesitata"/>
<link wikidata="Q254020" start="293" end="310" title="Triphosa dubitata" label="Triphosa dubitata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471060" start="410" end="422" title="Tissue paper" label="Tissue paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q118905760" start="505" end="519" title="Tissue (cloth)" label="Tissue (cloth)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795516" start="567" end="580" title="Facial tissue" label="Facial tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445052" start="624" end="639" title="Japanese tissue" label="Japanese tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5840" start="692" end="704" title="Toilet paper" label="Toilet paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4902975" start="748" end="763" title="Wrapping tissue" label="Wrapping tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6578522" start="830" end="843" title="Aerial tissue" label="Aerial tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769467" start="902" end="932" title="The Tissue (Tomaranai Seishun)" label="The Tissue (Tomaranai Seishun)"/>
<link wikidata="Q539265" start="1015" end="1029" title="Imtiaz Dharker" label="Imtiaz Dharker"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31185" wikidata="Q191118" url="?curid=31185" title="Tonne">
<text>The tonne ( or ; symbol: t) is a unit of mass equal to 1,000 kilograms. It is a non-SI unit accepted for use with SI. It is also referred to as a metric ton in the United States to distinguish it from the non-metric units of the short ton (United States customary units) and the long ton (British imperial units). It is equivalent to approximately 2,204.6 pounds, 1.102 short tons, and 0.984 long tons. The official SI unit is the megagram (Mg), a less common way to express the same amount.

==Symbol and abbreviations==
The BIPM symbol for the tonne is t, adopted at the same time as the unit in 1879. Its use is also official for the metric ton in the United States, having been adopted by the United States National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). It is a symbol, not an abbreviation, and should not be followed by a period. Use of lower case is significant, and use of other letter combinations can lead to ambiguity. For example, T, MT, mT, are the SI symbols for the tesla, megatesla, and millitesla, respectively, while Mt and mt are SI-compatible symbols for the megatonne (one teragram) and millitonne (one kilogram). If describing TNT equivalent units of energy, one megatonne of TNT is equivalent to approximately 4.184 petajoules.

==Origin and spelling==

In English, &quot;tonne&quot; is an established spelling alternative to &quot;metric ton&quot;. In American English and British English, tonne is usually pronounced the same as ton (), but the final &quot;e&quot; can also be pronounced, i.e. &quot;tunnie&quot; (). In Australian English, the common and recommended pronunciation is . In the United States, &quot;metric ton&quot; is the name for this unit used and recommended by NIST; an unqualified mention of a &quot;ton&quot; typically refers to a short ton of 2,000 lb (907.2 kg) and to a lesser extent to a long ton of 2,240 lb (1,016 kg), with the term &quot;tonne&quot; rarely used in speech or writing. Both terms are acceptable in Canadian English.

&quot;Ton&quot; and &quot;tonne&quot; are both derived from a Germanic word in general use in the North Sea area since the Middle Ages ( Old English and Old Frisian &quot;tunne&quot;, Old High German and Medieval Latin , German and French &quot;tonne&quot;) to designate a large cask, or &quot;tun&quot;. A full tun, standing about a metre high, could easily weigh a tonne. See also the common German word :de:Mülltonne (literal translation: garbage drum).

The spelling &quot;tonne&quot; pre-dates the introduction of the SI in 1960; it has been used with this meaning in France since 1842, when there were no metric prefixes for multiples of 106 and above, and is now used as the standard spelling for the metric mass measurement in most English-speaking countries. In the United States, the unit was originally referred to using the French words &quot;millier&quot; or &quot;tonneau&quot;, but these terms are now obsolete. The British imperial and United States customary units are comparable to the &quot;tonne&quot; and the spelling of &quot;ton&quot; in English is the same, though they differ in mass.

==Conversions==
One tonne is equivalent to:
* by definition.
* or 1 megagram (Mg). Megagram is the corresponding official SI unit with the same mass. Mg is distinct from mg, milligram.
*In pounds: Exactly pounds (lb) by definition of the pound, or approximately .
*In short tons: Exactly  short tons (tn), or approximately  tn.
**One short ton is exactly .
*In long tons: Exactly  long tons (LT), or approximately  LT.
**One long ton is exactly .

A tonne is the mass of one cubic metre of pure water at .

==Derived units==
As a non-SI unit, the use of SI metric prefixes with the tonne does not fall within the SI standard. For multiples of the tonne, it is more usual to speak of thousands or millions of tonnes. Kilotonne, megatonne, and gigatonne are more usually used for the energy of nuclear explosions and other events in equivalent mass of TNT, often loosely as approximate figures. When used in this context, there is little need to distinguish between metric and other tons, and the unit is spelled either as &quot;ton&quot; or &quot;tonne&quot; with the relevant prefix attached.


==Alternative usages==
===Metric ton units=== 
A metric ton unit (mtu) can mean within metal trading, particularly within the United States. It traditionally referred to a metric ton of ore containing 1% (i.e. 10 kg) of metal.
The following excerpt from a mining geology textbook describes its usage in the particular case of tungsten:
In the case of uranium, &quot;MTU&quot; is sometimes used in the sense of &quot;metric ton of uranium&quot; ().

===Use of mass as proxy for energy===

The &quot;tonne of trinitrotoluene (TNT)&quot; is used as a proxy for energy, usually of explosions (TNT is a common high explosive). Prefixes are used: kiloton(ne), megaton(ne), gigaton(ne), especially for expressing nuclear weapon yield, based on a specific combustion energy of TNT of about 4.2 MJ/kg (or one thermochemical calorie per milligram). Hence, 1 t TNT = 4.2 GJ, 1 kt TNT = approx. 4.2 TJ, 1 Mt TNT = approx. 4.2 PJ.

The SI unit of energy is the joule. One tonne of TNT is approximately equivalent to 4.2 gigajoules.

In the petroleum industry, the tonne of oil equivalent (toe) is a unit of energy: the amount of energy released by burning one tonne of crude oil, approximately 42 GJ. There are several slightly different definitions. This is ten times as much as a tonne of TNT because atmospheric oxygen is used.

===Unit of force===
Like the gram and the kilogram, the tonne gave rise to a (now obsolete) force unit of the same name, the tonne-force, equivalent to about 9.8 kilonewtons. The unit is also often called simply &quot;tonne&quot; or &quot;metric ton&quot; without identifying it as a unit of force. In contrast to the tonne as a mass unit, the tonne-force is not accepted for use with SI.

==See also==
* Metre–tonne–second system of units
* Orders of magnitude (mass)
* Ton
** Tonnage
** Ton (volume)

== Notes and references ==
;Notes

;Citations
== External links ==
*NIST Special Publication 811, &quot;Guide for the Use of the International System of Units (SI)&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="4" end="9" title="Tonne" label="tonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="25" end="26" title="Tonne" label="t"/>
<link wikidata="Q11570" start="61" end="69" title="kilogram" label="kilogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268848" start="80" end="116" title="Non-SI units mentioned in the SI" label="non-SI unit accepted for use with SI"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="146" end="156" title="Tonne" label="metric ton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11247037" start="205" end="220" title="ton" label="non-metric unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q469356" start="229" end="238" title="short ton" label="short ton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116609" start="240" end="269" title="United States customary units" label="United States customary units"/>
<link wikidata="Q667419" start="279" end="287" title="long ton" label="long ton"/>
<link wikidata="Q641227" start="289" end="311" title="Imperial units" label="British imperial units"/>
<link wikidata="Q100995" start="356" end="361" title="international avoirdupois pound" label="pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="431" end="439" title="Tonne" label="megagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="441" end="443" title="Tonne" label="Mg"/>
<link wikidata="Q229478" start="526" end="530" title="International Bureau of Weights and Measures" label="BIPM"/>
<link wikidata="Q176691" start="711" end="757" title="National Institute of Standards and Technology" label="National Institute of Standards and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q172008" start="835" end="841" title="period (punctuation)" label="period"/>
<link wikidata="Q163343" start="988" end="993" title="Tesla (unit)" label="tesla"/>
<link wikidata="Q193227" start="1156" end="1170" title="TNT equivalent" label="TNT equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q25269" start="1246" end="1255" title="petajoule" label="petajoule"/>
<link wikidata="Q469356" start="1785" end="1794" title="short ton" label="short ton"/>
<link wikidata="Q667419" start="1846" end="1854" title="long ton" label="long ton"/>
<link wikidata="Q44676" start="1974" end="1990" title="Canadian English" label="Canadian English"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="2055" end="2063" title="Germanic languages" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="2091" end="2100" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="2116" end="2127" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="2130" end="2141" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q35133" start="2146" end="2157" title="Old Frisian" label="Old Frisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35218" start="2177" end="2192" title="Old High German" label="Old High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163234" start="2197" end="2211" title="Medieval Latin" label="Medieval Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="2214" end="2220" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="2225" end="2231" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2399" end="2412" title=":de:Mülltonne" label=":de:Mülltonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738285" start="2443" end="2447" title="Drum_(container)" label="drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="2733" end="2740" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="2829" end="2835" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q100995" start="3293" end="3299" title="Pound (mass)" label="pounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q469356" start="3372" end="3381" title="short ton" label="short ton"/>
<link wikidata="Q667419" start="3465" end="3473" title="long ton" label="long ton"/>
<link wikidata="Q25517" start="3579" end="3590" title="cubic metre" label="cubic metre"/>
<link wikidata="Q193227" start="3935" end="3957" title="TNT equivalent" label="equivalent mass of TNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="4550" end="4557" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q170167" start="4706" end="4721" title="trinitrotoluene" label="trinitrotoluene"/>
<link wikidata="Q12870" start="4804" end="4818" title="high explosive" label="high explosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062538" start="4905" end="4925" title="nuclear weapon yield" label="nuclear weapon yield"/>
<link wikidata="Q828402" start="4938" end="4964" title="Fuel value" label="specific combustion energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25269" start="4985" end="4987" title="megajoule" label="MJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q11570" start="4988" end="4990" title="kilogram" label="kg"/>
<link wikidata="Q130964" start="4999" end="5021" title="calorie" label="thermochemical calorie"/>
<link wikidata="Q11570" start="5026" end="5035" title="milligram" label="milligram"/>
<link wikidata="Q25269" start="5059" end="5061" title="Gigajoule" label="GJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q193227" start="5065" end="5067" title="kiloton" label="kt"/>
<link wikidata="Q25269" start="5086" end="5088" title="Terajoule" label="TJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q25269" start="5113" end="5115" title="Petajoule" label="PJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q25269" start="5147" end="5152" title="joule" label="joule"/>
<link wikidata="Q862571" start="5226" end="5244" title="petroleum industry" label="petroleum industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q296936" start="5250" end="5273" title="tonne of oil equivalent" label="tonne of oil equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916980" start="5285" end="5299" title="units of energy" label="unit of energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="5355" end="5364" title="crude oil" label="crude oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q41803" start="5547" end="5551" title="gram" label="gram"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5680" end="5691" title="Newton_(unit)#Kilonewtons" label="kilonewtons"/>
<link wikidata="Q939202" start="5923" end="5957" title="Metre–tonne–second system of units" label="Metre–tonne–second system of units"/>
<link wikidata="Q846759" start="5960" end="5986" title="Orders of magnitude (mass)" label="Orders of magnitude (mass)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11247037" start="5989" end="5992" title="Ton" label="Ton"/>
<link wikidata="Q491774" start="5996" end="6003" title="Tonnage" label="Tonnage"/>
<link wikidata="Q11247037" start="6007" end="6019" title="Ton (volume)" label="Ton (volume)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31187" wikidata="Q751800" url="?curid=31187" title="TrueType">
<text>TrueType is an outline font standard developed by Apple in the late 1980s as a competitor to Adobe&#x27;s Type 1 fonts used in PostScript. It has become the most common format for fonts on the classic Mac OS, macOS, and Microsoft Windows operating systems.

The primary strength of TrueType was originally that it offered font developers a high degree of control over precisely how their fonts are displayed, right down to particular pixels, at various font sizes. With widely varying rendering technologies in use today, pixel-level control is no longer certain in a TrueType font.

==History==

&quot;TrueType&quot; was known during its development stage, first by the codename &quot;Bass&quot; and later on by the codename &quot;Royal&quot;. The system was developed and eventually released as TrueType with the launch of Mac System 7 in May 1991. The initial TrueType outline fonts, four-weight families of &quot;Times Roman&quot;, &quot;Helvetica&quot;, &quot;Courier&quot;, and the pi font &quot;Symbol&quot; replicated the original PostScript fonts of the Apple LaserWriter. Apple also replaced some of their bitmap fonts used by the graphical user-interface of previous Macintosh System versions (including Geneva, Monaco and New York) with scalable TrueType outline-fonts. For compatibility with older systems, Apple shipped these fonts, a TrueType Extension and a TrueType-aware version of Font/DA Mover for System 6. For compatibility with the Laserwriter II, Apple developed fonts like ITC Bookman and ITC Chancery in TrueType format.

All of these fonts could now scale to all sizes on screen and printer, making the Macintosh System 7 the first OS to work without any bitmap fonts. The early TrueType systems — being still part of Apple&#x27;s QuickDraw graphics subsystem — did not render Type 1 fonts on-screen as they do today. At the time, many users had already invested considerable money in Adobe&#x27;s still proprietary Type 1 fonts. As part of Apple&#x27;s tactic of opening the font format versus Adobe&#x27;s desire to keep it closed to all but Adobe licensees, Apple licensed TrueType to Microsoft. When TrueType and the license to Microsoft was announced, John Warnock, co-founder and then CEO of Adobe, gave an impassioned speech in which he claimed Apple and Microsoft were selling snake oil, and then announced that the Type 1 format was open for anyone to use.

Meanwhile, in exchange for TrueType, Apple got a license for TrueImage, a PostScript-compatible page-description language owned by Microsoft that Apple could use in laser printing. This was never actually included in any Apple products when a later deal was struck between Apple and Adobe, where Adobe promised to put a TrueType interpreter in their PostScript printer boards. Apple renewed its agreements with Adobe for the use of PostScript in its printers, resulting in lower royalty payments to Adobe, who was beginning to license printer controllers capable of competing directly with Apple&#x27;s LaserWriter printers.

Part of Adobe&#x27;s response to learning that TrueType was being developed was to create the Adobe Type Manager software to scale Type 1 fonts for anti-aliased output on-screen. Although ATM initially cost money, rather than coming free with the operating system, it became a &quot;de facto&quot; standard for anyone involved in desktop publishing. Anti-aliased rendering, combined with Adobe applications&#x27; ability to zoom in to read small type, and further combined with the now open PostScript Type 1 font format, provided the impetus for an explosion in font design and in desktop publishing of newspapers and magazines.

Apple extended TrueType with the launch of TrueType GX in 1994, with additional tables in the sfnt which formed part of QuickDraw GX. This offered powerful extensions in two main areas. First was font axes (today known as variations), for example allowing fonts to be smoothly adjusted from light to bold or from narrow to extended — competition for Adobe&#x27;s &quot;multiple master&quot; technology. Second was Line Layout Manager, where particular sequences of characters can be coded to flip to different designs in certain circumstances, useful for example to offer ligatures for &quot;fi&quot;, &quot;ffi&quot;, &quot;ct&quot;, etc. while maintaining the backing store of characters necessary for spell checkers and text searching. However, the lack of user-friendly tools for making TrueType GX fonts meant there were no more than a handful of GX fonts.

Much of the technology in TrueType GX, including variations and substitution, lives on as AAT (Apple Advanced Typography) in macOS. Few font-developers outside Apple attempt to make AAT fonts; instead, OpenType has become the dominant sfnt format, and all of the font variation technology is the de facto standard today in OpenType Variations.

===Adoption by Microsoft===
To ensure its wide adoption, Apple licensed TrueType to Microsoft for free. Microsoft added TrueType into the Windows 3.1 operating environment. In partnership with their contractors, Monotype Imaging, Microsoft put a lot of effort into creating a set of high quality TrueType fonts that were compatible with the core fonts being bundled with PostScript equipment at the time. This included the fonts that are standard with Windows to this day: Times New Roman (compatible with Times Roman), Arial (compatible with Helvetica) and Courier New (compatible with Courier). In this context, &quot;compatible&quot; means two things. On an aesthetic level, it means that the fonts are similar in appearance. On a functional level, it means that the fonts have the same character widths. This allows documents which have been typeset in one font to be changed to the other, without reflow.

Microsoft and Monotype technicians used TrueType&#x27;s hinting technology to ensure that these fonts did not suffer from the problem of illegibility at low resolutions, which had previously forced the use of bitmapped fonts for screen display. Subsequent advances in technology have introduced first anti-aliasing, which smooths the edges of fonts at the expense of a slight blurring, and more recently subpixel rendering (the Microsoft implementation goes by the name ClearType), which exploits the pixel structure of LCD based displays to increase the apparent resolution of text. Microsoft has heavily marketed ClearType, and sub-pixel rendering techniques for text are now widely used on all platforms.

Microsoft also developed a &quot;smart font&quot; technology, named &quot;TrueType Open&quot; in 1994, later renamed to OpenType in 1996 when it merged support of the Adobe Type 1 glyph outlines. Opentype now contains all of the same functionality of Apple TrueType and Apple TrueType GX.

==Platform support==
===Macintosh and Microsoft Windows===
TrueType has long been the most common format for fonts on classic Mac OS, Mac OS X, and Microsoft Windows, although Mac OS X and Microsoft Windows also include native support for Adobe&#x27;s Type 1 format and the OpenType extension to TrueType (since Mac OS X 10.0 and Windows 2000). While some fonts provided with the new operating systems are now in the OpenType format, most free or inexpensive third-party fonts use plain TrueType.

Increasing resolutions and new approaches to screen rendering have reduced the requirement of extensive TrueType hinting. Apple&#x27;s rendering approach on macOS ignores almost all the hints in a TrueType font, while Microsoft&#x27;s ClearType ignores many hints, and according to Microsoft, works best with &quot;lightly hinted&quot; fonts.

===Linux and other platforms===
The FreeType project of David Turner has created an independent implementation of the TrueType standard (as well as other font standards in FreeType 2). FreeType is included in many Linux distributions.

Until May 2010, there were potential patent infringements in FreeType 1 because parts of the TrueType hinting virtual machine were patented by Apple, a fact not mentioned in the TrueType standards. (Patent holders who contribute to standards published by a major standards body such as ISO are required to disclose the scope of their patents, but TrueType was not such a standard.) FreeType 2 included an optional automatic hinter to avoid the patented technology, but these patents have now expired so FreeType 2.4 now enables these features by default.

==Outlines==

The outlines of the characters (or glyphs) in TrueType fonts are made of straight line segments and quadratic Bézier curves. These curves are mathematically simpler and faster to process than cubic Bézier curves, which are used both in the PostScript-centered world of graphic design and in Type 1 fonts. However, most shapes require more points to describe with quadratic curves than cubics. This difference also means that it is not possible to convert Type 1 losslessly to the TrueType format, although in practice it is often possible to do a lossless conversion from TrueType to Type 1.

== Hinting language ==
TrueType systems include a virtual machine that executes programs inside the font, processing the &quot;hints&quot; of the glyphs, in TrueType called “instructions”. These distort the control points which define the outline, with the intention that the rasterizer produce fewer undesirable features on the glyph. Each glyph&#x27;s instruction set takes account of the size (in pixels) at which the glyph is to be displayed, as well as other less important factors of the display environment.

Although incapable of receiving input and producing output as normally understood in programming, the TrueType instruction language does offer the other prerequisites of programming languages: conditional branching (IF statements), looping an arbitrary number of times (FOR- and WHILE-type statements), variables (although these are simply numbered slots in an area of memory reserved by the font), and encapsulation of code into functions. Special instructions called delta instructions are the lowest level control, moving a control point at just one pixel size.

The hallmark of effective TrueType glyph programming techniques is that it does as much as possible using variables defined just once in the whole font (e.g., stem widths, cap height, x-height). This means avoiding delta instructions as much as possible. This helps the font developer to make major changes (e.g., the point at which the entire font&#x27;s main stems jump from 1 to 2 pixels wide) most of the way through development.

Creating a very well-instructed TrueType font remains a significant amount of work, despite the increased user-friendliness of programs for adding instructions to fonts. Many TrueType fonts therefore have only rudimentary instructions, or have them automatically applied by the font editor, with results of various quality.

== Embedding protection ==
The TrueType format allows for the most basic type of digital rights management – an &quot;embeddable flag field&quot; that specifies whether the author allows embedding of the font file into things like PDF files and websites. Anyone with access to the font file can directly modify this field, and simple tools exist to facilitate modifying it (obviously, modifying this field does not modify the font license and does not give extra legal rights). These tools have been the subject of controversy over potential copyright issues.

== Emoji ==
Apple has implemented a proprietary extension to allow color .ttf files for its emoji font Apple Color Emoji.

== File formats ==

=== Basic ===
A basic font is composed of multiple tables specified in its header. A table name can have up to 4 letters.

A codice_1 extension indicates a regular TrueType font or an OpenType font with TrueType outlines. Windows end user defined character editor (EUDCEDIT.EXE) creates TrueType font with name EUDC.TTE. An OpenType font with PostScript outlines must have an .otf extension. In principle an OpenType font with TrueType outlines may have an .otf extension, but this has rarely been done in practice.

In classic Mac OS and macOS, OpenType is one of several formats referred to as data-fork fonts, as they lack the classic Mac resource fork.

=== Collection ===
TrueType Collection (TTC) is an extension of TrueType format that allows combining multiple fonts into a single file, creating substantial space savings for a collection of fonts with many glyphs in common. They were first available in Chinese, Japanese, and Korean versions of Windows, and supported for all regions in Windows 2000 and later. Classic Mac OS included support of TTC starting with Mac OS 8.5.

A TrueType Collection file begins with a codice_2 table that allows access to the fonts within the collection by pointing to individual headers for each included font. The fonts within a collection share the same glyph-outline table, though each font can refer to subsets within those outlines in its own manner, through its codice_3, codice_4 and codice_5 tables. Collection files bear a codice_6 filename extension. In classic Mac OS and macOS, TTC has file type codice_2.

=== Suitcase ===
The suitcase format for TrueType is used on classic Mac OS and macOS. It adds additional Apple-specific information.

Like TTC, it can handle multiple fonts within a single file. But unlike TTC, those fonts need not be within the same family.

Suitcases come in resource-fork and data-fork formats. The resource-fork version was the original suitcase format. Data-fork-only suitcases, which place the resource fork contents into the data fork, were first supported in macOS. A suitcase packed into the data-fork-only format has the extension &quot;dfont&quot;.

=== PostScript ===
In the PostScript language, TrueType outlines are handled with a PostScript wrapper as Type 42 for name-keyed or Type 11 for CID-keyed fonts.

==See also==
* Apple Type Services for Unicode Imaging (New Macintosh multilingual text rendering engine)
* ClearType
* Core Text
* Datafork TrueType
* Embedded TrueType font
* FreeType
* GNU FreeFont
* Graphite (SIL)
* Nonzero-rule
* Online office suite
* Open-source Unicode typefaces
* OpenType
* Pango (Open source multilingual text rendering engine)
* Typeface
* Typography
* Unicode, UTF-8, Unicode fonts.
* Uniscribe (Windows multilingual text rendering engine)
* Web Open Font Format
* WorldScript (Old Macintosh multilingual text rendering engine)

==References==
==External links==
* TrueType specification (Apple)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q751800" start="0" end="8" title="TrueType" label="TrueType"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15" end="27" title="Computer font#Outline fonts" label="outline font"/>
<link wikidata="Q369577" start="28" end="36" title="standardization" label="standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="50" end="55" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q11463" start="93" end="98" title="Adobe Inc." label="Adobe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="106" end="118" title="PostScript fonts#Type 1" label="Type 1 fonts"/>
<link wikidata="Q218170" start="127" end="137" title="PostScript" label="PostScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q13522376" start="193" end="207" title="classic Mac OS" label="classic Mac OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="209" end="214" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="220" end="237" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868296" start="322" end="326" title="font" label="font"/>
<link wikidata="Q355198" start="434" end="439" title="pixel" label="pixel"/>
<link wikidata="Q176953" start="485" end="494" title="Rendering (computer graphics)" label="rendering"/>
<link wikidata="Q420384" start="829" end="837" title="System 7" label="System 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q213048" start="917" end="928" title="Times Roman" label="Times Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q504745" start="942" end="951" title="Helvetica" label="Helvetica"/>
<link wikidata="Q515301" start="965" end="972" title="Courier (typeface)" label="Courier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147633" start="1116" end="1127" title="bitmap font" label="bitmap font"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421927" start="1358" end="1367" title="Extension (Mac OS)" label="Extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q2921011" start="1400" end="1413" title="Typography of Apple Inc." label="Font/DA Mover"/>
<link wikidata="Q420785" start="1418" end="1426" title="System 6" label="System 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="2115" end="2124" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344392" start="2184" end="2196" title="John Warnock" label="John Warnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q301502" start="2312" end="2321" title="snake oil" label="snake oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847320" start="2455" end="2464" title="TrueImage" label="TrueImage"/>
<link wikidata="Q218170" start="2468" end="2478" title="PostScript" label="PostScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q67972035" start="2559" end="2573" title="laser printing" label="laser printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11463" start="3028" end="3033" title="Adobe Systems" label="Adobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q360450" start="3114" end="3132" title="Adobe Type Manager" label="Adobe Type Manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q127386817" start="3168" end="3180" title="spatial anti-aliasing" label="anti-aliased"/>
<link wikidata="Q188610" start="3350" end="3368" title="desktop publishing" label="desktop publishing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3694" end="3705" title="QuickDraw GX#TrueType GX" label="TrueType GX"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049344" start="3745" end="3749" title="SFNT" label="sfnt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522362" start="3771" end="3783" title="QuickDraw GX" label="QuickDraw GX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952448" start="4020" end="4035" title="multiple master fonts" label="multiple master"/>
<link wikidata="Q188725" start="4223" end="4232" title="Typographic ligature" label="ligatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q164274" start="4355" end="4368" title="spell checker" label="spell checker"/>
<link wikidata="Q621218" start="4609" end="4634" title="Apple Advanced Typography" label="Apple Advanced Typography"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="4639" end="4644" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q260180" start="4716" end="4724" title="OpenType" label="OpenType"/>
<link wikidata="Q495432" start="4997" end="5008" title="Windows 3.1" label="Windows 3.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583606" start="5071" end="5087" title="Monotype Imaging" label="Monotype Imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q213048" start="5332" end="5347" title="Times New Roman" label="Times New Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q653123" start="5379" end="5384" title="Arial" label="Arial"/>
<link wikidata="Q515301" start="5417" end="5428" title="Courier New" label="Courier New"/>
<link wikidata="Q837721" start="5705" end="5712" title="typesetting" label="typeset"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307372" start="5761" end="5767" title="Reflowable document" label="reflow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493777" start="5826" end="5833" title="Font hinting" label="hinting"/>
<link wikidata="Q452912" start="6174" end="6192" title="subpixel rendering" label="subpixel rendering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073878" start="6240" end="6249" title="ClearType" label="ClearType"/>
<link wikidata="Q83341" start="6290" end="6293" title="LCD" label="LCD"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6512" end="6522" title="smart font" label="smart font"/>
<link wikidata="Q260180" start="6599" end="6607" title="OpenType" label="OpenType"/>
<link wikidata="Q11463" start="6646" end="6651" title="Adobe Inc." label="Adobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q13522376" start="6887" end="6901" title="classic Mac OS" label="classic Mac OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="6903" end="6911" title="macOS" label="Mac OS X"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="6917" end="6934" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q260180" start="7043" end="7051" title="OpenType" label="OpenType"/>
<link wikidata="Q912481" start="7081" end="7094" title="Mac OS X 10.0" label="Mac OS X 10.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q483881" start="7099" end="7111" title="Windows 2000" label="Windows 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326617" start="7647" end="7655" title="FreeType" label="FreeType"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="7825" end="7830" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493777" start="7949" end="7956" title="Font hinting" label="hinting"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="7978" end="7984" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="8133" end="8136" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="ISO"/>
<link wikidata="Q36975" start="8452" end="8457" title="glyph" label="glyph"/>
<link wikidata="Q214728" start="8527" end="8539" title="Bézier curve" label="Bézier curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q218170" start="8657" end="8667" title="PostScript" label="PostScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q185925" start="8686" end="8700" title="graphic design" label="graphic design"/>
<link wikidata="Q192726" start="9060" end="9075" title="virtual machine" label="virtual machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493777" start="9137" end="9142" title="Font hinting" label="hints"/>
<link wikidata="Q36975" start="9156" end="9161" title="glyph" label="glyph"/>
<link wikidata="Q813911" start="9719" end="9737" title="conditional branch" label="conditional branch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9758" end="9765" title="Control flow#Loops" label="looping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104234" start="10264" end="10274" title="cap height" label="cap height"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916348" start="10276" end="10284" title="x-height" label="x-height"/>
<link wikidata="Q192532" start="10933" end="10958" title="digital rights management" label="digital rights management"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374485" start="10981" end="10991" title="flag field" label="flag field"/>
<link wikidata="Q42332" start="11083" end="11086" title="Portable Document Format" label="PDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049294" start="11505" end="11510" title="emoji" label="emoji"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781145" start="11516" end="11533" title="Apple Color Emoji" label="Apple Color Emoji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343889" start="12630" end="12638" title="Mac OS 8" label="Mac OS 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q3933446" start="13398" end="13425" title="Resource fork" label="resource-fork and data-fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465205" start="13684" end="13689" title="dfont" label="dfont"/>
<link wikidata="Q218170" start="13724" end="13734" title="PostScript" label="PostScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q785247" start="13842" end="13851" title="CID fonts" label="CID-keyed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781247" start="13875" end="13914" title="Apple Type Services for Unicode Imaging" label="Apple Type Services for Unicode Imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073878" start="13968" end="13977" title="ClearType" label="ClearType"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170185" start="13980" end="13989" title="Core Text" label="Core Text"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465205" start="13992" end="14009" title="Datafork TrueType" label="Datafork TrueType"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003146" start="14012" end="14020" title="Font embedding" label="Embedded"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326617" start="14037" end="14045" title="FreeType" label="FreeType"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093285" start="14048" end="14060" title="GNU FreeFont" label="GNU FreeFont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027984" start="14063" end="14077" title="Graphite (SIL)" label="Graphite (SIL)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049658" start="14080" end="14092" title="Nonzero-rule" label="Nonzero-rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q749298" start="14095" end="14114" title="Online office suite" label="Online office suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001385" start="14117" end="14146" title="Open-source Unicode typefaces" label="Open-source Unicode typefaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q260180" start="14149" end="14157" title="OpenType" label="OpenType"/>
<link wikidata="Q591485" start="14160" end="14165" title="Pango" label="Pango"/>
<link wikidata="Q17451" start="14217" end="14225" title="Typeface" label="Typeface"/>
<link wikidata="Q159964" start="14228" end="14238" title="Typography" label="Typography"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="14241" end="14248" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q193537" start="14250" end="14255" title="UTF-8" label="UTF-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q4526631" start="14257" end="14269" title="Unicode font" label="Unicode font"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144637" start="14274" end="14283" title="Uniscribe" label="Uniscribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q918221" start="14331" end="14351" title="Web Open Font Format" label="Web Open Font Format"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115327" start="14354" end="14365" title="WorldScript" label="WorldScript"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31188" wikidata="Q835034" url="?curid=31188" title="Triassic–Jurassic extinction event">
<text>The Triassic–Jurassic (Tr-J) extinction event (TJME), often called the end-Triassic extinction, marks the boundary between the Triassic and Jurassic periods, . It represents one of six major extinction events during the Phanerozoic, profoundly affecting life on land and in the oceans. 

In the seas, about 23–34% of marine genera disappeared; corals, bivalves, brachiopods, bryozoans, and radiolarians suffered severe losses of diversity and conodonts were completely wiped out, while marine vertebrates, gastropods, and benthic foraminifera were relatively unaffected. On land, all archosauromorph reptiles other than crocodylomorphs, dinosaurs, and pterosaurs became extinct. Crocodylomorphs, dinosaurs, pterosaurs, and mammals were left largely untouched, allowing them to become the dominant land animals for the next 135 million years. Plants were likewise significantly affected by the crisis, with floral communities undergoing radical ecological restructuring across the extinction event.

The cause of the TJME is generally considered to have been extensive volcanic eruptions in the Central Atlantic Magmatic Province (CAMP), a large igneous province whose emplacement released large amounts of carbon dioxide into the Earth&#x27;s atmosphere, causing profound global warming and ocean acidification, and discharged immense quantities of toxic mercury into the environment. Older hypotheses have proposed that gradual changes in climate and sea levels may have been the culprit, or perhaps one or more asteroid strikes.

== Research history ==
The earliest research on the TJME was conducted in the mid-20th century, when events in earth history where widely assumed to have been gradual, a paradigm known as uniformitarianism, and comparatively rapid cataclysms as causes of extinction events were dismissed as catastrophism, which had been associated with biblical creationism. Consequently, most researchers believed gradual environmental changes were the best explanation of the extinction; prominent vertebrate palaeontologist Edwin H. Colbert suggested gradual changes in the seasonality of rainfall and eustatic sea level rise that decreased the available land area above sea level were the culprit. In the 1980s, Jack Sepkoski identified the Triassic-Jurassic boundary drop in biodiversity as one of the &quot;Big 5&quot; mass extinction events. After the discovery that the Cretaceous-Palaeogene extinction event was caused by an impact event, the TJME had also been suggested to have been caused by such an impact in the 1980s and 1990s. The theory that the TJME was caused by massive volcanism in the Central Atlantic Magmatic Province (CAMP) first emerged in the 1990s after similar research examining the Permian-Triassic extinction event found it to have been caused by volcanic activity and the emplacement of the CAMP was found to have occurred around the time of the Triassic-Jurassic transition. Despite some early objections, this paradigm remains the scientific consensus in the present day.

==Effects==
=== Marine invertebrates ===
The Triassic-Jurassic extinction completed the transition from the Palaeozoic evolutionary fauna to the Modern evolutionary fauna that continues to dominate the oceans in the present, a change that began in the aftermath of the end-Guadalupian extinction and continued following the Permian-Triassic extinction event (PTME). Between 23% and 34.1% of marine genera went extinct. Plankton diversity dropped suddenly, but it was relatively mildly impacted at the Triassic-Jurassic boundary, although extinction rates among radiolarians rose significantly. Early Hettangian radiolarian communities became depauperate as a result of the TJME and consisted mainly of spumellarians and entactiniids. Benthic foraminifera suffered relatively minor losses of diversity. Some opportunistic foraminifera such as &quot;Triasina hantkeni&quot; increased in abundance as they thrived in oxygen-depleted waters. Ammonites were affected substantially by the Triassic-Jurassic extinction and were nearly wiped out. Ceratitidans, the most prominent group of ammonites in the Triassic, became extinct at the end of the Rhaetian after having their diversity reduced significantly in the Norian, while other ammonite groups such as the Ammonitina, Lytoceratina, and Phylloceratina diversified from the Early Jurassic onward. Bivalves suffered heavy losses, although the extinction was highly selective, with some bivalve clades escaping substantial diversity losses. The Lilliput effect, a term coined to describe a phenomenon wherein organisms shrink in size following a mass extinction, affected megalodontid bivalves, whereas file shell bivalves experienced the Brobdingnag effect, the reverse of the Lilliput effect. There is some evidence of a bivalve cosmopolitanism event during the mass extinction. Additionally, following the TJME, mobile bivalve taxa outnumbered stationary bivalve taxa. Gastropod diversity was barely affected at the Triassic-Jurassic boundary, although gastropods gradually suffered numerous losses over the late Norian and Rhaetian, during the leadup to the TJME. Brachiopods declined in diversity at the end of the Triassic before rediversifying in the Sinemurian and Pliensbachian; the dielasmatoid, athyridoid, and spondylospiroid brachiopods experienced particularly severe declines. Bryozoans, particularly taxa that lived in offshore settings, had already been in decline since the Norian and suffered further losses in the TJME. Ostracods also suffered significant losses, although opportunistic ostracod forms thrived in the eutrophic conditions of the TJME. Conulariids seemingly completely died out at the end of the Triassic. Around 96% of coral genera died out, with integrated corals being especially devastated. Corals practically disappeared from the Tethys Ocean at the end of the Triassic except for its northernmost reaches, resulting in an early Hettangian &quot;coral gap&quot;. There is good evidence for a collapse in the reef community, which was likely driven by ocean acidification resulting from supplied to the atmosphere by the CAMP eruptions.

Most evidence points to a relatively fast recovery from the mass extinction. Benthic ecosystems recovered far more rapidly after the TJME than they did after the PTME. British Early Jurassic benthic marine environments display a relatively rapid recovery that began almost immediately after the end of the mass extinction despite numerous relapses into anoxic conditions during the earliest Jurassic. In the Neuquén Basin, recovery began in the late early Hettangian and lasted until a new biodiversity equilibrium in the late Hettangian. Also despite recurrent anoxic episodes, large bivalves began to reappear shortly after the extinction event. Siliceous sponges dominated the immediate aftermath interval thanks to the enormous influx of silica into the oceans, a consequence of the aerial extent of the CAMP basalts that were exposed to surficial weathering processes. In some regions, recovery was slow; in the northern Tethys, carbonate platforms in the TJME&#x27;s aftermath became dominated by microbial carbonate producers and r-selected calcitic taxa such as &quot;Thaumatoporella parvovesiculifera&quot;, while dasycladacean algae did not reappear until the Sinemurian stage.

=== Marine vertebrates ===

Fish did not suffer a mass extinction at the end of the Triassic. The Late Triassic in general did experience a gradual drop in actinopterygiian diversity after an evolutionary explosion in the Middle Triassic. Though this may have been due to falling sea levels or the Carnian Pluvial Event, it may instead be a result of sampling bias considering that Middle Triassic fish have been more extensively studied than Late Triassic fish. Despite the apparent drop in diversity, neopterygiians (which include most modern bony fish) suffered less than more &quot;primitive&quot; actinopterygiians, indicating a biological turnover where modern groups of fish started to supplant earlier groups. Pycnodontiform fish were insignificantly affected. Conodonts, which were prominent index fossils throughout the Paleozoic and Triassic, finally became extinct at the T-J boundary following declining diversity.

Like fish, marine reptiles experienced a substantial drop in diversity between the Middle Triassic and the Jurassic. However, their extinction rate at the Triassic–Jurassic boundary was not elevated. The highest extinction rates experienced by Mesozoic marine reptiles actually occurred at the end of the Ladinian stage, which corresponds to the end of the Middle Triassic. The only marine reptile families which became extinct at or slightly before the Triassic–Jurassic boundary were the placochelyids (the last family of placodonts), making plesiosaurs the only surviving sauropterygians, and giant ichthyosaurs such as shastasaurids. Some authors have argued that the end of the Triassic acted as a genetic &quot;bottleneck&quot; for ichthyosaurs, which never regained the level of anatomical diversity and disparity which they possessed during the Triassic, although analysis of ichthyosaurian and eosauropterygian disparity across the Triassic-Jurassic transition has shown no evidence for such a bottleneck. The high diversity of rhomaelosaurids immediately after the TJME points to a gradual extinction of marine reptiles rather than an abrupt one.

=== Terrestrial animals ===

Terrestrial fauna was affected by the TJME much more severely than marine fauna. One of the earliest pieces of evidence for a Late Triassic extinction was a major turnover in terrestrial tetrapods such as amphibians, reptiles, and synapsids. Edwin H. Colbert drew parallels between the system of extinction and adaptation between the Triassic–Jurassic and Cretaceous–Paleogene boundaries. He recognized how dinosaurs, lepidosaurs (lizards and their relatives), and crocodyliforms (crocodilians and their relatives) filled the niches of more ancient groups of amphibians and reptiles which were extinct by the start of the Jurassic. Olsen (1987) estimated that 42% of all terrestrial tetrapods became extinct at the end of the Triassic, based on his studies of faunal changes in the Newark Supergroup of eastern North America. In contrast to the end-Cretaceous extinction, the TJME substantially affected freshwater ecosystems, and it further differed from the former in that body size did not affect extinction risk. More modern studies have debated whether the turnover in Triassic tetrapods was abrupt at the end of the Triassic, or instead more gradual.

During the Triassic, amphibians were mainly represented by large, crocodile-like members of the order Temnospondyli. Although the earliest lissamphibians (modern amphibians like frogs and salamanders) did appear during the Triassic, they would become more common in the Jurassic while the temnospondyls diminished in diversity past the Triassic–Jurassic boundary. Although the decline of temnospondyls did send shockwaves through freshwater ecosystems, it was probably not as abrupt as some authors have suggested. Brachyopoids, for example, survived until the Cretaceous according to new discoveries in the 1990s. Several temnospondyl groups did become extinct near the end of the Triassic despite earlier abundance, but it is uncertain how close their extinctions were to the end of the Triassic. The last known metoposaurids (&quot;Apachesaurus&quot;) were from the Redonda Formation, which may have been early Rhaetian or late Norian. &quot;Gerrothorax&quot;, the last known plagiosaurid, has been found in rocks which are probably (but not certainly) Rhaetian, while a capitosaur humerus was found in Rhaetian-age deposits in 2018. Therefore, plagiosaurids and capitosaurs were likely victims of an extinction at the very end of the Triassic, while most other temnospondyls were already extinct.

Terrestrial reptile faunas were dominated by archosauromorphs during the Triassic, particularly phytosaurs and members of Pseudosuchia (the reptile lineage which leads to modern crocodilians). In the Early Jurassic and onwards, dinosaurs and pterosaurs became the most common land reptiles, while small reptiles were mostly represented by lepidosauromorphs (such as lizards and tuatara relatives). Among pseudosuchians, only small crocodylomorphs did not become extinct by the end of the Triassic, with both dominant herbivorous subgroups (such as aetosaurs) and carnivorous ones (rauisuchids) having died out. Phytosaurs, drepanosaurs, trilophosaurids, tanystropheids, and procolophonids, which were other common reptiles in the Late Triassic, had also become extinct by the start of the Jurassic. However, pinpointing the extinction of these different land reptile groups is difficult, as the last stage of the Triassic, the Rhaetian, and the first stage of the Jurassic, the Hettangian, each have few records of large land animals; some paleontologists have considered only phytosaurs and procolophonids to have become extinct at the Triassic–Jurassic boundary, with other groups having become extinct earlier. However, it is likely that many other groups survived up until the boundary according to British fissure deposits from the Rhaetian. Aetosaurs, kuehneosaurids, drepanosaurs, thecodontosaurids, &quot;saltoposuchids&quot; (like &quot;Terrestrisuchus&quot;), trilophosaurids, and various non-crocodylomorph pseudosuchians are all examples of Rhaetian reptiles which may have become extinct at the Triassic–Jurassic boundary.

In the TJME&#x27;s aftermath, dinosaurs experienced a major radiation, filling some of the niches vacated by the victims of the extinction. Crocodylomorphs likewise underwent a very rapid and major adaptive radiation. Surviving non-mammalian synapsid clades similarly played a role in the post-TJME adaptive radiation during the Early Jurassic.

Herbivorous insects were minimally affected by the TJME; evidence from the Sichuan Basin shows they were overall able to quickly adapt to the floristic turnover by exploiting newly abundant plants. Odonates suffered highly selective losses, and their morphospace was heavily restructured as a result.

===Terrestrial plants===
The extinction event marks a floral turnover as well, with estimates of the percentage of Rhaetian pre-extinction plants being lost ranging from 17% to 73%. Though spore turnovers are observed across the Triassic-Jurassic boundary, the abruptness of this transition and the relative abundances of given spore types both before and after the boundary are highly variable from one region to another, pointing to a global ecological restructuring rather than a mass extinction of plants. Overall, plants suffered minor diversity losses on a global scale as a result of the extinction, but species turnover rates were high and substantial changes occurred in terms of relative abundance and growth distribution among taxa. Evidence from Central Europe suggests that rather than a sharp, very rapid decline followed by an adaptive radiation, a more gradual turnover in both fossil plants and spores with several intermediate stages is observed over the course of the extinction event. Extinction of plant species can in part be explained by the suspected increased carbon dioxide in the atmosphere as a result of CAMP volcanic activity, which would have created photoinhibition and decreased transpiration levels among species with low photosynthetic plasticity, such as the broad leaved Ginkgoales which declined to near extinction across the Tr–J boundary.

Ferns and other species with dissected leaves displayed greater adaptability to atmosphere conditions of the extinction event, and in some instances were able to proliferate across the boundary and into the Jurassic. The species &quot;Lepidopteris ottonis&quot; evolved a reliance on asexual reproduction amidst the environmental chaos of the TJME. In the Jiyuan Basin of North China, &quot;Classopolis&quot; content increased drastically in concordance with warming, drying, wildfire activity, enrichments in isotopically light carbon, and an overall reduction in floral diversity. In the Sichuan Basin, relatively cool mixed forests in the late Rhaetian were replaced by hot, arid fernlands during the Triassic–Jurassic transition, which in turn later gave way to a cheirolepid-dominated flora in the Hettangian and Sinemurian. The abundance of ferns in China that were resistant to high levels of aridity increased significantly across the Triassic–Jurassic boundary, though ferns better adapted for moist, humid environments declined, indicating that plants experienced major environmental stress, albeit not an outright mass extinction. In some regions, however, major floral extinctions did occur, with some researchers challenging the hypothesis of there being no significant floral mass extinction on this basis. In the Newark Supergroup of the United States East Coast, about 60% of the diverse monosaccate and bisaccate pollen assemblages disappear at the Tr–J boundary, indicating a major extinction of plant genera. Early Jurassic pollen assemblages are dominated by &quot;Corollina&quot;, a new genus that took advantage of the empty niches left by the extinction. The site of St. Audrie&#x27;s Bay displays a shift from diverse gymnosperm-dominated forests to Cheirolepidiaceae-dominated monocultures. The Danish Basin saw 34% of its Rhaetian spore-pollen assemblage, including &quot;Cingulizonates rhaeticus&quot;, &quot;Limbosporites lundbladiae&quot;, &quot;Polypodiisporites polymicroforatus&quot;, and &quot;Ricciisporites tuberculatus&quot;, disappear, with the post-extinction plant community being dominated by pinacean conifers such as &quot;Pinuspollenites minimus&quot; and tree ferns such as &quot;Deltoidospora&quot;, with ginkgos, cycads, cypresses, and corystospermous seed ferns also represented. Along the margins of the European Epicontinental Sea and the European shores of the Tethys, coastal and near-coastal mires fell victim to an abrupt sea level rise. These mires were replaced by a pioneering opportunistic flora after an abrupt sea level fall, although its heyday was short lived and it died out shortly after its rise. The opportunists that established themselves along the Tethyan coastline were primarily spore-producers. In the Eiberg Basin of the Northern Calcareous Alps, there was a very rapid palynomorph turnover. The palynological and palaeobotanical succession in Queensland shows a &quot;Classopolis&quot; bloom after the TJME. Polyploidy may have been an important factor that mitigated a conifer species&#x27; risk of going extinct.

== Possible causes ==
=== Central Atlantic Magmatic Province ===

The leading and best evidenced explanation for the TJME is massive volcanic eruptions, specifically from the Central Atlantic Magmatic Province (CAMP), the largest known large igneous province by area, and one of the most voluminous, with its flood basalts extending across parts of southwestern Europe, northwestern Africa, northeastern South America, and southeastern North America. The coincidence and synchrony of CAMP activity and the TJME is indicated by uranium-lead dating, argon-argon dating, and palaeomagnetism. The isotopic composition of fossil soils and marine sediments near the boundary between the Late Triassic and Early Jurassic has been tied to a large negative δ13C excursion, with values as low as -2.8%. Carbon isotopes of hydrocarbons (&quot;n&quot;-alkanes) derived from leaf wax and lignin, and total organic carbon from two sections of lake sediments interbedded with the CAMP in eastern North America have shown carbon isotope excursions similar to those found in the mostly marine St. Audrie&#x27;s Bay section, Somerset, England; the correlation suggests that the TJME began at the same time in marine and terrestrial environments, slightly before the oldest basalts in eastern North America but simultaneous with the eruption of the oldest flows in Morocco, with both a critical greenhouse and a marine biocalcification crisis. Furthermore, chemostratigraphic analysis in the Junggar Basin has shown that the negative δ13C excursions associated with CAMP volcanism corresponded in time to biotic turnovers in the palynomorph record, strongly suggesting a causal relationship between the two. Contemporaneous CAMP eruptions, mass extinction, and the carbon isotopic excursions are shown in the same places, making the case for a volcanic cause of a mass extinction. The observed negative carbon isotope excursion is lower in some sites that correspond to what was then eastern Panthalassa because of the extreme aridity of western Pangaea limiting weathering and erosion there. The negative δ13C excursion associated with CAMP volcanism lasted for approximately 20,000 to 40,000 years, or about one or two of Earth&#x27;s axial precession cycles, although the carbon cycle was so disrupted that it did not stabilise until the Sinemurian. Mercury anomalies from deposits in various parts of the world have further bolstered the volcanic cause hypothesis, as have anomalies from various platinum-group elements. Nickel enrichments are also observed at the Triassic-Jurassic boundary coevally with light carbon enrichments, providing yet more evidence of massive volcanism.

Some scientists initially rejected the volcanic eruption theory because the Newark Supergroup, a section of rock in eastern North America that records the Triassic–Jurassic boundary, contains no ash-fall horizons and because its oldest basalt flows were estimated to lie around 10 m above the transition zone, which they estimated to have occurred 610 kyr after the TJME. Also among their objections was that the Triassic-Jurassic boundary was poorly defined and the CAMP eruptions poorly constrained temporally. However, updated dating protocol and wider sampling has confirmed that the CAMP eruptions started in Morocco only a few thousand years before the extinction, preceding their onset in Nova Scotia and New Jersey, and that they continued in several more pulses for the next 600,000 years. Volcanic global warming has also been criticised as an explanation because some estimates have found that the amount of carbon dioxide emitted was only around 250 ppm, not enough to generate a mass extinction. In addition, at some sites, changes in carbon isotope ratios have been attributed to diagenesis and not any primary environmental changes.

==== Global warming ====
The flood basalts of the CAMP released gigantic quantities of carbon dioxide, a potent greenhouse gas causing intense global warming. Before the TJME, carbon dioxide levels were around 1,000 ppm as measured by the stomatal index of &quot;Lepidopteris ottonis&quot;, but this quantity jumped to 1,300 ppm at the onset of the extinction event. During the TJME, carbon dioxide concentrations increased fourfold. The record of CAMP degassing shows several distinct pulses of carbon dioxide immediately following each major pulse of magmatism, at least two of which amount to a doubling of atmospheric CO2. Carbon dioxide was emitted quickly and in enormous quantities compared to other periods of Earth&#x27;s history, rate of carbon dioxide emissions was one of the most meteoric rises in carbon dioxide levels in Earth&#x27;s entire history. It is estimated that a single volcanic pulse from the large igneous province would have emitted an amount of carbon dioxide roughly equivalent to projected anthropogenic carbon dioxide emissions for the 21st century. In addition, the flood basalts intruded through sediments that were rich in organic matter and combusted it, as evidenced by low Δ199Hg values showing elevated levels of organic matter-derived mercury in the environment. The degassing of volatiles resulting from volcanic intrusions into organic-rich sediments further enhanced the volcanic warming of the climate. Thermogenic carbon release through such contact metamorphism of carbon-rich deposits has been found to be a sensible hypothesis providing a coherent explanation for the magnitude of the negative carbon isotope excursions at the terminus of the Triassic. Global temperatures rose sharply by 3 to 4 °C. In some regions, the temperature rise was as great as 10 °C. Kaolinite-dominated clay mineral spectra reflect the extremely hot and humid greenhouse conditions engendered by the CAMP. Soil erosion occurred as the hydrological cycle was accelerated by the extreme global heat.

The catastrophic dissociation of gas hydrates as a positive feedback resulting from warming, which has been suggested as one possible cause of the PTME, the largest mass extinction of all time, may have exacerbated greenhouse conditions, although others suggest that methane hydrate release was temporally mismatched with the TJME and thus not a cause of it.

==== Global cooling ====
Besides the carbon dioxide-driven long-term global warming, CAMP volcanism had shorter term cooling effects resulting from the emission of sulphur dioxide aerosols. The extremely voluminous emission of this gas caused sharp drops in Earth&#x27;s albedo and induced severe volcanic winters. High latitudes had colder climates with evidence of mild glaciation during the extinction interval. Cold periods induced by volcanic ejecta clouding the atmosphere might have favoured endothermic animals, with dinosaurs, pterosaurs, and mammals being more capable at enduring these conditions than large pseudosuchians due to insulation. 

==== Metal poisoning ====
CAMP volcanism released enormous amounts of toxic mercury. The appearance of high rates of mutaganesis of varying severity in fossil spores during the TJME coincides with mercury anomalies and is thus believed by researchers to have been caused by mercury poisoning. δ202Hg and Δ199Hg evidence suggests that volcanism caused the mercury loading directly at the Triassic-Jurassic boundary, but that there were later bouts of elevated mercury in the environment during the Early Jurassic caused by eccentricity-forced enhancement of hydrological cycling and erosion that resulted in remobilisation of volcanically injected mercury that had been deposited in wetlands.

==== Wildfires ====
The intense, rapid warming is believed to have resulted in increased storminess and lightning activity as a consequence of the more humid climate. The uptick in lightning activity is in turn implicated as a cause of an increase in wildfire activity. The combined presence of charcoal fragments and heightened levels of pyrolytic polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in Polish sedimentary facies straddling the Triassic-Jurassic boundary indicates wildfires were extremely commonplace during the earliest Jurassic, immediately after the Triassic-Jurassic transition. Elevated wildfire activity is also known from the Junggar Basin. In the Jiyuan Basin, two distinct pulses of drastically elevated wildfire activity are known: the first mainly affected canopies and occurred amidst relatively humid conditions while the second predominantly affected ground cover and was associated with aridity. At the Winterswijk quarry in the Netherlands, a surge in wildfire activity has been suggested to correspond to and have caused the sudden decline in coniferous vegetation. Frequent wildfires, combined with increased seismic activity from CAMP emplacement, led to apocalyptic soil degradation.
==== Anoxia and euxinia ====
Anoxia was another mechanism of extinction; the end-Triassic extinction was coeval with an uptick in black shale deposition and a pronounced negative δ238U excursion, indicating a major decrease in marine oxygen availability. Additional evidence for anoxia during the TJME comes from pyrite framboids, which grow in anoxic conditions. Evidence of anoxia has been discovered at the Triassic-Jurassic boundary across the world&#x27;s oceans; the western Tethys, eastern Tethys, and Panthalassa were all affected by a precipitous drop in seawater oxygen, although at a few sites, the TJME was associated with fully oxygenated waters. Positive δ15N excursions have also been interpreted as evidence of anoxia concomitant with increased denitrification in marine sediments in the TJME&#x27;s aftermath.

In northeastern Panthalassa, episodes of anoxia were already occurring during the Rhaetian before the TJME, making its marine ecosystems unstable even before the main crisis began. This early phase of environmental degradation in eastern Panthalassa may have been caused by an early phase of CAMP activity. Anoxic, reducing conditions were likewise present in western Panthalassa off the coast of what is now Japan for about a million years prior to the TJME. During the TJME, the rapid warming led to the stagnation of ocean circulation in many ocean regions, enabling the development of catastrophic anoxia; in what is now northwestern Europe, shallow seas became salinity stratified, enabling easy development of anoxia. Another factor contributing to anoxia was the increase in continental weathering driven by intense warming that delivered vast quantities of nutrients to the ocean surface and engendered eutrophication; this uptick in weathering is evidenced by positive δ56Fe excursions. A combination of negative δ66Zn excursions, positive δ26Mg excursions, and a lack of significant change in δ65Cu provides further evidence of increased chemical weathering resulting from increased temperature and humidity on land at high latitudes. Increased influx of terrestrial organic matter, in conjunction with reduced salinity, has been directly shown to have enkindled anoxia in the Eiberg Basin. Persistent low δ238U ratios indicate prolonged global oxygen depletion continued into the Hettangian, with 87Sr/86Sr values showing that high influxes of terrestrial nutrients likely continued to eutrophicate the oceans well after the Triassic-Jurassic boundary. The persistence of anoxia into the Hettangian age may have helped delay the recovery of marine life in the extinction&#x27;s aftermath.

Euxinia, a form of anoxia defined by not just the absence of dissolved oxygen but high concentrations of hydrogen sulphide, also developed in the oceans, as indicated by findings of increased isorenieratane. The increase in concentration of this substance reveals that populations of green sulphur bacteria, which photosynthesise using hydrogen sulphide instead of water, grew significantly across the Triassic-Jurassic boundary. A meteoric shift towards positive sulphur isotope ratios in reduced sulphur species indicates a complete utilisation of sulphate by sulphate reducing bacteria. Off the shores of the Wrangellia Terrane, the onset of photic zone euxinia was preceded by an interval of limited nitrogen availability and increased nitrogen fixation in surface waters while euxinia developed in bottom waters. Recurrent hydrogen sulphide poisoning following the TJME had retarding effects on biotic rediversification.

==== Ocean acidification ====
Oceanic uptake of volcanogenic carbon and sulphur dioxide would have led to a significant decrease of seawater pH known as ocean acidification, which is discussed as a relevant driver of marine extinction, acting in conjunction with marine anoxia. Additionally, acidification was enhanced and exacerbated by widespread photic zone euxinia, which caused increased rates of organic matter respiration and carbon dioxide release. Evidence for ocean acidification as an extinction mechanism comes from the preferential extinction of marine organisms with thick aragonitic skeletons and little biotic control of biocalcification (e.g., corals, hypercalcifying sponges), which resulted in a coral reef collapse and an early Hettangian &quot;coral gap&quot;. The decline of megalodontoid bivalves is also attributed to increased seawater acidity. Extensive fossil remains of malformed calcareous nannoplankton, a common sign of significant drops in pH, have also been extensively reported from the Triassic-Jurassic boundary. Global interruption of carbonate deposition at the Triassic-Jurassic boundary has been cited as additional evidence for catastrophic ocean acidification. Upwardly developing aragonite fans in the shallow subseafloor may also reflect decreased pH, these structures being speculated to have precipitated concomitantly with acidification. In some studied sections, the TJME biocalcification crisis is masked by emersion of carbonate platforms induced by marine regression.

==== Ozone depletion ====
Research on the role of ozone shield deterioration during the Permian-Triassic mass extinction has suggested that it may have been a factor in the TJME as well. A spike in the abundance of unseparated tetrads of &quot;Kraeuselisporites reissingerii&quot; has been interpreted as evidence of increased ultraviolet radiation flux resulting from ozone layer damage caused by volcanic aerosols.

=== Gradual climate change ===
The extinctions at the end of the Triassic were initially attributed to gradually changing environments. Within his 1958 study recognizing biological turnover between the Triassic and Jurassic, Edwin H. Colbert&#x27;s proposal was that this extinction was a result of geological processes decreasing the diversity of land biomes. He considered the Triassic period to be an era of the world experiencing a variety of environments, from towering highlands to arid deserts to tropical marshes. In contrast, the Jurassic period was much more uniform both in climate and elevation due to excursions by shallow seas.

Later studies noted a clear trend towards increased aridification towards the end of the Triassic. Although high-latitude areas like Greenland and Australia actually became wetter, most of the world experienced more drastic changes in climate as indicated by geological evidence. This evidence includes an increase in carbonate and evaporite deposits (which are most abundant in dry climates) and a decrease in coal deposits (which primarily form in humid environments such as coal forests). In addition, the climate may have become much more seasonal, with long droughts interrupted by severe monsoons. The world gradually got warmer over this time as well; from the late Norian to the Rhaetian, mean annual temperatures rose by 7 to 9 °C. The site of Hochalm in Austria preserves evidence of carbon cycle perturbations during the Rhaetian preceding the Triassic-Jurassic boundary, potentially having a role in the ecological crisis.

===Sea level fall===
Geological formations in Europe and the Middle East seem to indicate a drop in sea levels at the end of the Triassic associated with the TJME. Although falling sea levels have sometimes been considered a culprit for marine extinctions, evidence is inconclusive since many sea level drops in geological history are not correlated with increased extinctions. However, there is still some evidence that marine life was affected by secondary processes related to falling sea levels, such as decreased oxygenation (caused by sluggish circulation), or increased acidification. These processes do not seem to have been worldwide, with the sea level fall observed in European sediments believed to be not global but regional, and with even some European sections showing no sign of sea level fall across the Triassic-Jurassic boundary, but they may explain local extinctions in European marine fauna. However, it is not universally accepted that even this local diversity drop was caused by sea level fall. A pronounced sea level change in latest Triassic records from Lake Williston in northeastern British Columbia, which was then the northeastern margin of Panthalassa, resulted in an extinction event of infaunal (sediment-dwelling) bivalves, though not epifaunal ones.

=== Extraterrestrial impact ===

Some have hypothesized that an impact from an asteroid or comet caused the Triassic–Jurassic extinction, similar to the extraterrestrial object which was the main factor in the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction about 66 million years ago, as evidenced by the Chicxulub crater in Mexico. However, so far no impact crater of sufficient size has been dated to precisely coincide with the Triassic–Jurassic boundary.

Nevertheless, the Late Triassic did experience several impacts, including the second-largest confirmed impact in the Mesozoic. The Manicouagan Reservoir in Quebec is one of the most visible large impact craters on Earth, and at in diameter it is tied with the Eocene Popigai impact structure in Siberia as the fourth-largest impact crater on Earth. Olsen &quot;et al.&quot; (1987) were the first scientists to link the Manicouagan crater to the Triassic–Jurassic extinction, citing its age which at the time was roughly considered to be Late Triassic. More precise radiometric dating by Hodych &amp; Dunning (1992) has shown that the Manicouagan impact occurred about 214 million years ago, about 13 million years before the Triassic–Jurassic boundary. Therefore, it could not have been responsible for an extinction precisely at the Triassic–Jurassic boundary. Nevertheless, the Manicouagan impact did have a widespread effect on the planet; a 214-million-year-old ejecta blanket of shocked quartz has been found in rock layers as far away as England and Japan. There is still a possibility that the Manicouagan impact was responsible for a small extinction midway through the Late Triassic at the Carnian–Norian boundary, although the disputed age of this boundary (and whether an extinction actually occurred in the first place) makes it difficult to correlate the impact with extinction. Onoue &quot;et al.&quot; (2016) alternatively proposed that the Manicouagan impact was responsible for a marine extinction in the middle of the Norian which affected radiolarians, sponges, conodonts, and Triassic ammonoids. Thus, the Manicouagan impact may have been partially responsible for the gradual decline in the latter two groups which culminated in their extinction at the Triassic–Jurassic boundary. The boundary between the Adamanian and Revueltian land vertebrate faunal zones, which involved extinctions and faunal changes in tetrapods and plants, was possibly also caused by the Manicouagan impact, although discrepancies between magnetochronological and isotopic dating lead to some uncertainty.

Other Triassic craters are closer to the Triassic–Jurassic boundary but also much smaller than the Manicouagan reservoir. The eroded Rochechouart impact structure in France has most recently been dated to million years ago, but at across (possibly up to across originally), it appears to be too small to have affected the ecosystem, although it has been speculated to have played a role in an alleged much smaller extinction event at the Norian-Rhaetian boundary. The wide Saint Martin crater in Manitoba has been proposed as a candidate for a possible TJME-causing impact, but its has since been dated to be Carnian. Other putative or confirmed Triassic craters include the wide Puchezh-Katunki crater in Eastern Russia (though it may be Jurassic in age), the wide Obolon&#x27; crater in Ukraine, and the wide Red Wing Creek structure in North Dakota. Spray &quot;et al.&quot; (1998) noted an interesting phenomenon, that being how the Manicouagan, Rochechouart, and Saint Martin craters all seem to be at the same latitude, and that the Obolon&#x27; and Red Wing craters form parallel arcs with the Rochechouart and Saint Martin craters, respectively. Spray and his colleagues hypothesized that the Triassic experienced a &quot;multiple impact event&quot;, a large fragmented asteroid or comet which broke up and impacted the earth in several places at the same time. Such an impact has been observed in the present day, when Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 broke up and hit Jupiter in 1992. However, the &quot;multiple impact event&quot; hypothesis for Triassic impact craters has not been well-supported; Kent (1998) noted that the Manicouagan and Rochechouart craters were formed in eras of different magnetic polarity, and radiometric dating of the individual craters has shown that the impacts occurred millions of years apart.

Shocked quartz has been found in Rhaetian deposits from the Northern Apennines of Italy, providing possible evidence of an end-Triassic extraterrestrial impact. Certain trace metals indicative of a bolide impact have been found in the late Rhaetian, though not at the Triassic-Jurassic boundary itself; the discoverers of these trace metal anomalies purport that such a bolide impact could only have been an indirect cause of the TJME. The discovery of seismites two to four metres thick coeval with the carbon isotope fluctuations associated with the TJME has been interpreted as evidence of a possible bolide impact, although no definitive link between these seismites and any impact event has been found.

On the other hand, the dissimilarity between the isotopic perturbations characterising the TJME and those characterising the end-Cretaceous mass extinction makes an extraterrestrial impact highly unlikely to have been the cause of the TJME, according to many researchers. Various trace metal ratios, including palladium/iridium, platinum/iridium, and platinum/rhodium, in rocks deposited during the TJME have numerical values very different from what would be expected in an extraterrestrial impact scenario, providing further evidence against this hypothesis. The Triassic-Jurassic boundary furthermore lacks a fern spore spike akin to that observed at the terminus of the Cretaceous, inconsistent with an asteroid impact.

==Comparisons to present climate change==
The extremely rapid, centuries-long timescale of carbon emissions and global warming caused by pulses of CAMP volcanism has drawn comparisons between the Triassic-Jurassic mass extinction and anthropogenic global warming, currently causing the Holocene extinction. The current rate of carbon dioxide emissions is around 50 gigatonnes per year, hundreds of times faster than during the latest Triassic, although the lack of extremely detailed stratigraphic resolution and pulsed nature of CAMP volcanism means that individual pulses of greenhouse gas emissions likely occurred on comparable timescales to human release of warming gases since the Industrial Revolution. The degassing rate of the first pulse of CAMP volcanism is estimated to have been around half of the rate of modern anthropogenic emissions. Palaeontologists studying the TJME and its impacts warn that a major reduction in humanity&#x27;s carbon dioxide emissions to slow down climate change is of critical importance for preventing a catastrophe similar to the TJME from befalling the modern biosphere. If human-induced climate change persists as is, predictions can be made as to how various aspects of the biosphere will respond based on records of the TJME. For example, current conditions such the increased carbon dioxide levels, ocean acidification, and ocean deoxygenation create a similar climate to that of the Triassic-Jurassic boundary for marine life, so it is the common assumption that should the trends continue, modern reef-building taxa and skeletal benthic organisms will be preferentially impacted. The end-Triassic reef crisis has been specifically cited as a possible analogue for the fate of present coral reefs should anthropogenic global warming continue.

==References==
==Literature==
*
* McHone, J.G. (2003), Volatile emissions of Central Atlantic Magmatic Province basalts: Mass assumptions and environmental consequences, in Hames, W.E. et al., eds., &quot;The Central Atlantic Magmatic Province: Insights from Fragments of Pangea&quot;. American Geophysical Union Monograph 136, p. 241–254.
*
*

==External links==
*Theories on the Triassic–Jurassic Extinction 
*The Triassic–Jurassic Mass Extinction
*200 million year old mystery BBC News story, 12-Oct-2011</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q835034" start="4" end="21" title="Triassic–Jurassic extinction event" label="Triassic–Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q835034" start="23" end="27" title="Triassic–Jurassic extinction event" label="Tr-J"/>
<link wikidata="Q835034" start="29" end="45" title="Triassic–Jurassic extinction event" label="extinction event"/>
<link wikidata="Q835034" start="47" end="51" title="Triassic–Jurassic extinction event" label="TJME"/>
<link wikidata="Q835034" start="71" end="94" title="Triassic–Jurassic extinction event" label="end-Triassic extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q47158" start="127" end="135" title="Triassic" label="Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q45805" start="140" end="148" title="Jurassic" label="Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q55814" start="191" end="207" title="extinction event" label="extinction event"/>
<link wikidata="Q101313" start="220" end="231" title="Phanerozoic" label="Phanerozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="324" end="330" title="genus" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q171446" start="344" end="350" title="Coral" label="corals"/>
<link wikidata="Q25368" start="352" end="360" title="Bivalvia" label="bivalves"/>
<link wikidata="Q178272" start="362" end="373" title="Brachiopod" label="brachiopods"/>
<link wikidata="Q148134" start="375" end="384" title="Bryozoa" label="bryozoans"/>
<link wikidata="Q107920" start="390" end="402" title="Radiolaria" label="radiolarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q586245" start="443" end="452" title="Conodont" label="conodonts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867740" start="506" end="516" title="Gastropoda" label="gastropods"/>
<link wikidata="Q134676" start="584" end="599" title="Archosauromorpha" label="archosauromorph"/>
<link wikidata="Q131863" start="620" end="635" title="Crocodylomorpha" label="crocodylomorphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q430" start="637" end="645" title="dinosaur" label="dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q179204" start="652" end="661" title="pterosaur" label="pterosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408476" start="1094" end="1128" title="Central Atlantic magmatic province" label="Central Atlantic Magmatic Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="1206" end="1220" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="1272" end="1286" title="global warming" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q855711" start="1291" end="1310" title="ocean acidification" label="ocean acidification"/>
<link wikidata="Q28643" start="1702" end="1710" title="paradigm" label="paradigm"/>
<link wikidata="Q208650" start="1720" end="1737" title="uniformitarianism" label="uniformitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q826716" start="1823" end="1836" title="catastrophism" label="catastrophism"/>
<link wikidata="Q580301" start="2043" end="2059" title="Edwin H. Colbert" label="Edwin H. Colbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677203" start="2232" end="2245" title="Jack Sepkoski" label="Jack Sepkoski"/>
<link wikidata="Q55811" start="2394" end="2432" title="Cretaceous-Palaeogene extinction event" label="Cretaceous-Palaeogene extinction event"/>
<link wikidata="Q463796" start="2450" end="2462" title="impact event" label="impact event"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408476" start="2623" end="2657" title="Central Atlantic Magmatic Province" label="Central Atlantic Magmatic Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q141118" start="2729" end="2762" title="Permian-Triassic extinction event" label="Permian-Triassic extinction event"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012789" start="3143" end="3161" title="evolutionary fauna" label="evolutionary fauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q21014121" start="3293" end="3319" title="end-Guadalupian extinction" label="end-Guadalupian extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q141118" start="3348" end="3381" title="Permian–Triassic extinction event" label="Permian-Triassic extinction event"/>
<link wikidata="Q25367" start="3443" end="3451" title="Plankton" label="Plankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q228002" start="3962" end="3971" title="Ammonoidea" label="Ammonites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054661" start="4063" end="4073" title="Ceratitida" label="Ceratitida"/>
<link wikidata="Q530828" start="4165" end="4173" title="Rhaetian" label="Rhaetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080207" start="4232" end="4238" title="Norian" label="Norian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3343308" start="4280" end="4290" title="Ammonitina" label="Ammonitina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3841045" start="4292" end="4304" title="Lytoceratina" label="Lytoceratina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901733" start="4310" end="4324" title="Phylloceratina" label="Phylloceratina"/>
<link wikidata="Q284787" start="4346" end="4360" title="Early Jurassic" label="Early Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28455743" start="4515" end="4530" title="Lilliput effect" label="Lilliput effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q14552509" start="4642" end="4654" title="Megalodontidae" label="megalodontid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749378" start="4673" end="4683" title="Limidae" label="file shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867740" start="4942" end="4951" title="Gastropoda" label="Gastropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q911869" start="5228" end="5238" title="Sinemurian" label="Sinemurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q540479" start="5243" end="5256" title="Pliensbachian" label="Pliensbachian"/>
<link wikidata="Q276412" start="5510" end="5519" title="Ostracod" label="Ostracods"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567954" start="5641" end="5652" title="Conulariida" label="Conulariids"/>
<link wikidata="Q208136" start="5840" end="5852" title="Tethys Ocean" label="Tethys Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q855711" start="6061" end="6080" title="ocean acidification" label="ocean acidification"/>
<link wikidata="Q686881" start="6224" end="6231" title="Benthic_zone" label="Benthic"/>
<link wikidata="Q24960815" start="6555" end="6568" title="Neuquén Basin" label="Neuquén Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139299" start="7184" end="7194" title="r-selected" label="r-selected"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123245" start="7328" end="7333" title="Stage (stratigraphy)" label="stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q127282" start="7492" end="7506" title="actinopterygii" label="actinopterygii"/>
<link wikidata="Q929395" start="7558" end="7573" title="Middle Triassic" label="Middle Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044049" start="7634" end="7655" title="Carnian Pluvial Event" label="Carnian Pluvial Event"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725298" start="7687" end="7700" title="sampling bias" label="sampling bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q740005" start="7839" end="7850" title="neopterygii" label="neopterygii"/>
<link wikidata="Q586245" start="8105" end="8113" title="Conodont" label="Conodont"/>
<link wikidata="Q726791" start="8570" end="8578" title="Ladinian" label="Ladinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="8663" end="8671" title="Family (biology)" label="families"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935998" start="8755" end="8768" title="Placochelyidae" label="placochelyids"/>
<link wikidata="Q132828" start="8789" end="8799" title="Placodontia" label="placodonts"/>
<link wikidata="Q269195" start="8809" end="8819" title="plesiosaur" label="plesiosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q132819" start="8840" end="8853" title="sauropterygia" label="sauropterygia"/>
<link wikidata="Q194515" start="8867" end="8878" title="ichthyosaur" label="ichthyosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715499" start="8888" end="8901" title="Shastasauridae" label="shastasaurids"/>
<link wikidata="Q815715" start="8982" end="8992" title="Population bottleneck" label="bottleneck"/>
<link wikidata="Q580301" start="9694" end="9710" title="Edwin H. Colbert" label="Edwin H. Colbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q728299" start="9870" end="9881" title="Lepidosauria" label="lepidosaurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q15879" start="9883" end="9889" title="lizard" label="lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3003172" start="9917" end="9931" title="Crocodyliformes" label="crocodyliforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q25363" start="9933" end="9943" title="crocodilia" label="crocodilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109710" start="10234" end="10251" title="Newark Supergroup" label="Newark Supergroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="10631" end="10640" title="amphibian" label="amphibian"/>
<link wikidata="Q131447" start="10712" end="10725" title="Temnospondyli" label="Temnospondyli"/>
<link wikidata="Q134861" start="10749" end="10761" title="lissamphibia" label="lissamphibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q53636" start="10788" end="10792" title="frog" label="frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q53663" start="10798" end="10808" title="salamander" label="salamander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733836" start="11125" end="11137" title="Brachyopoidea" label="Brachyopoids"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="11171" end="11181" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824275" start="11424" end="11437" title="Metoposauridae" label="metoposaurids"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751797" start="11445" end="11457" title="Koskinonodon" label="Apachesaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18393822" start="11479" end="11496" title="Redonda Formation" label="Redonda Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q530828" start="11524" end="11532" title="Rhaetian" label="Rhaetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080207" start="11541" end="11547" title="Norian" label="Norian"/>
<link wikidata="Q134415" start="11555" end="11566" title="Gerrothorax" label="Gerrothorax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620129" start="11589" end="11601" title="Plagiosauridae" label="plagiosaurid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035979" start="11684" end="11694" title="Capitosauria" label="capitosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q134676" start="11957" end="11973" title="Archosauromorpha" label="archosauromorphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q15632233" start="12008" end="12017" title="phytosaur" label="phytosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742285" start="12034" end="12046" title="Pseudosuchia" label="Pseudosuchia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25363" start="12090" end="12100" title="crocodilia" label="crocodilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q134665" start="12251" end="12268" title="Lepidosauromorpha" label="lepidosauromorphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q131863" start="12343" end="12358" title="Crocodylomorpha" label="crocodylomorphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q131967" start="12460" end="12468" title="aetosaur" label="aetosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q134295" start="12493" end="12504" title="Rauisuchidae" label="rauisuchids"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494615" start="12535" end="12546" title="drepanosaur" label="drepanosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q133273" start="12549" end="12564" title="Trilophosauridae" label="trilophosaurids"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138746" start="12566" end="12580" title="Tanystropheidae" label="tanystropheids"/>
<link wikidata="Q133347" start="12586" end="12600" title="Procolophonidae" label="procolophonids"/>
<link wikidata="Q633834" start="12890" end="12900" title="Hettangian" label="Hettangian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2786591" start="13270" end="13284" title="Kuehneosauridae" label="kuehneosaurids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056049" start="13300" end="13317" title="Thecodontosauridae" label="thecodontosaurids"/>
<link wikidata="Q981048" start="13358" end="13373" title="Terrestrisuchus" label="Terrestrisuchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131863" start="13415" end="13429" title="Crocodylomorpha" label="crocodylomorph"/>
<link wikidata="Q908981" start="15379" end="15394" title="photoinhibition" label="photoinhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q835097" start="15505" end="15515" title="Ginkgoales" label="Ginkgoales"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984362" start="15812" end="15832" title="Lepidopteris" label="Lepidopteris ottonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q271294" start="16167" end="16180" title="Sichuan Basin" label="Sichuan Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109710" start="16905" end="16922" title="Newark Supergroup" label="Newark Supergroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="16930" end="16954" title="East Coast of the United States" label="United States East Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q284787" start="17105" end="17119" title="Early Jurassic" label="Early Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q79932" start="17120" end="17126" title="pollen" label="pollen"/>
<link wikidata="Q172861" start="17224" end="17230" title="Niche segregation" label="niches"/>
<link wikidata="Q4935045" start="18370" end="18394" title="Northern Calcareous Alps" label="Northern Calcareous Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q213410" start="18558" end="18568" title="Polyploidy" label="Polyploidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408476" start="18841" end="18875" title="Central Atlantic Magmatic Province" label="Central Atlantic Magmatic Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q792425" start="18902" end="18924" title="large igneous province" label="large igneous province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930710" start="19193" end="19212" title="uranium-lead dating" label="uranium-lead dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789695" start="19214" end="19232" title="argon-argon dating" label="argon-argon dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q853422" start="19238" end="19253" title="paleomagnetism" label="palaeomagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278929" start="19414" end="19418" title="δ13C" label="δ13C"/>
<link wikidata="Q41581" start="19492" end="19513" title="Alkane" label="&amp;quot;n&amp;quot;-alkanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q184817" start="19541" end="19547" title="lignin" label="lignin"/>
<link wikidata="Q900291" start="19553" end="19573" title="total organic carbon" label="total organic carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156656" start="20139" end="20152" title="Junggar Basin" label="Junggar Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109710" start="21410" end="21427" title="Newark Supergroup" label="Newark Supergroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="21570" end="21576" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="21948" end="21955" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="22030" end="22041" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="22046" end="22056" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q180621" start="22428" end="22438" title="diagenesis" label="diagenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="22570" end="22584" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306723" start="23803" end="23812" title="Volatile (astrogeology)" label="volatiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q380971" start="23970" end="23990" title="contact metamorphism" label="contact metamorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q864080" start="24541" end="24552" title="Clathrate hydrate" label="gas hydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q55814" start="24673" end="24688" title="mass extinction" label="mass extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282" start="25032" end="25047" title="sulphur dioxide" label="sulphur dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q12571883" start="25367" end="25378" title="endothermic" label="endothermic"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="25599" end="25606" title="mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q408089" start="25797" end="25814" title="mercury poisoning" label="mercury poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045071" start="27401" end="27417" title="soil degradation" label="soil degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8083977" start="28088" end="28092" title="δ15N" label="δ15N"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334780" start="28448" end="28473" title="environmental degradation" label="environmental degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3735091" start="30048" end="30055" title="Euxinia" label="Euxinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170591" start="30153" end="30170" title="hydrogen sulphide" label="hydrogen sulphide"/>
<link wikidata="Q12962791" start="30332" end="30354" title="green sulfur bacteria" label="green sulphur bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q170591" start="30384" end="30401" title="hydrogen sulphide" label="hydrogen sulphide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7940083" start="31023" end="31035" title="Volcanogenic massive sulfide ore deposit" label="volcanogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q855711" start="31128" end="31147" title="ocean acidification" label="ocean acidification"/>
<link wikidata="Q580301" start="33138" end="33154" title="Edwin H. Colbert" label="Edwin H. Colbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q181699" start="33874" end="33883" title="carbonate" label="carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q491689" start="33888" end="33897" title="evaporite" label="evaporite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137814" start="34033" end="34044" title="coal forest" label="coal forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="34150" end="34157" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q967775" start="35574" end="35588" title="Lake Williston" label="Lake Williston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="35605" end="35621" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="35859" end="35867" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="35871" end="35876" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q55811" start="35990" end="36021" title="Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event" label="Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q55816" start="36070" end="36086" title="Chicxulub crater" label="Chicxulub crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q756106" start="36356" end="36377" title="Manicouagan Reservoir" label="Manicouagan Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="36381" end="36387" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="36485" end="36491" title="Eocene" label="Eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q594483" start="36492" end="36516" title="Popigai impact structure" label="Popigai impact structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="36520" end="36527" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q791776" start="36535" end="36549" title="List of impact craters on Earth" label="fourth-largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q214753" start="36790" end="36808" title="radiometric dating" label="radiometric dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350112" start="37191" end="37205" title="ejecta blanket" label="ejecta blanket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061666" start="37209" end="37223" title="shocked quartz" label="shocked quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="37269" end="37276" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786795" start="38462" end="38491" title="Rochechouart impact structure" label="Rochechouart impact structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="38495" end="38501" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q729784" start="38802" end="38821" title="Saint Martin crater" label="Saint Martin crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="38825" end="38833" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997880" start="39009" end="39031" title="Puchezh-Katunki crater" label="Puchezh-Katunki crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="39043" end="39049" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q45805" start="39068" end="39076" title="Jurassic" label="Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667489" start="39095" end="39114" title="Obolon&amp;#x27; crater" label="Obolon&amp;#x27; crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="39118" end="39125" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696695" start="39140" end="39164" title="Red Wing crater" label="Red Wing Creek structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207" start="39168" end="39180" title="North Dakota" label="North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076" start="39757" end="39779" title="Comet Shoemaker–Levy 9" label="Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061666" start="40156" end="40170" title="Shocked quartz" label="Shocked quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285" start="40216" end="40234" title="Northern Apennines" label="Northern Apennines"/>
<link wikidata="Q317167" start="40354" end="40360" title="bolide" label="bolide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510595" start="40609" end="40618" title="seismites" label="seismites"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="41824" end="41852" title="anthropogenic global warming" label="anthropogenic global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q796140" start="41876" end="41895" title="Holocene extinction" label="Holocene extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="42277" end="42298" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q855711" start="42936" end="42955" title="ocean acidification" label="ocean acidification"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076135" start="42961" end="42980" title="ocean deoxygenation" label="ocean deoxygenation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31190" wikidata="Q838607" url="?curid=31190" title="Tufted puffin">
<text>The tufted puffin (Fratercula cirrhata), also known as crested puffin, is a relatively abundant medium-sized pelagic seabird in the auk family (Alcidae) found throughout the North Pacific Ocean.
It is one of three species of puffin that make up the genus &quot;Fratercula&quot; and is easily recognizable by its thick red bill and yellow tufts.
== Description ==

Tufted puffins are around in length with a similar wingspan and weigh about three-quarters of a kilogram (1.6  lbs), making them the largest of all the puffins. Birds from the western Pacific population are somewhat larger than those from the eastern Pacific, and male birds tend to be slightly larger than females.
They are primarily black with a white facial patch, and, typical of other puffin species, feature a very thick bill, primarily red with some yellow and occasionally green markings. Their most distinctive feature and namesake are the yellow tufts () that appear annually on birds of both sexes as the summer reproductive season approaches. Their feet become bright red and their face is also bright white in the summer. During the feeding season, the tufts molt off and the plumage, beak, and legs lose much of their luster.

As among other alcids, the wings are relatively short, adapted for diving, underwater swimming, and capturing prey rather than gliding, of which they are incapable. As a consequence, they have thick, dark myoglobin-rich breast muscles adapted for a fast and aerobically strenuous wing-beat cadence, which they can nonetheless maintain for long periods of time.
Juvenile tufted puffins resemble winter adults, but with a grey-brown breast shading to white on the belly, and a shallow, yellowish-brown bill. Overall, they resemble a horn-less and unmarked rhinoceros auklet (&quot;Cerorhinca monocerata&quot;).

== Taxonomy ==
The tufted puffin was first described in 1769 by German zoologist Peter Simon Pallas. The scientific name &quot;Fratercula&quot; comes from the Medieval Latin , friar, a reference to the black and white plumage which resembles monastic robes. The specific name &quot;cirrhata&quot; is Latin for &quot;curly-headed&quot;, from &quot;cirrus&quot;, a curl of hair. The vernacular name &quot;puffin&quot; – puffed in the sense of swollen – was originally applied to the fatty, salted meat of young birds of the unrelated species, the Manx shearwater (&quot;Puffinus puffinus&quot;), formerly known as the &quot;Manks puffin&quot;. It is an Anglo-Norman word (Middle English &quot;pophyn&quot; or &quot;poffin&quot;) used for the cured carcasses. The Atlantic puffin acquired the name at a much later stage, possibly because of its similar nesting habits, and it was formally applied to that species by Pennant in 1768. It was later extended to include the similar and related Pacific puffins.

Since it may be more closely related to the rhinoceros auklet than the other puffins, it is sometimes placed in the monotypic genus Lunda.

The juveniles, due to their similarity to &quot;C. monocerata&quot;, were initially mistaken for a distinct species of a monotypic genus, and named Sagmatorrhina lathami (&quot;Latham&#x27;s saddle-billed auk&quot;, from &quot;sagmata&quot; &quot;saddle&quot; and &quot;rhina&quot; &quot;nose&quot;).

== Distribution and habitat ==
Tufted puffins form dense breeding colonies during the summer reproductive season from Washington state and British Columbia, throughout southeastern Alaska and the Aleutian Islands, Kamchatka, the Kuril Islands and throughout the Sea of Okhotsk. While they share some habitat with horned puffins (&quot;F. corniculata&quot;), the range of the tufted puffin is generally more eastern. They have been known to nest in small numbers as far south as the northern Channel Islands, off the coast of southern California. However, the last confirmed sighting at the Channel Islands occurred in 1997.

Tufted puffins typically select islands or cliffs that are relatively inaccessible to predators, close to productive waters, and high enough that they can take to the air successfully. Ideal habitat is steep but with a relatively soft soil substrate and grass for the creation of burrows.

During the winter feeding season, they spend their time almost exclusively at sea, extending their range throughout the North Pacific and south to Japan and California.

== Behavior ==
=== Breeding ===
Breeding takes place on isolated islands: over 25,000 pairs have been recorded in a single colony off the coast of British Columbia. The nest is usually a simple burrow dug with the bill and feet, but sometimes a crevice between rocks is used instead. It is well-lined with vegetation and feathers. Courtship occurs through skypointing, strutting, and billing. A single egg is laid, usually in June, and incubated by both parents for about 45 days. The eggs are pure white or pale buff and are without gloss. They very often have barely perceptible shell markings of dull purplish color. Fledglings leave the nest at between 40 and 55 days.

Tufted puffins may be purely aquatic locomotive animals until they are three, living entirely as marine animals returning to shore only to breed on the nesting cliffs where they hatched. They tend to be well offshore when hatching.

=== Diet ===

Tufted puffins feed on a variety of fish and marine invertebrates, which they catch by diving from the surface. However, their diet varies greatly with age and location. Adult puffins largely depend on invertebrates, especially squid and krill. Nestlings at coastal colonies are fed primarily fish such as rockfish and sandlance, while nestlings at colonies closer to pelagic habitats are more dependent on invertebrates. Demersal fish are consumed in some quantity by most nestlings, suggesting that puffins feed to some extent on the ocean bottom.

Feeding areas can be located far offshore from the nesting areas. Puffins can store large quantities of small fish in their bills and carry them to their chicks.

=== Predators and threats ===
Tufted puffins are preyed upon by various avian raptors such as snowy owls, bald eagles and peregrine falcons, and mammals like the Arctic fox. Foxes seem to prefer the puffin over other birds, making the bird a main target. Choosing inaccessible cliffs and entirely mammal-free islands protects them from terrestrial predators while laying eggs in burrows is effective in protecting them from egg-scavengers like gulls and ravens.

A mass die-off of puffins at St. Paul Island, Alaska between October 2016 and January 2017 has been attributed to ecosystem changes resulting from climate change.

== Relationship with humans ==

The Aleut and Ainu people (who called them &quot;Etupirka&quot;) of the North Pacific traditionally hunted tufted puffin for food and feathers. Skins were used to make tough parkas worn feather side in and the silky tufts were sewn into ornamental work. Currently, harvesting of tufted puffin is illegal or discouraged throughout its range.

The tufted puffin is a familiar bird on the coasts of the Russian Pacific coast, where it is known as &quot;toporok&quot; (Топорок) – meaning &quot;small axe,&quot; a hint to the shape of the bill. &quot;Toporok&quot; is the namesake of one of its main breeding sites, &quot;Kamen Toporkov&quot; (&quot;Tufted Puffin Rock&quot;) or &quot;Ostrov Toporkov&quot; (&quot;Tufted Puffin Island&quot;), an islet offshore Bering Island.

The oldest recorded tufted puffin was six years old when discovered in Alaska, the same state where it had been banded.

=== Conservation status in Puget Sound ===

Many rules and regulations have been set out to try to conserve fishes and shorebirds in Puget Sound. The Department of Natural Resources (DNR) of Washington State has created aquatic reserves surrounding Smith and Minor Islands.
Over of tidelands and seafloor habitat were included in the proposed aquatic reserve. Not only do these islands provide the necessary habitat for many seabirds such as tufted puffins and marine mammals, but this area also contains the largest kelp beds in all of Puget Sound. In addition, Protection Island reserve has also been off limits to the public to aid marine birds in breeding. Protection Island contains one of the last two nesting colonies of puffins in Puget Sound, and about 70% of the tufted puffin population nests on this island.

== References ==
== External links ==
* Stirling, Katie. &quot;ADW: Fratercula cirrhata&quot;. University of Michigan</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q838607" start="4" end="17" title="Tufted puffin" label="tufted puffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q838607" start="55" end="69" title="Tufted puffin" label="crested puffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q191468" start="109" end="116" title="pelagic" label="pelagic"/>
<link wikidata="Q55808" start="117" end="124" title="seabird" label="seabird"/>
<link wikidata="Q28294" start="132" end="135" title="auk" label="auk"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="174" end="193" title="North Pacific Ocean" label="North Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q311761" start="225" end="231" title="puffin" label="puffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q31528" start="322" end="326" title="beak" label="bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q192642" start="1410" end="1419" title="myoglobin" label="myoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152037" start="1463" end="1474" title="Aerobic exercise" label="aerobically"/>
<link wikidata="Q903229" start="1759" end="1776" title="rhinoceros auklet" label="rhinoceros auklet"/>
<link wikidata="Q155914" start="1896" end="1914" title="Peter Simon Pallas" label="Peter Simon Pallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="1920" end="1935" title="scientific name" label="scientific name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163234" start="1974" end="1988" title="Medieval Latin" label="Medieval Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q548320" start="1991" end="1996" title="friar" label="friar"/>
<link wikidata="Q148836" start="2057" end="2065" title="monasticism" label="monastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2115" end="2120" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q208405" start="2360" end="2375" title="Manx shearwater" label="Manx shearwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q36395" start="2485" end="2499" title="Middle English" label="Middle English"/>
<link wikidata="Q545123" start="2728" end="2735" title="Thomas Pennant" label="Pennant"/>
<link wikidata="Q903229" start="2864" end="2881" title="rhinoceros auklet" label="rhinoceros auklet"/>
<link wikidata="Q310890" start="2936" end="2945" title="monotypic" label="monotypic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="3068" end="3075" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="3091" end="3096" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q334364" start="3137" end="3143" title="John Latham (ornithologist)" label="Latham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368963" start="3319" end="3336" title="Bird colony" label="breeding colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="3380" end="3396" title="Washington state" label="Washington state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="3401" end="3417" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="3443" end="3449" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q119285" start="3458" end="3474" title="Aleutian Islands" label="Aleutian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q993" start="3476" end="3485" title="Kamchatka" label="Kamchatka"/>
<link wikidata="Q80389" start="3491" end="3504" title="Kuril Islands" label="Kuril Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q41602" start="3524" end="3538" title="Sea of Okhotsk" label="Sea of Okhotsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q855367" start="3575" end="3589" title="horned puffins" label="horned puffins"/>
<link wikidata="Q306147" start="3744" end="3768" title="Channel Islands (California)" label="northern Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="3787" end="3806" title="southern California" label="southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q23442" start="3919" end="3925" title="island" label="island"/>
<link wikidata="Q170430" start="3973" end="3981" title="predator" label="predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q43238" start="4141" end="4146" title="grass" label="grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410542" start="4167" end="4173" title="burrow" label="burrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4257161" start="4276" end="4281" title="range (biology)" label="range"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="4324" end="4329" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="4334" end="4344" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="4494" end="4510" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q659503" start="4749" end="4752" title="Bird egg" label="egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914884" start="4967" end="4977" title="Fledgling (birds)" label="Fledglings"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="5304" end="5308" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q108555493" start="5313" end="5333" title="marine invertebrates" label="marine invertebrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q81900" start="5496" end="5501" title="squid" label="squid"/>
<link wikidata="Q29498" start="5506" end="5511" title="krill" label="krill"/>
<link wikidata="Q26261896" start="5574" end="5582" title="rockfish" label="rockfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q695712" start="5587" end="5596" title="sandlance" label="sandlance"/>
<link wikidata="Q191468" start="5636" end="5643" title="pelagic" label="pelagic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734949" start="5690" end="5703" title="Demersal fish" label="Demersal fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q170177" start="6076" end="6085" title="snowy owl" label="snowy owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q127216" start="6088" end="6098" title="bald eagle" label="bald eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q30535" start="6104" end="6120" title="peregrine falcon" label="peregrine falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q82738" start="6144" end="6154" title="Arctic fox" label="Arctic fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699803" start="6426" end="6430" title="gull" label="gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q8335" start="6436" end="6441" title="raven" label="raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q80107" start="6474" end="6497" title="Saint Paul Island (Alaska)" label="St. Paul Island, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="6592" end="6606" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q191710" start="6645" end="6650" title="Aleut people" label="Aleut"/>
<link wikidata="Q101828" start="6655" end="6666" title="Ainu people" label="Ainu people"/>
<link wikidata="Q567688" start="6815" end="6820" title="parka" label="parka"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7106" end="7113" title=":ru:Топорок" label="Топорок"/>
<link wikidata="Q193962" start="7397" end="7410" title="Bering Island" label="Bering Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545190" start="7783" end="7806" title="Smith Island (Washington)" label="Smith and Minor Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251327" start="8097" end="8122" title="Protection Island (Washington)" label="Protection Island reserve"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31193" wikidata="Q783365" url="?curid=31193" title="THX 1138">
<text>THX 1138 is a 1971 American social science fiction film co-written and directed by George Lucas in his directorial debut. Produced by Francis Ford Coppola and co-written by Walter Murch, the film stars Robert Duvall and Donald Pleasence, with Don Pedro Colley, Maggie McOmie, and Ian Wolfe in supporting roles. The film is set in a dystopian future in which the citizens are controlled by android police and mandatory use of drugs that suppress emotions.

&quot;THX 1138&quot; was developed from Lucas&#x27;s 1967 student film &quot;Electronic Labyrinth: THX 1138 4EB&quot;, which he created while attending the USC School of Cinematic Arts. The feature film was produced in a joint venture between Warner Bros. and American Zoetrope. A novelization by Ben Bova was published in 1971.

The film received mixed reviews from critics and underperformed at the box office upon its initial release, but it has subsequently received critical acclaim and gained a cult following, particularly in the aftermath of Lucas&#x27;s success with &quot;Star Wars&quot; (1977). A director&#x27;s cut prepared by Lucas was released in 2004.

==Plot==
In the dystopian future, sexual intercourse and reproduction are prohibited, and mind-altering drugs are mandatory to enforce compliance among the citizens and to ensure their ability to conduct dangerous and demanding tasks. Workers wear identical white uniforms and have shaven heads to emphasize uniformity, likewise with police androids who wear black and monks who are robed. Instead of names, people have designations with three arbitrary letters (referred to as the &quot;prefix&quot;) and four digits, shown on an identity badge worn at all times.

At their jobs in central video control centers, SEN 5241 and LUH 3417 keep surveillance on the city. LUH has a male roommate named THX 1138, who works in a factory producing android police officers. At the beginning of the story, THX finishes his shift while the loudspeakers urge the workers to &quot;increase safety&quot;—and congratulate them for only losing 195 workers in the last period—to the competing factory&#x27;s 242.

On the way home, he stops at a confession booth in a row of many, and relates his concerns and mumbles prayers about &quot;party&quot; and &quot;masses&quot;, under the Jesus Christ-esque portrait of &quot;OMM 0000&quot;. A soothing voice greets THX, and OMM ends the confession with a parting salutation: &quot;You are a true believer, blessings of the State, blessings of the masses. Work hard, increase production, prevent accidents, and be happy.&quot;

At home, THX takes his drugs and watches holobroadcasts while engaging with a masturbatory device. LUH secretly substitutes pills in her possession for THX&#x27;s medications, causing him to develop nausea, anxiety, and sexual desires. LUH and THX become involved romantically and have sex. THX later is confronted by SEN, who attempts to arrange that THX become his new roommate, but THX files a complaint against SEN for the illegal shift pattern change.

Without drugs in his system, THX falters during a critical and hazardous phase of his job, and a control center engages a &quot;mind lock&quot; on THX which raises the level of danger. After the release of the mind lock, THX makes the necessary correction to that work phase. THX and LUH are arrested and THX undergoes drug therapy and medical analysis. He enjoys a brief reunion with LUH, but it is disrupted shortly after she reveals her pregnancy.

At THX&#x27;s trial, it is stated that THX was clinically born. It is decided that it would be inefficient to terminate THX, so THX is sentenced to prison, alongside SEN. THX and SEN walk to search for an exit. Eventually they are joined by hologram actor SRT 5752, who starred in the holobroadcasts. SRT 5752 shows them the exit and suggests to them that they may have been going in circles. During the escape, THX and SRT are separated from SEN. Chased by the police androids, THX and SRT are trapped in a control center, from which THX learns that LUH has been &quot;consumed&quot;, and her name has been reassigned to her fetus, numbered 66691, in a growth chamber. SEN eventually escapes to an area reserved for the monks of OMM, where a monk notices that SEN has no identification badge. SEN attacks him and later wanders into a child-rearing area, strikes up a conversation with children, and sits aimlessly until police androids apprehend him. THX and SRT steal two cars. SRT struggles to figure out how to drive the car. When SRT finally gets the car to move, SRT immediately crashes his car into a concrete pillar. After the crash, SRT is not found in the vehicle.

Pursued by two police androids on motorcycles, THX flees to the limits of the city. Android officers continue to pursue him as he briefly struggles with simian-like creatures identified as shell dwellers and arrives at a vertical shaft with an escape ladder. The android officers are ordered by Central Command to cease pursuit, on the grounds that the expense of his capture exceeds their allocated budget for THX. The officers inform THX that the area outside the &quot;city shell&quot; is uninhabitable in a last-ditch attempt to convince him to surrender, but he is undeterred and continues up the ladder. The city is then revealed to be entirely underground, and THX has escaped onto the surface, where he witnesses the Sun setting.

==Cast==

* Robert Duvall as THX 1138
* Donald Pleasence as SEN 5241
* Maggie McOmie as LUH 3417
* Don Pedro Colley as the hologram actor SRT 5752
* Ian Wolfe as the old prisoner PTO
* Marshall Efron as prisoner TWA
* Sid Haig as prisoner NCH
* John Pearce as prisoner DWY
* James Wheaton as the voice of OMM 0000

The announcer voices include those of Scott Beach, Terence McGovern, and David Ogden Stiers (billed as David Ogden Steers), all of whom had ties to the San Francisco Bay area, as did Lucas.

==Production==
&quot;THX 1138&quot; is the first film of a planned seven-picture slate commissioned by Warner Bros. from the 1969 incarnation of American Zoetrope. Lucas wrote the initial script draft based on his earlier short film, but Coppola and Lucas agreed that it was unsatisfactory. Walter Murch assisted Lucas in writing an improved final draft. For some of SEN&#x27;s dialogue in the film, the script included excerpts from speeches by Richard Nixon.

The script required almost the entire cast to shave their heads, either completely bald or with buzz cuts. As a publicity stunt, several actors were filmed having their first haircuts and shaves at unusual venues, with the results used in a promotional featurette titled &quot;&quot;. Many of the extras were recruited from the nearby Synanon, an addiction-recovery program that later became a violent cult.

Filming began on September 22, 1969. The schedule was planned for 35–40 days, completing in November 1969. Lucas filmed &quot;THX 1138&quot; in Techniscope.

Most filming locations are in the San Francisco area, including the unfinished tunnels of the Bay Area Rapid Transit subway system, the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, the Marin County Civic Center in San Rafael designed by Frank Lloyd Wright, the Lawrence Hall of Science in Berkeley, the San Francisco International Airport and at a remote manipulator for a hot cell. Several scenes show one of the FAA 9020 IBM System/360 used for air traffic control multi-computer installation (the only version with a &quot;360 Mode&quot; button on the console). Studio sequences were shot at stages in Los Angeles, including a white stage for the &quot;white limbo&quot; sequences. Lucas used entirely natural light.
The chase scene features two Lola T70 Mk III race cars chased by Yamaha TA125/250cc two-stroke, race-replica motorcycles through two San Francisco Bay Area automotive tunnels: the Caldecott Tunnel between Oakland and Orinda and the underwater Posey Tube between Oakland and Alameda. According to Caleb Deschanel, cars drove at speeds of while filming the chase. Other cars appearing in the film include custom-built Ferrari Thomassima cars, one of which is on display in the Ferrari museum in Modena, Italy.

The chase features a motorcycle stunt in which stuntman Ronald &quot;Duffy&quot; Hambleton (credited as Duffy Hamilton) rode his police motorcycle full speed into a fallen scaffold, with a ramp built to his specification. He flew over the handlebars, was hit by the airborne motorcycle, landed in the street on his back, and slammed into the crashed car in which Duvall&#x27;s character had escaped. According to Lucas, Hambleton was uninjured but angry at the people who came to his aid, worried that they may have ruined the stunt by walking into frame.

THX&#x27;s final climb out to the daylight was filmed (with the camera rotated 90°) in the incomplete (and decidedly horizontal) Bay Area Rapid Transit Transbay Tube before installation of the track supports, with the actors using exposed reinforcing bars on the floor of the tunnel as a ladder. The end scene in which THX stands before the sunset was shot at Port Hueneme, California by a second unit of photographer Caleb Deschanel and Matthew Robbins, who played THX in this long shot.

After completion of photography, Coppola scheduled one year for Lucas to complete postproduction. Lucas edited the film on a German-made K-E-M flatbed editor in his Mill Valley house by day and Walter Murch edited sound at night, comparing notes as each session ended. Murch compiled and synchronized the sound montage, which includes elements such as the &quot;overhead&quot; voices, radio chatter and announcements. The bulk of the editing was finished by mid-1970.

On completion of editing, Coppola took it to Warner Bros., the financiers. Studio executives disliked the film and insisted that Coppola provide the negative to an in-house editor, who cut about four minutes of the film prior to release.

==Soundtrack==
The soundtrack to &quot;THX 1138&quot;, conducted by Lalo Schifrin, was released in 1970. Recording took place on October 15 and 16, 1970 at the Burbank Studios in Burbank, California.

===Track listing===
# Logo – 00:08
# Main Title / What&#x27;s Wrong? – 03:14
# Room Tone / Primitive Dance – 01:46
# Be Happy / LUH / Society Montage – 05:06
# Be Happy Again (Jingle of the Future) – 00:56
# Source #1 – 05:18
# Loneliness Sequence – 01:28
# SEN / Monks / LUH Reprise – 02:44
# You Have Nowhere to Go – 01:12
# Torture Sequence / Prison Talk Sequence – 03:42
# Love Dream / The Awakening – 01:47
# First Escape – 03:01
# Source #3 – 03:34
# Second Escape – 01:16
# Source #4 / Third Escape / Morgue Sequence / The Temple / Disruption / LUH&#x27;s Death – 08:31
# Source #2 – 03:17
# The Hologram – 00:56
# First Chase / Foot Chase / St. Matthew&#x27;s Passion (Bach) (End Credits) – 07:40

==Reception==

&quot;THX 1138&quot; was released to theaters on March 11, 1971, and was a commercial flop, earning $945,000 in rentals for Warner Bros. and an overall loss for the studio. A contemporary survey found seven favorable, three mixed and five negative reviews.

Roger Ebert of the &quot;Chicago Sun-Times&quot; awarded the film three stars out of four and wrote, &quot;&quot;THX 1138&quot; suffers somewhat from its simple storyline, but as a work of visual imagination it&#x27;s special, and as haunting as parts of &quot;2001: A Space Odyssey&quot;, &quot;Silent Running&quot;, and &quot;The Andromeda Strain&quot;.&quot; Gene Siskel of the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; awarded two stars out of four and stated, &quot;The principal problem with this film is that it lacks imagination, the essential component of a science fiction film. Some persons might claim that the world of &quot;THX 1138&quot; is here right now. A more reasonable opinion would hold that we are facing the problems of that world right now. Time has passed the film by.&quot;

Vincent Canby of &quot;The New York Times&quot; wrote, &quot;It is not, however, as either chase drama, or social drama, that &quot;THX 1138&quot; is most interesting. Rather it&#x27;s as a stunning montage of light, color and sound effects that create their own emotional impact ... Lucas&#x27;s achievement in his first feature is all the more extraordinary when you realize that he is 25 years old, and that he shot most of the film in San Francisco, on a budget that probably would not cover the cost of half of one of the space ships in Stanley Kubrick&#x27;s &quot;2001.&quot;&quot;

Arthur D. Murphy of &quot;Variety&quot; observed, &quot;Likely not to be an artistic or commercial success in its own time, the American Zoetrope (Francis Ford Coppola group) production just might in time become a classic of stylistic, abstract cinema.&quot; Charles Champlin of the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; praised the film as &quot;a stunning deployment of the aural and visual resources of the screen to suggest a fearful new world of tyranny by technology&quot;, adding that &quot;Lucas is obviously a master of cinematic effects with a special remarkable gift for discovering the look of the future in mundane places like parking structures and office corridors.&quot; Champlin stressed that the &quot;real excitement of &quot;THX 1138&quot; is not really the message but the medium — the use of film not to tell a story so much as to convey an experience, a credible impression of a fantastic and scary dictatorship of tomorrow.&quot;

Kenneth Turan wrote in &quot;The Washington Post&quot;, &quot;Fortunately, the film comes over not at all trite but rather as enormously affecting. Lucas obviously believed strongly in this futuristic vision, and the film draws its vitality and unity from his belief, and from the fact that it was not bottled up to meet arbitrary conditions but allowed the free rein necessary to reach completeness.&quot; Penelope Houston of &quot;The Monthly Film Bulletin&quot; commented, &quot;Details of the future society — control panels, monitor screens, soothing TV commercial voices, unshakeably calm robot policemen, the human animal turned automaton in appearance and function, but breaking out into a doomed love affair — are all tolerably persuasive, but in sum total rather a pile-up of predictability. On the Orwellian level of ideas, Lucas&#x27; passive new world is too indeterminate to carry enough conviction and, consequently, enough of a menacing charge.&quot;

The film has continued to earn critical acclaim and holds an approval rating of 85% on Rotten Tomatoes based on 67 reviews, with an average score of 6.8/10. The consensus reads: &quot;George Lucas&#x27;s feature debut presents a spare, bleak, dystopian future, and features evocatively minimal set design and creepy sound effects.&quot; On Metacritic it has a weighted average score of 75 out of 100 based on 8 reviews, indicating &quot;generally favorable reviews&quot;.

===Awards===
The film received a nomination at the 1971 Cannes Film Festival from the International Federation of Film Critics in the Directors&#x27; Fortnight section.

==Versions==
===1967 student film===

The first version was a 15-minute student film for the USC School of Cinematic Arts titled &quot;Electronic Labyrinth: THX 1138 4EB&quot;. It was released as a bonus feature along with the 2004 director&#x27;s cut release.

===1971 studio version===
The 1971 studio version, distributed to theaters, had five minutes removed (against Lucas&#x27; wishes) by Warner Bros. This 81-minute version has never been released in any home-media format.

===1977 restored version===
In 1977, after the success of &quot;Star Wars&quot;, &quot;THX 1138&quot; was rereleased with the footage restored that had been deleted by Warner Bros., but it still failed to achieve popularity. This version was later released in VHS (88 minutes) and LaserDisc (86 minutes) formats.

===2004 director&#x27;s cut===

In 2004, &quot;The George Lucas Director&#x27;s Cut&quot; of the film was released. Under Lucas&#x27; supervision, the film underwent an extensive restoration and digital intermediate process by Lowry Digital and Industrial Light &amp; Magic (ILM), where the film&#x27;s original negative was scanned, digital color correction was applied and a new digital master was created. Computer-generated imagery and audio/video restoration techniques were also applied to the film.

At Lucas&#x27;s request, the previsualization team at Skywalker Ranch worked with ILM throughout mid-2003. The team also executed a single-day shoot to form the basis for new digital visual effects, mostly to expand scenes by extending crowds and adding detail to settings and backgrounds for many scenes.

These changes increased the runtime of the film to 88 minutes. This director&#x27;s cut was released to a limited number of digital-projection theaters on September 10, 2004, and then on DVD on September 14, 2004. The film was released on Blu-ray on September 7, 2010. With the addition of the added content, the film&#x27;s MPAA rating was changed from GP (now known as PG) to R for &quot;sexuality/nudity&quot;. It is the only film directed by Lucas to carry an &quot;R&quot; rating.

===Novelization===
A novelization based on the film was written by Ben Bova and published in 1971. It follows the film&#x27;s plot closely, with four additions:
* An additional character, Control, is the accountant-like ultimate administrator of the city. Several passages depict the events from his point of view.
* After having sex with LUH 3417, THX 1138 consults a psychologist and admits everything. This psychologist transfers the confession to Control, leading to the overriding mindlock and arrest in the factory.
* LUH 3417&#x27;s trial and death are depicted first-hand from her point of view and from that of Control.
* Instead of climbing outside to witness a sunset, THX 1138 climbs up and spends the night in the superstructure, and exits in the morning to find other humans living outside.

==Etymology and references==

The significance of the name THX 1138 has been the subject of much speculation. Lucas chose the letters and numbers for their aesthetic qualities, especially their symmetry. Lucas named the film after his telephone number while in college, 849-1138—the letters THX correspond to the numbers 8, 4, and 9 on the keypad. However, Walter Murch said that he always believed that Lucas intended THX to be &quot;sex&quot;, LUH to be &quot;love&quot;, and SEN to be &quot;sin&quot;. John Lithgow described the title &quot;THX 1138&quot; as &quot;reading like a license plate number&quot;.

Numerous references to &quot;1138&quot; or &quot;THX 1138&quot; appear throughout the &quot;Star Wars&quot; franchise, and other of Lucas&#x27; films. THX 138 is the license plate number of John Milner&#x27;s hot rod in &quot;American Graffiti&quot;. Lucas founded THX Ltd., developer of the &quot;THX&quot; audiovisual reproduction standards.

It is also widely believed that The Misfits&#x27; song &quot;We Are 138&quot; is lyrically inspired from the film. Their songwriter Glenn Danzig has repeatedly denied this, claiming instead that the song is &quot;about violence.&quot;

==See also==
* List of American films of 1971
* List of cult films
* List of films featuring surveillance
* &quot;Calling All Girls&quot; (Queen song)
* &quot;99&quot; (song), 1979, by Toto
* Utopian and dystopian fiction

==References==
===Further reading===
* 

==External links==

* at lucasfilm.com
* at warnerbros.com
* at LucasFan.com
* White on White Village Voice review April 8, 1971
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q944250" start="28" end="50" title="social science fiction" label="social science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q38222" start="83" end="95" title="George Lucas" label="George Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q56094" start="134" end="154" title="Francis Ford Coppola" label="Francis Ford Coppola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394956" start="173" end="185" title="Walter Murch" label="Walter Murch"/>
<link wikidata="Q171736" start="202" end="215" title="Robert Duvall" label="Robert Duvall"/>
<link wikidata="Q314914" start="220" end="236" title="Donald Pleasence" label="Donald Pleasence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239413" start="243" end="259" title="Don Pedro Colley" label="Don Pedro Colley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884033" start="261" end="274" title="Maggie McOmie" label="Maggie McOmie"/>
<link wikidata="Q346833" start="280" end="289" title="Ian Wolfe" label="Ian Wolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q180774" start="332" end="340" title="dystopia" label="dystopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q181787" start="389" end="396" title="Android (robot)" label="android"/>
<link wikidata="" start="533" end="567" title="Electronic Labyrinth: THX 1138 4EB" label="Electronic Labyrinth: THX 1138 4EB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583249" start="612" end="640" title="USC School of Cinematic Arts" label="USC School of Cinematic Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="699" end="711" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q467348" start="716" end="733" title="American Zoetrope" label="American Zoetrope"/>
<link wikidata="Q436664" start="753" end="761" title="Ben Bova" label="Ben Bova"/>
<link wikidata="Q209672" start="957" end="971" title="cult following" label="cult following"/>
<link wikidata="Q17738" start="1038" end="1047" title="Star Wars (film)" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q240862" start="1064" end="1083" title="director&amp;#x27;s cut" label="director&amp;#x27;s cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q180774" start="1141" end="1149" title="dystopia" label="dystopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5873" start="1159" end="1177" title="sexual intercourse" label="sexual intercourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q11990" start="1182" end="1194" title="reproduction" label="reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706669" start="1215" end="1234" title="Psychoactive drug" label="mind-altering drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q181787" start="1466" end="1474" title="Android (robot)" label="androids"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="2291" end="2303" title="Jesus" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q847337" start="2390" end="2400" title="confession" label="confession"/>
<link wikidata="Q527628" start="2621" end="2635" title="Holography" label="holobroadcasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q527628" start="3731" end="3739" title="Holography" label="hologram"/>
<link wikidata="Q26513" start="4116" end="4121" title="fetus" label="fetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q171736" start="5417" end="5430" title="Robert Duvall" label="Robert Duvall"/>
<link wikidata="Q314914" start="5445" end="5461" title="Donald Pleasence" label="Donald Pleasence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884033" start="5476" end="5489" title="Maggie McOmie" label="Maggie McOmie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239413" start="5504" end="5520" title="Don Pedro Colley" label="Don Pedro Colley"/>
<link wikidata="Q346833" start="5554" end="5563" title="Ian Wolfe" label="Ian Wolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773560" start="5590" end="5604" title="Marshall Efron" label="Marshall Efron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331953" start="5623" end="5631" title="Sid Haig" label="Sid Haig"/>
<link wikidata="Q6252369" start="5650" end="5661" title="John Pearce (actor)" label="John Pearce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6145378" start="5680" end="5693" title="James Wheaton" label="James Wheaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435965" start="5758" end="5769" title="Scott Beach" label="Scott Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184219" start="5771" end="5787" title="Terry McGovern (actor)" label="Terence McGovern"/>
<link wikidata="Q202449" start="5793" end="5811" title="David Ogden Stiers" label="David Ogden Stiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q467348" start="6056" end="6073" title="American Zoetrope" label="American Zoetrope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394956" start="6202" end="6214" title="Walter Murch" label="Walter Murch"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="6357" end="6370" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640574" start="6469" end="6477" title="buzz cut" label="buzz cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2375620" start="6708" end="6715" title="Synanon" label="Synanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932268" start="6926" end="6937" title="Techniscope" label="Techniscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="6974" end="6987" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q610120" start="7034" end="7056" title="Bay Area Rapid Transit" label="Bay Area Rapid Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q519826" start="7076" end="7114" title="Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory" label="Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150950" start="7120" end="7145" title="Marin County Civic Center" label="Marin County Civic Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q631915" start="7149" end="7159" title="San Rafael, California" label="San Rafael"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604" start="7172" end="7190" title="Frank Lloyd Wright" label="Frank Lloyd Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q14683059" start="7196" end="7220" title="Lawrence Hall of Science" label="Lawrence Hall of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q484678" start="7224" end="7232" title="Berkeley, California" label="Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q8688" start="7238" end="7273" title="San Francisco International Airport" label="San Francisco International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q606878" start="7283" end="7301" title="remote manipulator" label="remote manipulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601563" start="7308" end="7316" title="hot cell" label="hot cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q609843" start="7358" end="7372" title="IBM System/360" label="IBM System/360"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502590" start="7684" end="7692" title="Lola T70" label="Lola T70"/>
<link wikidata="Q158888" start="7720" end="7726" title="Yamaha Motor Company" label="Yamaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q213205" start="7788" end="7810" title="San Francisco Bay Area" label="San Francisco Bay Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018994" start="7835" end="7851" title="Caldecott Tunnel" label="Caldecott Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042" start="7860" end="7867" title="Oakland, California" label="Oakland"/>
<link wikidata="Q206464" start="7872" end="7878" title="Orinda, California" label="Orinda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233047" start="7898" end="7908" title="Posey and Webster Street Tubes" label="Posey Tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q490744" start="7929" end="7936" title="Alameda, California" label="Alameda"/>
<link wikidata="Q49020" start="7951" end="7966" title="Caleb Deschanel" label="Caleb Deschanel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8079" end="8094" title="Tom Meade#Thomassima series" label="Thomassima cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329137" start="8130" end="8144" title="Museo Casa Enzo Ferrari" label="Ferrari museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q279" start="8148" end="8161" title="Modena" label="Modena, Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688982" start="8873" end="8886" title="Transbay Tube" label="Transbay Tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q983853" start="9081" end="9105" title="Port Hueneme, California" label="Port Hueneme, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3852272" start="9159" end="9174" title="Matthew Robbins (screenwriter)" label="Matthew Robbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582621" start="9354" end="9368" title="flatbed editor" label="flatbed editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394956" start="9405" end="9417" title="Walter Murch" label="Walter Murch"/>
<link wikidata="Q247293" start="9987" end="10000" title="Lalo Schifrin" label="Lalo Schifrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720617" start="10075" end="10094" title="the Burbank Studios" label="the Burbank Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q39561" start="10098" end="10105" title="Burbank, California" label="Burbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="11099" end="11110" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q577417" start="11124" end="11141" title="Chicago Sun-Times" label="Chicago Sun-Times"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11360" end="11381" title="2001: A Space Odyssey" label="2001: A Space Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q770904" start="11395" end="11409" title="Silent Running" label="Silent Running"/>
<link wikidata="Q499036" start="11427" end="11447" title="The Andromeda Strain (film)" label="The Andromeda Strain"/>
<link wikidata="Q969105" start="11461" end="11472" title="Gene Siskel" label="Gene Siskel"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="11486" end="11501" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q716442" start="11887" end="11900" title="Vincent Canby" label="Vincent Canby"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="11910" end="11928" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="12503" end="12510" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063922" start="12736" end="12752" title="Charles Champlin" label="Charles Champlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="12766" end="12783" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353410" start="13424" end="13437" title="Kenneth Turan" label="Kenneth Turan"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="13453" end="13472" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q13107374" start="13857" end="13882" title="The Monthly Film Bulletin" label="The Monthly Film Bulletin"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="14479" end="14494" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="14732" end="14742" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q729113" start="14752" end="14768" title="weighted average" label="weighted average"/>
<link wikidata="Q42369" start="14921" end="14941" title="Cannes Film Festival" label="Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q253988" start="14951" end="14991" title="International Federation of Film Critics" label="International Federation of Film Critics"/>
<link wikidata="Q838403" start="14999" end="15024" title="Directors&amp;#x27; Fortnight" label="Directors&amp;#x27; Fortnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583249" start="15128" end="15156" title="USC School of Cinematic Arts" label="USC School of Cinematic Arts"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15170" end="15204" title="Electronic Labyrinth: THX 1138 4EB" label="Electronic Labyrinth: THX 1138 4EB"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="15777" end="15780" title="VHS" label="VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q273309" start="15798" end="15807" title="LaserDisc" label="LaserDisc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415247" start="16000" end="16021" title="film restoration" label="extensive restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q61695203" start="16026" end="16046" title="digital intermediate" label="digital intermediate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694157" start="16058" end="16071" title="Lowry Digital" label="Lowry Digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q746676" start="16076" end="16104" title="Industrial Light &amp;amp; Magic" label="Industrial Light &amp;amp; Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q595597" start="16134" end="16151" title="negative (photography)" label="original negative"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148596" start="16173" end="16189" title="color correction" label="color correction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276108" start="16212" end="16226" title="digital master" label="digital master"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002306" start="16240" end="16266" title="Computer-generated imagery" label="Computer-generated imagery"/>
<link wikidata="Q240862" start="16713" end="16732" title="director&amp;#x27;s cut" label="director&amp;#x27;s cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="16832" end="16835" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="16884" end="16891" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q676222" start="16970" end="16974" title="Motion Picture Association of America" label="MPAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421000" start="17153" end="17165" title="novelization" label="novelization"/>
<link wikidata="Q436664" start="17199" end="17207" title="Ben Bova" label="Ben Bova"/>
<link wikidata="Q311271" start="18443" end="18455" title="John Lithgow" label="John Lithgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q375855" start="18776" end="18793" title="American Graffiti" label="American Graffiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044630" start="18815" end="18823" title="THX" label="THX Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q311785" start="18927" end="18938" title="Misfits (band)" label="The Misfits"/>
<link wikidata="Q85814708" start="18956" end="18966" title="We Are 138" label="We Are 138"/>
<link wikidata="Q354654" start="19027" end="19039" title="Glenn Danzig" label="Glenn Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561531" start="19146" end="19176" title="List of American films of 1971" label="List of American films of 1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q6614871" start="19179" end="19197" title="List of cult films" label="List of cult films"/>
<link wikidata="Q6620012" start="19200" end="19236" title="List of films featuring surveillance" label="List of films featuring surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19239" end="19281" title="Calling All Girls#Music video" label="&amp;quot;Calling All Girls&amp;quot; (Queen song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399032" start="19284" end="19305" title="99 (song)" label="&amp;quot;99&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q358998" start="19323" end="19352" title="Utopian and dystopian fiction" label="Utopian and dystopian fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q876158" start="19489" end="19502" title="Village Voice" label="Village Voice"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31198" wikidata="Q201898" url="?curid=31198" title="Tuning fork">
<text>A tuning fork is an acoustic resonator in the form of a two-pronged fork with the prongs (&quot;tines&quot;) formed from a U-shaped bar of elastic metal (usually steel). It resonates at a specific constant pitch when set vibrating by striking it against a surface or with an object, and emits a pure musical tone once the high overtones fade out. A tuning fork&#x27;s pitch depends on the length and mass of the two prongs. They are traditional sources of standard pitch for tuning musical instruments.

The tuning fork was invented in 1711 by British musician John Shore, sergeant trumpeter and lutenist to the royal court.

==Description==
A tuning fork is a fork-shaped acoustic resonator used in many applications to produce a fixed tone. The main reason for using the fork shape is that, unlike many other types of resonators, it produces a very pure tone, with most of the vibrational energy at the fundamental frequency. The reason for this is that the frequency of the first overtone is about = = times the fundamental (about octaves above it). By comparison, the first overtone of a vibrating string or metal bar is one octave above (twice) the fundamental, so when the string is plucked or the bar is struck, its vibrations tend to mix the fundamental and overtone frequencies. When the tuning fork is struck, little of the energy goes into the overtone modes; they also die out correspondingly faster, leaving a pure sine wave at the fundamental frequency. It is easier to tune other instruments with this pure tone.

Another reason for using the fork shape is that it can then be held at the base without damping the oscillation. That is because its principal mode of vibration is symmetric, with the two prongs always moving in opposite directions, so that at the base where the two prongs meet there is a node (point of no vibratory motion) which can therefore be handled without removing energy from the oscillation (damping). However, there is still a tiny motion induced in the handle in its longitudinal direction (thus at right angles to the oscillation of the prongs) which can be made audible using any sort of sound board. Thus by pressing the tuning fork&#x27;s base against a sound board such as a wooden box, table top, or bridge of a musical instrument, this small motion, but which is at a high acoustic pressure (thus a very high acoustic impedance), is partly converted into audible sound in air which involves a much greater motion (particle velocity) at a relatively low pressure (thus low acoustic impedance). The pitch of a tuning fork can also be heard directly through bone conduction, by pressing the tuning fork against the bone just behind the ear, or even by holding the stem of the fork in one&#x27;s teeth, conveniently leaving both hands free. Bone conduction using a tuning fork is specifically used in the Weber and Rinne tests for hearing in order to bypass the middle ear. If just held in open air, the sound of a tuning fork is very faint due to the acoustic impedance mismatch between the steel and air. Moreover, since the feeble sound waves emanating from each prong are 180° out of phase, those two opposite waves interfere, largely cancelling each other. Thus when a solid sheet is slid in between the prongs of a vibrating fork, the apparent volume actually &quot;increases&quot;, as this cancellation is reduced, just as a loudspeaker requires a baffle in order to radiate efficiently.

Commercial tuning forks are tuned to the correct pitch at the factory, and the pitch and frequency in hertz is stamped on them. They can be retuned by filing material off the prongs. Filing the ends of the prongs raises the pitch, while filing the inside of the base of the prongs lowers it.

Currently, the most common tuning fork sounds the note of A = 440 Hz, the standard concert pitch that many orchestras use. That A is the pitch of the violin&#x27;s second-highest string, the highest string of the viola, and an octave above the highest string of the cello. Orchestras between 1750 and 1820 mostly used A = 423.5 Hz, though there were many forks and many slightly different pitches. Standard tuning forks are available that vibrate at all the pitches within the central octave of the piano, and also other pitches.

Tuning fork pitch varies slightly with temperature, due mainly to a slight decrease in the modulus of elasticity of steel with increasing temperature. A change in frequency of 48 parts per million per °F (86 ppm per °C) is typical for a steel tuning fork. The frequency decreases (becomes flat) with increasing temperature. Tuning forks are manufactured to have their correct pitch at a standard temperature. The standard temperature is now , but is an older standard. The pitch of other instruments is also subject to variation with temperature change.

==Calculation of frequency==
The frequency of a tuning fork depends on its dimensions and what it is made from: 

: formula_1

where
: is the frequency the fork vibrates at, (SI units: 1/s)
:  ≈ 3.516015 is the square of the smallest positive solution to , which arises from the boundary conditions of the prong’s cantilevered structure.
: is the length of the prongs, (m)
: is the Young&#x27;s modulus (elastic modulus or stiffness) of the material the fork is made from, (Pa or N/m2 or kg/(ms2))
: is the second moment of area of the cross-section, (m4)
: is the density of the fork&#x27;s material (kg/m3), and
: is the cross-sectional area of the prongs (tines) (m2).

The ratio in the equation above can be rewritten as if the prongs are cylindrical with radius , and if the prongs have rectangular cross-section of width along the direction of motion.

==Uses==
Tuning forks have traditionally been used to tune musical instruments, though electronic tuners have largely replaced them. Forks can be driven electrically by placing electronic oscillator-driven electromagnets close to the prongs.

===In musical instruments===
A number of keyboard musical instruments use principles similar to tuning forks. The most popular of these is the Rhodes piano, in which hammers hit metal tines that vibrate in the magnetic field of a pickup, creating a signal that drives electric amplification. The earlier, un-amplified dulcitone, which used tuning forks directly, suffered from low volume.

===In clocks and watches===
The quartz crystal that serves as the timekeeping element in modern quartz clocks and watches is in the form of a tiny tuning fork. It usually vibrates at a frequency of 32,768 Hz in the ultrasonic range (above the range of human hearing). It is made to vibrate by small oscillating voltages applied by an electronic oscillator circuit to metal electrodes plated on the surface of the crystal. Quartz is piezoelectric, so the voltage causes the tines to bend rapidly back and forth.

The Accutron, an electromechanical watch developed by Max Hetzel and manufactured by Bulova beginning in 1960, used a 360-hertz steel tuning fork as its timekeeper, powered by electromagnets attached to a battery-powered transistor oscillator circuit. The fork provided greater accuracy than conventional balance wheel watches. The humming sound of the tuning fork was audible when the watch was held to the ear.

===Medical and scientific uses===
Alternatives to the common A=440 standard include philosophical or scientific pitch with standard pitch of C=512. According to Rayleigh, physicists and acoustic instrument makers used this pitch. The tuning fork John Shore gave to George Frideric Handel produces C=512.

Tuning forks, usually C512, are used by medical practitioners to assess a patient&#x27;s hearing. This is most commonly done with two exams called the Weber test and Rinne test, respectively. Lower-pitched ones, usually at C128, are also used to check vibration sense as part of the examination of the peripheral nervous system.

Orthopedic surgeons have explored using a tuning fork (lowest frequency C=128) to assess injuries where bone fracture is suspected. They hold the end of the vibrating fork on the skin above the suspected fracture, progressively closer to the suspected fracture. If there is a fracture, the periosteum of the bone vibrates and fires nociceptors (pain receptors), causing a local sharp pain. This can indicate a fracture, which the practitioner refers for medical X-ray. The sharp pain of a local sprain can give a false positive. Established practice, however, requires an X-ray regardless, because it&#x27;s better than missing a real fracture while wondering if a response means a sprain. A systematic review published in 2014 in BMJ Open suggests that this technique is not reliable or accurate enough for clinical use.

=== Non-medical and non-scientific uses ===
Tuning forks also play a role in several alternative therapy practices, such as sonopuncture and polarity therapy.

=== Radar gun calibration ===
A radar gun that measures the speed of cars or a ball in sports is usually calibrated with a tuning fork. Instead of the frequency, these forks are labeled with the calibration speed and radar band (e.g., X-band or K-band) they are calibrated for.

===In gyroscopes===
Doubled and H-type tuning forks are used for tactical-grade Vibrating Structure Gyroscopes and various types of microelectromechanical systems.

===Level sensors===
Tuning fork forms the sensing part of vibrating point level sensors. The tuning fork is kept vibrating at its resonant frequency by a piezoelectric device. Upon coming in contact with solids, amplitude of oscillation goes down, the same is used as a switching parameter for detecting point level for solids. For liquids, the resonant frequency of tuning fork changes upon coming in contact with the liquids, change in frequency is used to detect level.

== See also ==
* Electronic tuner
* Pitch pipe
* Savart wheel
* Tonometer
==References==
==External links==
*Onlinetuningfork.com, an online tuning fork using Macromedia Flash Player.
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q201898" start="2" end="13" title="Tuning fork" label="tuning fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q510293" start="20" end="28" title="Musical acoustics" label="acoustic"/>
<link wikidata="Q349669" start="29" end="38" title="resonator" label="resonator"/>
<link wikidata="Q81881" start="68" end="72" title="fork" label="fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q15043709" start="90" end="107" title="Tine (structural)" label="&amp;quot;tines&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672013" start="139" end="146" title="Elastic deformation" label="elastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="162" end="167" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558427" start="173" end="182" title="acoustic resonance" label="resonates"/>
<link wikidata="Q118819" start="206" end="211" title="pitch (music)" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q261967" start="327" end="335" title="overtone" label="overtone"/>
<link wikidata="Q858576" start="475" end="481" title="musical tuning" label="tuning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373295" start="561" end="571" title="John Shore (trumpeter)" label="John Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q8338" start="582" end="589" title="trumpet" label="trumpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q180733" start="596" end="600" title="lute" label="lute"/>
<link wikidata="Q349669" start="673" end="691" title="acoustic resonator" label="acoustic resonator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573668" start="851" end="860" title="pure tone" label="pure tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331774" start="905" end="926" title="fundamental frequency" label="fundamental frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127660" start="1617" end="1624" title="Damping ratio" label="damping"/>
<link wikidata="Q900488" start="1672" end="1676" title="Normal mode" label="mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062658" start="1819" end="1823" title="node (physics)" label="node"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189953" start="2132" end="2143" title="Sound board (music)" label="sound board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068172" start="2322" end="2339" title="Sound pressure" label="acoustic pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q975684" start="2358" end="2376" title="acoustic impedance" label="acoustic impedance"/>
<link wikidata="Q336894" start="2463" end="2480" title="particle velocity" label="particle velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q490249" start="2604" end="2619" title="bone conduction" label="bone conduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470699" start="2850" end="2855" title="Weber test" label="Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759298" start="2860" end="2870" title="Rinne test" label="Rinne test"/>
<link wikidata="Q501553" start="2907" end="2917" title="middle ear" label="middle ear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761108" start="3006" end="3024" title="impedance mismatch" label="impedance mismatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q185553" start="3133" end="3138" title="phase (waves)" label="phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q136980" start="3165" end="3174" title="Interference (wave motion)" label="interfere"/>
<link wikidata="Q59123" start="3400" end="3406" title="Loudspeaker enclosure" label="baffle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610210" start="3792" end="3802" title="A440 (pitch standard)" label="A = 440 Hz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571955" start="3817" end="3830" title="concert pitch" label="concert pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q192005" start="4356" end="4377" title="modulus of elasticity" label="modulus of elasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7001368" start="4554" end="4558" title="flat (music)" label="flat"/>
<link wikidata="Q102145" start="4678" end="4698" title="Standard temperature and pressure" label="standard temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="4962" end="4971" title="frequency" label="frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="4995" end="5003" title="SI units" label="SI units"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091584" start="5202" end="5222" title="Young&amp;#x27;s modulus" label="Young&amp;#x27;s modulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q835065" start="5327" end="5348" title="second moment of area" label="second moment of area"/>
<link wikidata="Q29539" start="5385" end="5392" title="density" label="density"/>
<link wikidata="Q11500" start="5459" end="5463" title="area" label="area"/>
<link wikidata="Q858576" start="5733" end="5737" title="Musical tuning" label="tune"/>
<link wikidata="Q34379" start="5738" end="5756" title="musical instrument" label="musical instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298056" start="5766" end="5782" title="electronic tuner" label="electronic tuner"/>
<link wikidata="Q249997" start="5856" end="5877" title="electronic oscillator" label="electronic oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q178032" start="5885" end="5898" title="electromagnet" label="electromagnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q52954" start="5963" end="5971" title="keyboard instrument" label="keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q743659" start="6065" end="6077" title="Rhodes piano" label="Rhodes piano"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6152" end="6158" title="Pickup (music technology)#Magnetic pickups" label="pickup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264755" start="6240" end="6249" title="dulcitone" label="dulcitone"/>
<link wikidata="Q877055" start="6344" end="6358" title="crystal oscillator" label="quartz crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q257916" start="6408" end="6420" title="quartz clock" label="quartz clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q178794" start="6426" end="6431" title="watch" label="watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q162564" start="6527" end="6537" title="ultrasound" label="ultrasonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q249997" start="6646" end="6667" title="electronic oscillator" label="electronic oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q183759" start="6744" end="6757" title="piezoelectric" label="piezoelectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q663300" start="6828" end="6836" title="Accutron" label="Accutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357672" start="6841" end="6864" title="Electromechanical watches" label="electromechanical watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q663300" start="6909" end="6915" title="Bulova" label="Bulova"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="6946" end="6951" title="hertz" label="hertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q17087764" start="7322" end="7355" title="Scientific pitch" label="philosophical or scientific pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q83297" start="7399" end="7407" title="John William Strutt, 3rd Baron Rayleigh" label="Rayleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373295" start="7484" end="7494" title="John Shore (trumpeter)" label="John Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302" start="7503" end="7525" title="George Frideric Handel" label="George Frideric Handel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470699" start="7694" end="7704" title="Weber test" label="Weber test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759298" start="7709" end="7719" title="Rinne test" label="Rinne test"/>
<link wikidata="Q216685" start="7873" end="7892" title="orthopedic surgery" label="Orthopedic surgeons"/>
<link wikidata="Q367423" start="8163" end="8173" title="periosteum" label="periosteum"/>
<link wikidata="Q412542" start="8205" end="8215" title="nociceptor" label="nociceptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003470" start="8604" end="8612" title="BMJ Open" label="BMJ Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q188504" start="8781" end="8800" title="alternative medicine" label="alternative therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q121713" start="8820" end="8832" title="sonopuncture" label="sonopuncture"/>
<link wikidata="Q23618232" start="8837" end="8853" title="polarity therapy" label="polarity therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032075" start="8888" end="8897" title="radar gun" label="radar gun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9215" end="9245" title="Vibrating structure gyroscope#Tuning fork gyroscope" label="Vibrating Structure Gyroscopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q175561" start="9267" end="9297" title="microelectromechanical systems" label="microelectromechanical systems"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9368" end="9387" title="Level sensor#Point level detection of liquids" label="point level sensors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298056" start="9791" end="9807" title="Electronic tuner" label="Electronic tuner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757934" start="9810" end="9820" title="Pitch pipe" label="Pitch pipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427954" start="9823" end="9835" title="Savart wheel" label="Savart wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q107660" start="9838" end="9847" title="Tonometer (music)" label="Tonometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q234946" start="9933" end="9943" title="Macromedia" label="Macromedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q857177" start="9944" end="9956" title="Flash Player" label="Flash Player"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31199" wikidata="Q208420" url="?curid=31199" title="Trireme">
<text>A trireme ( ; ; cf. ) was an ancient vessel and a type of galley that was used by the ancient maritime civilizations of the Mediterranean Sea, especially the Phoenicians, ancient Greeks and Romans.

The trireme derives its name from its three rows of oars, manned with one man per oar. The early trireme was a development of the penteconter, an ancient warship with a single row of 25 oars on each side (i.e., a single-banked boat), and of the bireme (, ), a warship with two banks of oars, of Phoenician origin. The word &quot;dieres&quot; does not appear until the Roman period. According to Morrison and Williams, &quot;It must be assumed the term pentekontor covered the two-level type&quot;. As a ship, it was fast and agile and was the dominant warship in the Mediterranean from the 7th to the 4th centuries BC, after which it was largely superseded by the larger quadriremes and quinqueremes. Triremes played a vital role in the Persian Wars, the creation of the Athenian maritime empire and its downfall during the Peloponnesian War.

Medieval and early modern galleys with three files of oarsmen per side are sometimes referred to as triremes.

==History==

===Origins===

Depictions of two-banked ships (biremes), with or without the &quot;parexeiresia&quot; (the outriggers, see below), are common in 8th century BC and later vases and pottery fragments, and it is at the end of that century that the first references to three-banked ships are found. Fragments from an 8th-century relief at the Assyrian capital of Nineveh depicting the fleets of Tyre and Sidon show ships with rams, and fitted with oars pivoted at two levels. They have been interpreted as two-decked warships, and also as triremes.

Modern scholarship is divided on the provenance of the trireme, Greece or Phoenicia, and the exact time it developed into the foremost ancient fighting ship. According to Thucydides, the trireme was introduced to Greece by the Corinthians in the late 8th century BC, and the Corinthian Ameinocles built four such ships for the Samians. This was interpreted by later writers, Pliny and Diodorus, to mean that triremes were &quot;invented&quot; in Corinth. Clement of Alexandria in the 2nd century, drawing on earlier works, explicitly attributes the invention of the trireme (&quot;trikrotos naus&quot;, &quot;three-banked ship&quot;) to the Sidonians the possibility remains that the earliest three-banked warships originated in Phoenicia.

===Early use and development===

Herodotus mentions that the Egyptian pharaoh Necho II (610–595 BC) built triremes on the Nile, for service in the Mediterranean, and in the Red Sea, but this reference is disputed by modern historians, and attributed to a confusion, since &quot;triērēs&quot; was by the 5th century used in the generic sense of &quot;warship&quot;, regardless its type. The first definite reference to the use of triremes in naval combat dates to , when, according to Herodotus, the tyrant Polycrates of Samos was able to contribute 40 triremes to a Persian invasion of Egypt (Battle of Pelusium). The Persians were the first nation to use triremes in significant numbers. By 490 BC, triremes were the backbone of the Persian fleet. Thucydides clearly states that in the time of the Persian Wars, the majority of the Greek navies consisted of (probably two-tiered) penteconters and &quot;ploia makrá&quot; (&quot;long ships&quot;).

In any case, by the early 5th century, the trireme was becoming the dominant warship type of the eastern Mediterranean, with minor differences between the &quot;Greek&quot; and &quot;Phoenician&quot; types, as literary references and depictions of the ships on coins make clear. The first large-scale naval battle where triremes participated was the Battle of Lade during the Ionian Revolt, where the combined fleets of the Greek Ionian cities were defeated by the Persian fleet, composed of squadrons from their Phoenician, Carian, and Egyptian subjects.

===The Persian Wars===
Athens was at that time embroiled in a conflict with the neighbouring island of Aegina, which possessed a formidable navy. In order to counter this, and possibly with an eye already at the mounting Persian preparations, in 483/2 BC the Athenian statesman Themistocles used his political skills and influence to persuade the Athenian assembly to start the construction of 200 triremes, using the income of the newly discovered silver mines at Laurion. The first clash with the Persian navy was at the Battle of Artemisium, where both sides suffered great casualties. However, the decisive naval clash occurred at Salamis, where Xerxes&#x27; invasion fleet was decisively defeated.

After Salamis and another Greek victory over the Persian fleet at Mycale, the Ionian cities were freed, and the Delian League was formed under the aegis of Athens. Gradually, the predominance of Athens turned the League effectively into an Athenian Empire. The source and foundation of Athens&#x27; power was her strong fleet, composed of over 200 triremes. It not only secured control of the Aegean Sea and the loyalty of her allies, but also safeguarded the trade routes and the grain shipments from the Black Sea, which fed the city&#x27;s burgeoning population. In addition, as it provided permanent employment for the city&#x27;s poorer citizens, the fleet played an important role in maintaining and promoting the radical Athenian form of democracy. Athenian maritime power is the first example of thalassocracy in world history. Aside from Athens, other major naval powers of the era included Syracuse, Corfu and Corinth.

In the subsequent Peloponnesian War, naval battles fought by triremes were crucial in the power balance between Athens and Sparta. Despite numerous land engagements, Athens was finally defeated through the destruction of her fleet during the Sicilian Expedition, and finally, at the Battle of Aegospotami, at the hands of Sparta and her allies.

==Design==
Based on all archeological evidence, the design of the trireme most likely pushed the technological limits of the ancient world. After gathering the proper timbers and materials it was time to consider the fundamentals of the trireme design. These fundamentals included accommodations, propulsion, weight and waterline, centre of gravity and stability, strength, and feasibility. All of these variables are dependent on one another; however a certain area may be more important than another depending on the purpose of the ship.

The arrangement and number of oarsmen is the first deciding factor in the size of the ship. For a ship to travel at high speeds would require a high oar-gearing, which is the ratio between the outboard length of an oar and the inboard length; it is this arrangement of the oars which is unique and highly effective for the trireme. The ports would house the oarsmen with a minimal waste of space. There would be three files of oarsmen on each side tightly but workably packed by placing each man outboard of, and in height overlapping, the one below, provided that thalamian tholes were set inboard and their ports enlarged to allow oar movement. 
Thalamian, zygian, and thranite are the English terms for &#x27; (), &#x27; (), and &quot;&quot; (), the Greek words for the oarsmen in, respectively the lowest, middle, and uppermost files of the triereis. 
The holes were pins that acted as fulcrums to the oars that allowed them to move. The center of gravity of the ship is low because of the overlapping formation of the files that allow the ports to remain closer to the ships walls. A lower center of gravity would provide adequate stability.

The trireme was constructed to maximize all traits of the ship to the point where if any changes were made the design would be compromised. Speed was maximized to the point where any less weight would have resulted in considerable losses to the ship&#x27;s integrity. The center of gravity was placed at the lowest possible position where the Thalamian tholes were just above the waterline which retained the ship&#x27;s resistance to waves and the possible rollover. If the center of gravity were placed any higher, the additional beams needed to restore stability would have resulted in the exclusion of the Thalamian the holes due to the reduced hull space. The purpose of the area just below the center of gravity and the waterline known as the &quot;&quot; () was to allow bending of the hull when faced with up to 90 kN of force. The calculations of forces that could have been absorbed by the ship are arguable because there is not enough evidence to confirm the exact process of jointing used in ancient times. In a modern reconstruction of the ship, a polysulphide sealant was used to compare to the caulking that evidence suggests was used; however this is also contentious because there is simply not enough evidence to authentically reproduce the triereis seams.

Triremes required a great deal of upkeep in order to stay afloat, as references to the replacement of ropes, sails, rudders, oars and masts in the middle of campaigns suggest. They also would become waterlogged if left in the sea for too long. In order to prevent this from happening, ships would have to be pulled from the water during the night. The use of lightwoods meant that the ship could be carried ashore by as few as 140 men. Beaching the ships at night, however, would leave the troops vulnerable to surprise attacks. While well-maintained triremes would last up to 25 years, during the Peloponnesian War, Athens had to build nearly 20 triremes a year to maintain their fleet of 300.

The Athenian trireme had two great cables of about 47 mm in diameter and twice the ship&#x27;s length called &quot;hypozomata&quot; (undergirding), and carried two spares. They were possibly rigged fore and aft from end to end along the middle line of the hull just under the main beams and tensioned to 13.5 tonnes force. The &quot;hypozomata&quot; were considered important and secret: their export from Athens was a capital offense. This cable would act as a stretched tendon straight down the middle of the hull, and would have prevented hogging. Additionally, hull plank butts would remain in compression in all but the most severe sea conditions, reducing working of joints and consequent leakage. The &quot;hypozomata&quot; would also have significantly braced the structure of the trireme against the stresses of ramming, giving it an important advantage in combat. According to material scientist J.E. Gordon: &quot;The &quot;hupozoma&quot; was therefore an essential part of the hulls of these ships; they were unable to fight, or even to go to sea at all, without it. Just as it used to be the practice to disarm modern warships by removing the breech-blocks from the guns, so, in classical times, disarmament commissioners used to disarm triremes by removing the &quot;hupozomata&quot;.&quot;

===Dimensions===
Excavations of the ship sheds (&quot;neōsoikoi&quot;, νεώσοικοι) at the harbour of Zea in Piraeus, which was the main war harbour of ancient Athens, were first carried out by Dragatsis and Wilhelm Dörpfeld in the 1880s. These have provided us with a general outline of the Athenian trireme. The sheds were ca. 40 m long and just 6 m wide. These dimensions are corroborated by the evidence of Vitruvius, whereby the individual space allotted to each rower was 2 cubits. With the Doric cubit of 0.49 m, this results in an overall ship length of just under 37 m. The height of the sheds&#x27; interior was established as 4.026 metres, leading to estimates that the height of the hull above the water surface was ca. 2.15 metres. Its draught was relatively shallow, about 1 metre, which, in addition to the relatively flat keel and low weight, allowed it to be beached easily.

===Construction===

Construction of the trireme differed from modern practice. The construction of a trireme was expensive and required around 6,000 man-days of labour to complete. The ancient Mediterranean practice was to build the outer hull first, and the ribs afterwards. To secure and add strength to the hull, cables (&quot;hypozōmata&quot;) were employed, fitted in the keel and stretched by means of windlasses. Hence the triremes were often called &quot;girded&quot; when in commission.

The materials from which the trireme was constructed were an important aspect of its design. The three principal timbers included fir, pine, and cedar. Primarily the choice in timber depended on where the construction took place. For example, in Syria and Phoenicia, triereis were made of cedar, because pine was not readily available. Pine is stronger and more resistant to decay, but it is heavy, unlike fir, which was used because it was lightweight. The frame and internal structure would consist of pine and fir for a compromise between durability and weight.

Another very strong type of timber is oak; this was primarily used for the hulls of triereis, to withstand the force of hauling ashore. Other ships would usually have their hulls made of pine, because they would usually come ashore via a port or with the use of an anchor. It was necessary to ride the triereis onto the shores because there simply was no time to anchor a ship during war and gaining control of enemy shores was crucial in the advancement of an invading army. (Petersen) The joints of the ship required finding wood that was capable of absorbing water but was not completely dried out to the point where no water absorption could occur. There would be gaps between the planks of the hull when the ship was new, but, once submerged, the planks would absorb the water and expand, thus forming a watertight hull.

Problems would occur, for example, when shipbuilders would use green wood for the hull; when green timber is allowed to dry, it loses moisture, which causes cracks in the wood that could cause catastrophic damage to the ship. The sailyards and masts were preferably made from fir, because fir trees were naturally tall, and provided these parts in usually a single piece. Making durable rope consisted of using both papyrus and white flax; the idea to use such materials is suggested by evidence to have originated in Egypt. In addition, ropes began being made from a variety of esparto grass in the later third century BC.

The use of light woods meant that the ship could be carried ashore by as few as 140 men, but also that the hull soaked up water, which adversely affected its speed and maneuverability. But it was still faster than other warships.
Once the triremes were seaworthy, it is argued that they were highly decorated with, &quot;eyes, nameplates, painted figureheads, and various ornaments&quot;. These decorations were used both to show the wealth of the patrician and to make the ship frightening to the enemy. The home port of each trireme was signaled by the wooden statue of a deity located above the bronze ram on the front of the ship. In the case of Athens, since most of the fleet&#x27;s triremes were paid for by wealthy citizens, there was a natural sense of competition among the patricians to create the &quot;most impressive&quot; trireme, both to intimidate the enemy and to attract the best oarsmen. Of all military expenditure, triremes were the most labor- and (in terms of men and money) investment-intensive.

===Propulsion and capabilities===
The ship&#x27;s primary propulsion came from the 170 oars (&quot;kōpai&quot;), arranged in three rows, with one man per oar. Evidence for this is provided by Thucydides, who records that the Corinthian oarsmen carried &quot;each his oar, cushion (&quot;hypersion&quot;) and oarloop&quot;. The ship also had two masts, a main (&quot;histos megas&quot;) and a small foremast (&quot;histos akateios&quot;), with square sails, while steering was provided by two steering oars at the stern (one at the port side, one to starboard).

Classical sources indicate that the trireme was capable of sustained speeds of ca. 6 knots at relatively leisurely oaring. There is also a reference by Xenophon of a single day&#x27;s voyage from Byzantium to Heraclea Pontica, which translates as an average speed of 7.37 knots. These figures seem to be corroborated by the tests conducted with the reconstructed &quot;Olympias&quot;: a maximum speed of 8 knots and a steady speed of 4 knots could be maintained, with half the crew resting at a time. Given the imperfect nature of the reconstructed ship, as well as the fact that it was manned by totally untrained modern men and women, it is reasonable to suggest that ancient triremes, expertly built and navigated by trained men, would attain higher speeds.

The distance a trireme could cover in a given day depended much on the weather. On a good day, the oarsmen, rowing for 6–8 hours, could propel the ship between . There were rare instances, however, when experienced crews and new ships were able to cover nearly twice that distance (Thucydides mentions a trireme travelling 300 kilometres in one day). The commanders of the triremes also had to stay aware of the condition of their men. They had to keep their crews comfortably paced, so as not to exhaust them before battle.

==Crew==
The total complement (&quot;plērōma&quot;) of the ship was about 200. These were divided into the 170 rowers (&quot;eretai&quot;), who provided the ship&#x27;s motive power, the deck crew headed by the trierarch and a marine detachment. The trierarch would be situated in the rear of the ship, and relay orders to the rest of the crew via the rowmaster. For the crew of Athenian triremes, the ships were an extension of their democratic beliefs. Rich and poor rowed alongside each other. Victor Davis Hanson argues that this &quot;served the larger civic interest of acculturating thousands as they worked together in cramped conditions and under dire circumstances.&quot;

During the Peloponnesian War, there were a few variations to the typical crew layout of a trireme. One was a drastically reduced number of oarsmen, so as to use the ship as a troop transport. The thranites would row from the top benches while the rest of the space, below, would be filled with hoplites. In another variation, the Athenians used 10 or so trireme for transporting horses. Such triremes had 60 oarsmen, and rest of the ship was for horses.

The trireme was designed for day-long journeys, with no capacity to stay at sea overnight, or to carry the provisions needed to sustain its crew overnight. Each crewman required 2 gallons (7.6 l) of fresh drinking water to stay hydrated each day, but it is unknown quite how this was stored and distributed. This meant that all those aboard were dependent upon the land and peoples of wherever they landed each night for supplies. Sometimes this would entail traveling up to eighty kilometres in order to procure provisions. In the Peloponnesian War, the beached Athenian fleet was caught unawares on more than one occasion, while out looking for food (Battle of Syracuse and Battle of Aegospotami). Cities visited, which suddenly found themselves needing to provide for large numbers of sailors, usually did not mind the extra business, though those in charge of the fleet had to be careful not to deplete them of resources.

===Trierarch===
In Athens, the ship&#x27;s patron was known as the trierarch (&quot;triērarchos&quot;). He was a wealthy Athenian citizen (usually from the class of the &quot;pentakosiomedimnoi&quot;), responsible for manning, fitting out and maintaining the ship for his liturgical year at least; the ship itself belonged to Athens. The &quot;triērarchia&quot; was one of the liturgies of ancient Athens; although it afforded great prestige, it constituted a great financial burden, so that in the 4th century, it was often shared by two citizens, and after 397 BC it was assigned to special boards.

===Deck crew===
The deck and command crew (&quot;hypēresia&quot;) was headed by the helmsman, the &quot;kybernētēs&quot;, who was always an experienced seaman and was often the commander of the vessel. These experienced sailors were to be found on the upper levels of the triremes. Other officers were the bow lookout (&quot;prōreus&quot; or &quot;prōratēs&quot;), the boatswain (&quot;keleustēs&quot;), the quartermaster (&quot;pentēkontarchos&quot;), the shipwright (&quot;naupēgos&quot;), the piper (&quot;aulētēs&quot;) who gave the rowers&#x27; rhythm and two superintendents (&quot;toicharchoi&quot;), in charge of the rowers on each side of the ship. What constituted these sailors&#x27; experience was a combination of superior rowing skill (physical stamina and/or consistency in hitting with a full stroke) and previous battle experience. The sailors were likely in their thirties and forties. In addition, there were ten sailors handling the masts and the sails.

===Rowers===
In the ancient navies, crews were composed not of galley slaves but of free men. In the Athenian case in particular, service in ships was the integral part of the military service provided by the lower classes, the &quot;thētai&quot;, although metics and hired foreigners were also accepted. Although it has been argued that slaves formed part of the rowing crew in the Sicilian Expedition, a typical Athenian trireme crew during the Peloponnesian War consisted of 80 citizens, 60 metics and 60 foreign hands. Indeed, in the few emergency cases where slaves were used to crew ships, these were deliberately set free, usually before being employed. For instance, the tyrant Dionysius I of Syracuse once set all slaves of Syracuse free to man his galleys, employing thus freedmen, but otherwise relied on citizens and foreigners as oarsmen.

In the Athenian navy, the crews enjoyed long practice in peacetime, becoming skilled professionals and ensuring Athens&#x27; supremacy in naval warfare. The rowers were divided according to their positions in the ship into &quot;thranitai&quot;, &quot;zygitai&quot;, and &quot;thalamitai&quot;. According to the excavated Naval Inventories, lists of ships&#x27; equipment compiled by the Athenian naval boards, there were:
* 62 &quot;thranitai&quot; in the top row (&quot;thranos&quot; means &quot;deck&quot;). They rowed through the &quot;parexeiresia&quot;, an outrigger which enabled the inclusion of the third row of oars without significant increase to the height and loss of stability of the ship. Greater demands were placed upon their strength and synchronization than on those of the other two rows.
* 54 &quot;zygitai&quot; in the middle row, named after the beams (&quot;zygoi&quot;) on which they sat.
* 54 &quot;thalamitai&quot; or &quot;thalamioi&quot; in the lowest row, (&quot;thalamos&quot; means &quot;hold&quot;). Their position was certainly the most uncomfortable, being underneath their colleagues and also exposed to the water entering through the oarholes, despite the use of the &quot;askōma&quot;, a leather sleeve through which the oar emerged.

Most of the rowers (108 of the 170 – the &quot;zygitai&quot; and &quot;thalamitai&quot;), due to the design of the ship, were unable to see the water and therefore, rowed blindly, therefore coordinating the rowing required great skill and practice. It is not known exactly how this was done, but there are literary and visual references to the use of gestures and pipe playing to convey orders to rowers. In the sea trials of the reconstruction &quot;Olympias&quot;, it was evident that this was a difficult problem to solve, given the amount of noise that a full rowing crew generated. In Aristophanes&#x27; play &quot;The Frogs&quot; two different rowing chants can be found: &quot;&quot;ryppapai&quot; and &quot;o opop&quot;&quot;, both corresponding quite well to the sound and motion of the oar going through its full cycle.

===Marines===
A varying number of marines (&quot;epibatai&quot;), usually 10–20, were carried aboard for boarding actions. At the Battle of Salamis, each Athenian ship was recorded to have 14 hoplites and 4 archers (usually Scythian mercenaries) on board, but Herodotus narrates that the Chiots had 40 hoplites on board at Lade and that the Persian ships carried a similar number. This reflects the different practices between the Athenians and other, less professional navies. Whereas the Athenians relied on speed and maneuverability, where their highly trained crews had the advantage, other states favored boarding, in a situation that closely mirrored the one that developed during the First Punic War. Grappling hooks would be used both as a weapon and for towing damaged ships (ally or enemy) back to shore. When the triremes were alongside each other, marines would either spear the enemy or jump across and cut the enemy down with their swords. As the presence of too many heavily armed hoplites on deck tended to destabilize the ship, the &quot;epibatai&quot; were normally seated, only rising to carry out any boarding action. The hoplites belonged to the middle social classes, so that they came immediately next to the trierarch in status aboard the ship.

==Tactics==

In the ancient world, naval combat relied on two methods: boarding and ramming. Artillery in the form of ballistas and catapults was widespread, especially in later centuries, but its inherent technical limitations meant that it could not play a decisive role in combat. The method for boarding was to brush alongside the enemy ship, with oars drawn in, in order to break the enemy&#x27;s oars and render the ship immobile (which disables the enemy ship from simply getting away), then to board the ship and engage in hand-to-hand combat.

Rams (&quot;embola&quot;) were fitted to the prows of warships, and were used to rupture the hull of the enemy ship. The preferred method of attack was to come in from astern, with the aim not of creating a single hole, but of rupturing as big a length of the enemy vessel as possible. The speed necessary for a successful impact depended on the angle of attack; the greater the angle, the lesser the speed required. At 60 degrees, 4 knots was enough to penetrate the hull, while it increased to 8 knots at 30 degrees. If the target for some reason was in motion in the direction of the attacker, even less speed was required, and especially if the hit came amidships. The Athenians especially became masters in the art of ramming, using light, un-decked (&quot;aphraktai&quot;) triremes.

In either case, the masts and railings of the ship were taken down prior to engagement to reduce the opportunities for opponents&#x27; grappling hooks.

===On-board forces===
Unlike the naval warfare of other eras, boarding an enemy ship was not the primary offensive action of triremes. Triremes&#x27; small size allowed for a limited number of marines to be carried aboard. During the 5th and 4th centuries, the trireme&#x27;s strength was in its maneuverability and speed, not its armor or boarding force. That said, fleets less confident in their ability to ram were prone to load more marines onto their ships.

On the deck of a typical trireme in the Peloponnesian War there were 4 or 5 archers and 10 or so marines. These few troops were peripherally effective in an offensive sense, but critical in providing defense for the oarsmen. Should the crew of another trireme board, the marines were all that stood between the enemy troops and the slaughter of the men below. It has also been recorded that if a battle were to take place in the calmer water of a harbor, oarsmen would join the offensive and throw stones (from a stockpile aboard) to aid the marines in harassing/attacking other ships.

===Naval strategy in the Peloponnesian War===

Squadrons of triremes employed a variety of tactics. The &quot;periplous&quot; (Gk., &quot;sailing around&quot;) involved outflanking or encircling the enemy so as to attack them in the vulnerable rear; the &quot;diekplous&quot; (Gk., &quot;Sailing out through&quot;) involved a concentrated charge so as to break a hole in the enemy line, allowing galleys to break through and then wheel to attack the enemy line from behind; and the &quot;kyklos&quot; (Gk., &quot;circle&quot;) and the &quot;mēnoeidēs kyklos&quot; (Gk. &quot;half-circle&quot;; literally, &quot;moon-shaped (i.e. crescent-shaped) circle&quot;), were defensive tactics to be employed against these manoeuvres. In all of these manoeuvres, the ability to accelerate faster, row faster, and turn more sharply than one&#x27;s enemy was very important.

Athens&#x27; strength in the Peloponnesian War came from its navy, whereas Sparta&#x27;s came from its land-based Hoplite army. As the war progressed however the Spartans came to realize that if they were to undermine Pericles&#x27; strategy of outlasting the Peloponnesians by remaining within the walls of Athens indefinitely (a strategy made possible by Athens&#x27; Long Walls and fortified port of Piraeus), they were going to have to do something about Athens superior naval force. Once Sparta gained Persia as an ally, they had the funds necessary to construct the new naval fleets necessary to combat the Athenians. Sparta was able to build fleet after fleet, eventually destroying the Athenian fleet at the Battle of Aegospotami. The Spartan General Brasidas summed up the difference in approach to naval warfare between the Spartans and the Athenians: &quot;Athenians relied on speed and maneuverability on the open seas to ram at will clumsier ships; in contrast, a Peloponnesian armada might win only when it fought near land in calm and confined waters, had the greater number of ships in a local theater, and if its better-trained marines on deck and hoplites on shore could turn a sea battle into a contest of infantry.&quot; In addition, compared to the high-finesse of the Athenian navy (superior oarsmen who could outflank and ram enemy triremes from the side), the Spartans (as well as their allies and other enemies of Athens) would focus mainly on ramming Athenian triremes head on. It would be these tactics, in combination with those outlined by Brasidas, that led to the defeat of the Athenian fleet at the Second Battle of Syracuse during the Sicilian Expedition.

===Casualties===
Once a naval battle was under way, for the men involved, there were numerous ways for them to meet their end. Drowning was perhaps the most common way for a crew member to perish. Once a trireme had been rammed, the ensuing panic that engulfed the men trapped below deck no doubt extended the amount of time it took the men to escape. Inclement weather would greatly decrease the crew&#x27;s odds of survival, leading to a situation like that off Cape Athos in 411 (12 of 10,000 men were saved). An estimated 40,000 Persians died in the Battle of Salamis. In the Peloponnesian War, after the Battle of Arginusae, six Athenian generals were executed for failing to rescue several hundred of their men clinging to wreckage in the water.

If the men did not drown, they might be taken prisoner by the enemy. In the Peloponnesian War, &quot;Sometimes captured crews were brought ashore and either cut down or maimed – often grotesquely, by cutting off the right hand or thumb to guarantee that they could never row again.&quot; The image found on an early-5th-century black-figure, depicting prisoners bound and thrown into the sea being pushed and prodded under water with poles and spears, shows that enemy treatment of captured sailors in the Peloponnesian War was often brutal. Being speared amid the wreckage of destroyed ships was likely a common cause of death for sailors in the Peloponnesian War.

Naval battles were far more of a spectacle than the hoplite battles on land. Sometimes the battles raging at sea were watched by thousands of spectators on shore. Along with this greater spectacle, came greater consequences for the outcome of any given battle. Whereas the average percentage of fatalities from a land battle were between 10 and 15%, in a sea battle, the forces engaged ran the risk of losing their entire fleet. The number of ships and men in battles was sometimes very high. At the Battle of Arginusae for example, 263 ships were involved, making for a total of 55,000 men, and at the Battle of Aegospotami more than 300 ships and 60,000 seamen were involved. In Battle of Aegospotami, the city-state of Athens lost what was left of its navy: the once &#x27;invincible&#x27; thalassocracy lost 170 ships (costing some 400 talents), and the majority of the crews were either killed, captured or lost.

==Changes of engagement and construction==

During the Hellenistic period, the light trireme was supplanted by larger warships in dominant navies, especially the pentere/quinquereme. The maximum practical number of oar banks a ship could have was three. So the number in the type name did not refer to the banks of oars any more (as for biremes and triremes), but to the number of rowers per vertical section, with several men on each oar. The reason for this development was the increasing use of armour on the bows of warships against ramming attacks, which again required heavier ships for a successful attack. This increased the number of rowers per ship, and also made it possible to use less well-trained personnel for moving these new ships. This change was accompanied by an increased reliance on tactics like boarding, missile skirmishes and using warships as platforms for artillery.

Triremes continued to be the mainstay of all smaller navies. While the Hellenistic kingdoms did develop the quinquereme and even larger ships, most navies of the Greek homeland and the smaller colonies could only afford triremes. They were used by the Diadochi Empires and sea powers like Syracuse, Carthage and later Rome. The difference to the classical 5th century Athenian ships was that they were armoured against ramming and carried significantly more marines. Lightened versions of the trireme and smaller vessels were often used as auxiliaries, and still performed quite effectively against the heavier ships, thanks to their greater manoeuvrability.
With the rise of the Roman Empire the biggest fleet of quinqueremes temporarily ruled the Mediterranean, but during the civil wars after Caesar&#x27;s death the fleet was on the wrong side and a new warfare with light liburnas was developed. By Imperial times, Rome controlled the entirety of the Mediterranean and thus the need to maintain a powerful navy was minimal, as the only enemy they would be facing is pirates. As a result, the fleet was relatively small and had mostly political influence, controlling the grain supply and fighting pirates, who usually employed light biremes and liburnians. But instead of the successful liburnians of the Greek Civil War, it was again centred around light triremes, but still with many marines. Out of this type of ship, the dromon developed. 

The &quot;Classis Germanica&quot;, which guarded the imperial border on the Rhine river, used light river triremes, the &quot;Classis Britannica&quot;, the Channel Fleet, had the task of logistical movement of personnel and support, and keeping open communication routes across the English Channel.

==Reconstruction==

In 1985–1987 a shipbuilder in Piraeus, financed by Frank Welsh (an author, Suffolk banker, writer and trireme enthusiast), advised by historian J. S. Morrison and naval architect John F. Coates (who with Welsh founded the Trireme Trust that initiated and managed the project), and informed by evidence from underwater archaeology, built an Athenian-style trireme, &quot;Olympias&quot;.

Crewed by 170 volunteer oarsmen, &quot;Olympias&quot; in 1988 achieved 9 knots (17 km/h or 10.5 mph). These results, achieved with inexperienced crew, suggest that the ancient writers were not exaggerating about straight-line performance. In addition, &quot;Olympias&quot; was able to execute a 180 degree turn in one minute and in an arc no wider than two and one half (2.5) ship-lengths. Additional sea trials took place in 1987, 1990, 1992 and 1994. In 2004 &quot;Olympias&quot; was used ceremonially to transport the Olympic Flame from the port of Keratsini to the main port of Piraeus as the 2004 Olympic Torch Relay entered its final stages in the run-up to the 2004 Summer Olympics opening ceremony.

The builders of the reconstruction project concluded that it effectively proved what had previously been in doubt, i.e., that Athenian triremes were arranged with the crew positioned in a staggered arrangement on three levels with one person per oar. This architecture would have made optimum use of the available internal dimensions. However, since modern humans are on average approximately 6 cm (2 inches) taller than Ancient Greeks (and the same relative dimensions can be presumed for oarsmen and other athletes), the construction of a craft which followed the precise dimensions of the ancient vessel led to cramped rowing conditions and consequent restrictions on the modern crew&#x27;s ability to propel the vessel with full efficiency, which perhaps explains why the ancient speed records stand unbroken.

==See also==
* Warship
* Penteconter
* Bireme

==Notes==
==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Thucydides, History of the Peloponnesian War
* &quot;Age of the Trireme&quot;, special issue of &quot;Ancient Warfare&quot;, 2/2 (2008)

==External links==

* &quot;A Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities (1890)&quot;, entry on &quot;Warships&quot;
* E. J. de Meester&#x27;s page
* Hellenic Navy web page for the reconstructed &quot;Olympias&quot; trireme
* History and archeology of the ship – lecture notes – 26. Triremes, from the Centre for Maritime Archaeology of the University of Southampton
* Merchant ships page
* The Trireme Trust</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q208420" start="2" end="9" title="Trireme" label="trireme"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752971" start="29" end="43" title="ancient navies and vessels" label="ancient vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q188924" start="58" end="64" title="galley" label="galley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="124" end="141" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="158" end="169" title="Phoenicians" label="Phoenicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="171" end="185" title="ancient Greece" label="ancient Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="190" end="196" title="ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003749" start="251" end="254" title="oar" label="oar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423264" start="329" end="340" title="penteconter (ship)" label="penteconter"/>
<link wikidata="Q629990" start="444" end="450" title="bireme" label="bireme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031121" start="751" end="758" title="warship" label="warship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="766" end="779" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q15249389" start="870" end="880" title="quadrireme" label="quadrireme"/>
<link wikidata="Q15249389" start="886" end="897" title="quinquereme" label="quinquereme"/>
<link wikidata="Q76026" start="936" end="948" title="Persian Wars" label="Persian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064853" start="970" end="978" title="Ancient Athens" label="Athenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33745" start="1023" end="1040" title="Peloponnesian War" label="Peloponnesian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q188924" start="1069" end="1075" title="galley" label="galley"/>
<link wikidata="Q629990" start="1214" end="1220" title="bireme" label="bireme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562991" start="1274" end="1284" title="outriggers" label="outriggers"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="1506" end="1513" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5680" start="1526" end="1533" title="Nineveh" label="Nineveh"/>
<link wikidata="Q82070" start="1558" end="1562" title="Tyre, Lebanon" label="Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q163490" start="1567" end="1572" title="Sidon" label="Sidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q83858" start="1589" end="1593" title="ramming" label="rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="1777" end="1783" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="1787" end="1796" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41683" start="1884" end="1894" title="Thucydides" label="Thucydides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363688" start="1940" end="1951" title="Ancient Corinth" label="Corinthians"/>
<link wikidata="Q156882" start="2040" end="2047" title="Samos" label="Samians"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="2088" end="2093" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="2098" end="2106" title="Diodorus" label="Diodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q188883" start="2168" end="2189" title="Clement of Alexandria" label="Clement of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q163490" start="2354" end="2359" title="Sidon" label="Sidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="2442" end="2451" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="2487" end="2496" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="2515" end="2523" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q125102" start="2532" end="2540" title="Necho II" label="Necho II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="2576" end="2580" title="Nile" label="Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="2627" end="2634" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="2938" end="2947" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q180095" start="2953" end="2959" title="tyrant" label="tyrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q294840" start="2960" end="2970" title="Polycrates" label="Polycrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q156882" start="2974" end="2979" title="Samos" label="Samos"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="3020" end="3027" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="3040" end="3045" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q544239" start="3047" end="3065" title="Battle of Pelusium (525 BC)" label="Battle of Pelusium"/>
<link wikidata="Q76026" start="3253" end="3265" title="Persian Wars" label="Persian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q427565" start="3753" end="3767" title="Battle of Lade" label="Battle of Lade"/>
<link wikidata="Q208261" start="3779" end="3792" title="Ionian Revolt" label="Ionian Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q620874" start="3833" end="3838" title="Ionia" label="Ionia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193214" start="3928" end="3933" title="Caria" label="Caria"/>
<link wikidata="Q926624" start="3940" end="3948" title="Twenty-seventh Dynasty of Egypt" label="Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q191082" start="4063" end="4069" title="Aegina" label="Aegina"/>
<link wikidata="Q179552" start="4238" end="4250" title="Themistocles" label="Themistocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q730392" start="4307" end="4324" title="Ecclesia (ancient Athens)" label="Athenian assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314937" start="4409" end="4432" title="Mines of Laurion" label="silver mines at Laurion"/>
<link wikidata="Q104848707" start="4459" end="4471" title="Achaemenid navy" label="Persian navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q747679" start="4483" end="4503" title="Battle of Artemisium" label="Battle of Artemisium"/>
<link wikidata="Q178850" start="4595" end="4602" title="Battle of Salamis" label="Salamis"/>
<link wikidata="Q503982" start="4730" end="4736" title="Battle of Mycale" label="Mycale"/>
<link wikidata="Q193235" start="4776" end="4789" title="Delian League" label="Delian League"/>
<link wikidata="Q223767" start="5392" end="5418" title="Athenian democracy" label="Athenian form of democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q288587" start="5468" end="5481" title="thalassocracy" label="thalassocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13670" start="5564" end="5572" title="Syracuse, Sicily" label="Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q121378" start="5574" end="5579" title="Corfu" label="Corfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363688" start="5584" end="5591" title="Ancient Corinth" label="Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q844289" start="5836" end="5855" title="Sicilian Expedition" label="Sicilian Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q866862" start="5877" end="5898" title="Battle of Aegospotami" label="Battle of Aegospotami"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="5916" end="5922" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740969" start="10143" end="10150" title="Hogging and sagging" label="hogging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680321" start="10507" end="10518" title="J.E. Gordon" label="J.E. Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q58976" start="11014" end="11021" title="Piraeus" label="Piraeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q60239" start="11113" end="11129" title="Wilhelm Dörpfeld" label="Wilhelm Dörpfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q47163" start="11316" end="11325" title="Vitruvius" label="Vitruvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502030" start="11385" end="11391" title="cubits" label="cubits"/>
<link wikidata="Q244777" start="11654" end="11661" title="Draft (hull)" label="draught"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750281" start="12037" end="12041" title="hull (watercraft)" label="hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373406" start="12206" end="12214" title="windlass" label="windlass"/>
<link wikidata="Q928533" start="14267" end="14274" title="esparto" label="esparto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363688" start="15560" end="15570" title="Ancient Corinth" label="Corinthian"/>
<link wikidata="Q23725" start="16093" end="16102" title="Byzantium" label="Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q302511" start="16106" end="16122" title="Heraclea Pontica" label="Heraclea Pontica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069593" start="16266" end="16274" title="Olympias (trireme)" label="Olympias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770133" start="17435" end="17444" title="trierarch" label="trierarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276395" start="17682" end="17701" title="Victor Davis Hanson" label="Victor Davis Hanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q175249" start="18162" end="18170" title="hoplites" label="hoplites"/>
<link wikidata="Q33745" start="18855" end="18872" title="Peloponnesian War" label="Peloponnesian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q844289" start="18976" end="18994" title="Battle of Syracuse (415 BC)" label="Battle of Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q866862" start="18999" end="19020" title="Battle of Aegospotami" label="Battle of Aegospotami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770133" start="19317" end="19326" title="trierarch" label="trierarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q716540" start="19425" end="19443" title="pentacosiomedimni" label="pentakosiomedimnoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816377" start="19627" end="19636" title="Liturgy (ancient Greece)" label="liturgies"/>
<link wikidata="Q588083" start="20890" end="20902" title="galley slave" label="galley slave"/>
<link wikidata="Q716540" start="21061" end="21067" title="thetes" label="thētai"/>
<link wikidata="Q385625" start="21084" end="21090" title="metics" label="metics"/>
<link wikidata="Q844289" start="21210" end="21229" title="Sicilian Expedition" label="Sicilian Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q841571" start="21447" end="21455" title="freedman" label="set free"/>
<link wikidata="Q332750" start="21513" end="21536" title="Dionysius I of Syracuse" label="Dionysius I of Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q13670" start="21560" end="21568" title="Syracuse, Sicily" label="Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069593" start="23404" end="23412" title="Olympias (trireme)" label="Olympias"/>
<link wikidata="Q43353" start="23543" end="23555" title="Aristophanes" label="Aristophanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q815376" start="23573" end="23582" title="The Frogs" label="The Frogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q178850" start="23914" end="23931" title="Battle of Salamis" label="Battle of Salamis"/>
<link wikidata="Q175249" start="23976" end="23984" title="hoplites" label="hoplites"/>
<link wikidata="Q131802" start="24008" end="24016" title="Scythians" label="Scythian"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="24044" end="24053" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q160483" start="24072" end="24078" title="Chios" label="Chiots"/>
<link wikidata="Q427565" start="24107" end="24111" title="Battle of Lade" label="Lade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286" start="24475" end="24490" title="First Punic War" label="First Punic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q648919" start="25125" end="25133" title="Boarding (attack)" label="boarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q83858" start="25138" end="25145" title="ramming" label="ramming"/>
<link wikidata="Q219433" start="25172" end="25180" title="ballista" label="ballista"/>
<link wikidata="Q184393" start="25186" end="25195" title="catapults" label="catapults"/>
<link wikidata="Q128822" start="26041" end="26046" title="Knot (unit)" label="knots"/>
<link wikidata="Q208123" start="26355" end="26361" title="Deck (ship)" label="decked"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287607" start="26532" end="26546" title="grappling hook" label="grappling hook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898583" start="26743" end="26750" title="Marine (military)" label="marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q955920" start="27648" end="27657" title="Squadron (naval)" label="Squadrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="27728" end="27731" title="Ancient Greek" label="Gk."/>
<link wikidata="Q175249" start="28579" end="28586" title="Hoplite" label="Hoplite"/>
<link wikidata="Q80398" start="28683" end="28691" title="Pericles" label="Pericles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163616" start="28835" end="28845" title="Long Walls" label="Long Walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q866862" start="29181" end="29202" title="Battle of Aegospotami" label="Battle of Aegospotami"/>
<link wikidata="Q844289" start="30133" end="30152" title="Sicilian Expedition" label="Sicilian Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q178850" start="30709" end="30726" title="Battle of Salamis" label="Battle of Salamis"/>
<link wikidata="Q389257" start="30764" end="30783" title="Battle of Arginusae" label="Battle of Arginusae"/>
<link wikidata="Q629602" start="31236" end="31248" title="Black-figure pottery" label="black-figure"/>
<link wikidata="Q175249" start="31627" end="31634" title="hoplite" label="hoplite"/>
<link wikidata="Q389257" start="32075" end="32094" title="Battle of Arginusae" label="Battle of Arginusae"/>
<link wikidata="Q866862" start="32178" end="32199" title="Battle of Aegospotami" label="Battle of Aegospotami"/>
<link wikidata="Q866862" start="32256" end="32277" title="Battle of Aegospotami" label="Battle of Aegospotami"/>
<link wikidata="Q288587" start="32368" end="32381" title="thalassocracy" label="thalassocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="32549" end="32567" title="Hellenistic period" label="Hellenistic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q15249389" start="32664" end="32675" title="quinquereme" label="quinquereme"/>
<link wikidata="Q648919" start="33312" end="33320" title="Boarding (attack)" label="boarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="33377" end="33386" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q201546" start="33641" end="33649" title="Diadochi" label="Diadochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13670" start="33678" end="33686" title="Syracuse, Sicily" label="Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="33688" end="33696" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="33707" end="33711" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="34069" end="34081" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="34138" end="34151" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q18843" start="34266" end="34273" title="liburna" label="liburna"/>
<link wikidata="Q731662" start="34819" end="34825" title="dromon" label="dromon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096170" start="34849" end="34866" title="Classis Germanica" label="Classis Germanica"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="34915" end="34920" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q472978" start="34965" end="34983" title="Classis Britannica" label="Classis Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="35121" end="35136" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q58976" start="35189" end="35196" title="Piraeus" label="Piraeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5490296" start="35210" end="35221" title="Frank Welsh (writer)" label="Frank Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4141367" start="35303" end="35317" title="John Sinclair Morrison" label="J. S. Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226439" start="35338" end="35352" title="John Francis Coates" label="John F. Coates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069593" start="35529" end="35537" title="Olympias (trireme)" label="Olympias"/>
<link wikidata="Q170320" start="36067" end="36080" title="Olympic Flame" label="Olympic Flame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322006" start="36143" end="36167" title="2004 Olympic Torch Relay" label="2004 Olympic Torch Relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567610" start="36214" end="36251" title="2004 Summer Olympics opening ceremony" label="2004 Summer Olympics opening ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031121" start="37084" end="37091" title="Warship" label="Warship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423264" start="37094" end="37105" title="Penteconter" label="Penteconter"/>
<link wikidata="Q629990" start="37108" end="37114" title="Bireme" label="Bireme"/>
<link wikidata="Q41683" start="37167" end="37177" title="Thucydides" label="Thucydides"/>
<link wikidata="Q639493" start="37179" end="37211" title="History of the Peloponnesian War" label="History of the Peloponnesian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752935" start="37269" end="37284" title="Ancient Warfare (magazine)" label="Ancient Warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q76473" start="37644" end="37669" title="University of Southampton" label="University of Southampton"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31202" wikidata="Q294512" url="?curid=31202" title="Thalassa (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Thalassa]] is a personification of the sea in Greek mythology.

Thalassa may also refer to:

* Thalassa (band), a band which represented Greece at the Eurovision Song Contest 1998
* &quot;Thalassa&quot; (beetle), a genus of ladybug
* Thalassa (moon), a moon of the planet Neptune
* &quot;Thalassa&quot; (TV series), a French documentary programme
* , a ship of the Ifremer
* A fictional planet in Arthur C. Clarke&#x27;s novel &quot;The Songs of Distant Earth&quot;
* A character from the &quot;Star Trek&quot; original series episode &quot;Return to Tomorrow&quot;
* Thalassa Gramarye, a fictional musician in the video game &quot;Apollo Justice: Ace Attorney&quot;

==See also==
* Thalassia (disambiguation)
* Thalasso (disambiguation)
* Thalassocracy
* Thalassotherapy
* Panthalassa
* Thalatta! Thalatta!</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q294512" start="0" end="12" title="Thalassa (disambiguation)" label="[[Thalassa]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q294512" start="66" end="74" title="Thalassa (disambiguation)" label="Thalassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q10292253" start="97" end="112" title="Thalassa (band)" label="Thalassa (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18115200" start="184" end="213" title="Thalassa (beetle)" label="&amp;quot;Thalassa&amp;quot; (beetle)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19447" start="236" end="251" title="Thalassa (moon)" label="Thalassa (moon)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519442" start="284" end="316" title="Thalassa (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Thalassa&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q472368" start="435" end="461" title="The Songs of Distant Earth" label="The Songs of Distant Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487477" start="543" end="561" title="Return to Tomorrow" label="Return to Tomorrow"/>
<link wikidata="" start="634" end="662" title="Apollo Justice: Ace Attorney" label="Apollo Justice: Ace Attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709538" start="685" end="711" title="Thalassia (disambiguation)" label="Thalassia (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q115248016" start="714" end="739" title="Thalasso (disambiguation)" label="Thalasso (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q288587" start="742" end="755" title="Thalassocracy" label="Thalassocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420139" start="758" end="773" title="Thalassotherapy" label="Thalassotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q208378" start="776" end="787" title="Panthalassa" label="Panthalassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709578" start="790" end="809" title="Thalatta! Thalatta!" label="Thalatta! Thalatta!"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31204" wikidata="Q174929" url="?curid=31204" title="Tertullian">
<text>Tertullian (; ; 155 – 220 AD) was a prolific early Christian author from Carthage in the Roman province of Africa. He was the first Christian author to produce an extensive corpus of Latin Christian literature and was an early Christian apologist and a polemicist against heresy, including contemporary Christian Gnosticism. 

Tertullian was the first theologian to write in Latin, and so has been called &quot;the father of Latin Christianity&quot;, as well as &quot;the founder of Western theology&quot;. He is perhaps most famous for being the first writer in Latin known to use the term &quot;trinity&quot; (Latin: &quot;trinitas&quot;).

Tertullian originated new theological concepts and advanced the development of early Church doctrine. However, some of his teachings, such as the subordination of the Son and Spirit to the Father, were later rejected by the Church. According to Jerome, he later joined the Montanist sect and may have apostasized; however, modern scholars dispute this.

== Life ==
Scant reliable evidence exists regarding Tertullian&#x27;s life; most knowledge comes from passing references in his own writings. Roman Africa was famous as the home of orators, and that influence can be seen in his writing style with its archaisms or provincialisms, its glowing imagery and its passionate temper. He was a scholar with an excellent education. He wrote at least three books in Koine Greek; none of them are extant.

Some sources describe him as Berber. The linguist René Braun suggested that he was of Punic origin but acknowledged that it is difficult to decide since the heritage of Carthage had become common to the Berbers. Tertullian&#x27;s own understanding of his ethnicity has been questioned: He referred to himself as &quot;Poenicum inter Romanos&quot; () in his book &quot;De Pallio&quot; and claimed Africa as his &quot;patria&quot;. According to church tradition, Tertullian was raised in Carthage. Jerome claimed that Tertullian&#x27;s father held the position of &quot;centurio proconsularis&quot; (&quot;aide-de-camp&quot;) in the Roman army in Africa.

Tertullian has been claimed to have been a trained lawyer and an ordained priest. Those assertions rely on the accounts of Eusebius of Caesarea, &quot;Church History&quot;, II, ii. 4, and Jerome&#x27;s &quot;De viris illustribus&quot; (&quot;On famous men&quot;) chapter 53. Tertullian has also been thought to be a lawyer, based on his use of legal analogies and on an identification of him with the jurist Tertullianus, who is quoted in the &quot;Pandects&quot;. Although Tertullian used a knowledge of Roman law in his writings, his legal knowledge does not demonstrably exceed what could be expected from a sufficient Roman education. The writings of Tertullianus, a lawyer of the same &quot;agnomen&quot;, exist only in fragments and do not explicitly denote a Christian authorship. The notion of Tertullian being a priest is also questionable. In his extant writings, he never describes himself as ordained in the church and seems to place himself among the laity.

His conversion to Christianity perhaps took place about 197–198 (cf. Adolf Harnack, Bonwetsch, and others), but its immediate antecedents are unknown except as they are conjectured from his writings. The event must have been sudden and decisive, transforming at once his own personality. He writes that he could not imagine a truly Christian life without such a conscious breach, a radical act of conversion: &quot;Christians are made, not born&quot; (&quot;Apol&quot;., xviii). Two books addressed to his wife confirm that he was married to a Christian wife.

In his middle life (about 207), he was attracted to the &quot;New Prophecy&quot; of Montanism, but today most scholars reject the assertion that Tertullian left the mainstream church or was excommunicated. &quot;[W]e are left to ask whether Saint Cyprian could have regarded Tertullian as his master if Tertullian had been a notorious schismatic. Since no ancient writer was more definite (if not indeed fanatical) on this subject of schism than Saint Cyprian, the question must surely be answered in the negative.&quot;

In the time of Augustine, a group of &quot;Tertullianists&quot; still had a basilica in Carthage, which within the same period passed to the orthodox church. It is unclear whether the name was merely another for the North African Montanists or that it means that Tertullian later split with the Montanists and founded his own group.

Jerome says that Tertullian lived to old age. By the doctrinal works he published, Tertullian became the teacher of Cyprian and the predecessor of Augustine, a key figure of western theology.

== Writings ==

=== General character ===
Thirty-one works are extant, together with fragments of more. Some fifteen works in Latin or Greek are lost, some as recently as the 9th century (&quot;De Paradiso, De superstitione saeculi, De carne et anima&quot; were all extant in the now damaged Codex Agobardinus in 814 AD). Tertullian&#x27;s writings cover the whole theological field of the timeapologetics against paganism and Judaism, polemics, polity, discipline, and morals, or the whole reorganization of human life on a Christian basis; they gave a picture of the religious life and thought of the time which is of great interest to the church historian.

Like other early Christian writers Tertullian used the term &quot;paganus&quot; to mean &quot;civilian&quot; as a contrast to the &quot;soldiers of Christ&quot;. The motif of Miles Christi did not assume the literal meaning of participation in war until Church doctrines justifying Christian participation in battle were developed around the 5th century. In the 2nd-century writings of Tertullian, &quot;paganus&quot; meant a &quot;civilian&quot; who was lacking self-discipline. In &quot;De Corona Militis&quot; XI.V he writes:
=== Chronology and contents ===
The chronology of his writings is difficult to fix with certainty. In his work against Marcion, which he calls his third composition on the Marcionite heresy, he gives its date as the fifteenth year of the reign of Severus (&quot;Adv. Marcionem&quot;, i.1, 15) – which would be approximately 208.

The writings may be divided according to their subject matter, falling into two groups: Apologetic and polemic writings, like &quot;Apologeticus&quot;, &quot;De testimonio animae&quot;, the anti-Jewish &quot;&quot;, &quot;Adv. Marcionem&quot;, &quot;Adv. Praxeam&quot;, &quot;Adv. Hermogenem&quot;, &quot;De praescriptione hereticorum&quot;, and &quot;Scorpiace&quot; were written to counteract Gnosticism and other religious or philosophical doctrines. The other group consists of practical and disciplinary writings, e.g., &quot;De monogamia&quot;, &quot;Ad uxorem&quot;, &quot;De virginibus velandis&quot;, &quot;De cultu feminarum&quot;, &quot;De patientia&quot;, &quot;De pudicitia&quot;, &quot;De oratione&quot;, and &quot;Ad martyras&quot;.

Among his apologetic writings, the &quot;Apologeticus&quot;, addressed to the Roman magistrates, is a most pungent defense of Christianity and the Christians against the reproaches of the pagans, and an important legacy of the ancient Church, proclaiming the principle of freedom of religion as an inalienable human right and demanding a fair trial for Christians before they are condemned to death.

Tertullian was the first to disprove charges that Christians sacrificed infants at the celebration of the Lord&#x27;s Supper and committed incest. He pointed to the commission of such crimes in the pagan world and then proved by the testimony of Pliny the Younger that Christians pledged themselves not to commit murder, adultery, or other crimes. He adduced the inhumanity of pagan customs such as feeding the flesh of gladiators to beasts. He argued that the gods have no existence and thus there is no pagan religion against which Christians may offend. Christians do not engage in the foolish worship of the emperors, that they do better: they pray for them, and that Christians can afford to be put to torture and to death, and the more they are cast down the more they grow; &quot;the blood of the Christians is seed&quot; (&quot;Apologeticum&quot;, 50). In the &quot;De Praescriptione&quot; he develops as its fundamental idea that, in a dispute between the Church and a separating party, the whole burden of proof lies with the latter, as the Church, in possession of the unbroken tradition, is by its very existence a guarantee of its truth.

The five books against Marcion, written in 207 or 208, are the most comprehensive and elaborate of his polemical works, invaluable for gauging the early Christian view of Gnosticism. Tertullian has been identified by Jo Ann McNamara as the person who originally invested the consecrated virgin as the &quot;bride of Christ&quot;, which helped to bring the independent virgin under patriarchal rule.

Scholars in the past accepting the Montanist theory have also divided his work into earlier Catholic works and the later supposedly Montanist works (cf. Harnack, ii.262 sqq.), aiming to show the change of views Tertullian&#x27;s mind underwent.

===Manuscripts===
The earliest manuscript (handwritten copy) of any of Tertullian&#x27;s works dates to the eighth century, but most are of the fifteenth. There are five main collections of Tertullian&#x27;s works, known as the &quot;Cluniacense&quot;, &quot;Corbeiense&quot;, &quot;Trecense&quot;, &quot;Agobardinum&quot; and &quot;Ottobonianus&quot;. Some of Tertullian&#x27;s works are lost. All the manuscripts of the &quot;Corbeiense&quot; collection are also now lost, although the collection survives in early printed editions.

== Theology ==

=== Specific teachings ===
Tertullian&#x27;s main doctrinal teachings are as follows:

====God====
Tertullian reserves the appellation God, in the sense of the ultimate originator of all things, to the Father, who made the world out of nothing through his Son, the Word, has corporeity, though he is a spirit (, vii.; , vii). However Tertullian used &#x27;corporeal&#x27; only in the Stoic sense, to mean something with actual material existence, rather than the later idea of flesh.

Tertullian is often considered an early proponent of the Nicene doctrine, approaching the subject from the standpoint of the Logos doctrine, though he did not state the later doctrine of the immanent Trinity. In his treatise against Praxeas, who taught patripassianism in Rome, he used the words &quot;trinity&quot;, &quot;economy&quot; (used in reference to the three persons), &quot;persons&quot;, and &quot;substance&quot;, maintaining the distinction of the Son from the Father as the unoriginate God, and the Spirit from both the Father and the Son (, xxv). &quot;These three are one substance, not one person; and it is said, &#x27;I and my Father are one&#x27; in respect not of the singularity of number but the unity of the substance.&quot; The very names &quot;Father&quot; and &quot;Son&quot; indicate the distinction of personality. The Father is one, the Son is another, and the Spirit is another ( , ix)), and yet in defending the unity of God, he says the Son is not other (, ( 18) as a result of receiving a portion of the Father&#x27;s substance. At times, speaking of the Father and the Son, Tertullian refers to &quot;two gods&quot;. He says that all things of the Father belong also to the Son, including his names, such as Almighty God, Most High, Lord of Hosts, or King of Israel.

Though Tertullian considered the Father to be God (Yahweh), he responded to criticism of the Modalist Praxeas that this meant that Tertullian&#x27;s Christianity was not monotheistic by noting that even though there was one God (Yahweh, who became the Father when the Son became his agent of creation), the Son could also be referred to as God, when referred to apart from the Father, because the Son, though subordinate to God, is entitled to be called God &quot;from the unity of the Father&quot; in regards to being formed from a portion of His substance. &quot;The Catholic Encyclopedia&quot; comments that for Tertullian, &quot;There was a time when there was no Son and no sin, when God was neither Father nor Judge.&quot; Similarly J.N.D. Kelly stated: &quot;Tertullian followed the Apologists in dating His &#x27;perfect generation&#x27; from His extrapolation for the work of creation; prior to that moment God could not strictly be said to have had a Son, while after it the term &#x27;Father&#x27;, which for earlier theologians generally connoted God as author of reality, began to acquire the specialized meaning of Father of the Son.&quot; As regards the subjects of subordination of the Son to the Father, the &quot;New Catholic Encyclopedia&quot; has commented: &quot;In not a few areas of theology, Tertullian&#x27;s views are, of course, completely unacceptable. Thus, for example, his teaching on the Trinity reveals a subordination of Son to Father that in the later crass form of Arianism the Church rejected as heretical.&quot; Though he did not fully state the doctrine of the immanence of the Trinity, according to B. B. Warfield, he went a long distance in the way of approach to it.

====Apostolicity====
Tertullian was a defender of the necessity of apostolicity. In his &quot;Prescription Against Heretics&quot;, he explicitly challenges heretics to produce evidence of the apostolic succession of their communities.

==== Eucharist ====
Unlike many early Christian writers, Tertullian (along with Clement of Alexandria) used the word &quot;figure&quot; and &quot;symbol&quot; to define the Eucharist, since in his book &quot;Against Marcion&quot; he implied that &quot;this is my body&quot; should be interpreted as &quot;a figure of my body&quot;; others have also suggested that he believed in a spiritual presence in the Eucharist.

==== Baptism ====
Tertullian advises the postponement of baptism of little children and the unmarried, he mentions that it was customary to baptise infants, with sponsors speaking on their behalf. He argued that an infant ran the risk of growing up and then falling into sin, which could cause them to lose their salvation, if they were baptized as infants.

Contrary to early Syrian baptismal doctrine and practice, Tertullian describes baptism as a cleansing and preparation process which precedes the reception of the Holy Spirit in post-baptismal anointing ( 6). includes the earliest known mention of a prayer for the consecration of the waters of baptism.

Tertullian had an view of the baptism, thus the efficiency of baptism was not dependent upon the faith of the receiver. He also believed that in an emergency, the laity can give the baptism.

==== The Church ====
According to James Puglisi, Tertullian interpreted that in Matthew 16:18–19 &quot;the rock&quot; refers to Peter. For him, Peter is the type of the one Church and its origins, this Church, is now present in a variety of local churches. He also believed that the power to &quot;bind and unbind&quot; has passed from Peter to the apostles and prophets of the Montanist church, not the bishops. He mocked Pope Calixtus or Agrippinus (it is debated which one he was referring to) when he challenged him on the Church forgiving capital sinners and letting them back into the church. He believed that the people who committed grave sins, such as sorcery, fornication and murder, should not be let inside the church.

As a Montanist, he attacked the church authorities as more interested in their own political power in the church than in listening to the Spirit. Tertullian&#x27;s criticism of Church authorities has been compared to the Protestant reformation.

==== Marriage ====
Tertullian&#x27;s later view of marriage, such as in his book &quot;Exhortation to Chastity&quot;, may have been heavily influenced by Montanism. He had previously held marriage to be fundamentally good, but after his conversion he denied its goodness. He argues that marriage is considered to be good &quot;when it is compared with the greatest of all evils&quot;. He argued that before the coming of Christ, the command to reproduce was a prophetic sign pointing to the coming of the Church; after it came, the command was superseded. He also believed lust for one&#x27;s wife and for another woman were essentially the same, so that marital desire was similar to adulterous desire. He believed that sex even in marriage would disrupt the Christian life and that abstinence was the best way to achieve the clarity of the soul. Tertullian&#x27;s views would later influence much of the western church. 

Tertullian was the first to introduce a view of &quot;sexual hierarchy&quot;: he believed that those who abstain from sexual relations should have a higher hierarchy in the church than those who do not, because he saw sexual relations as a barrier that stopped one from a close relationship with God.

==== Scripture ====
Tertullian did not have a specific listing of the canon; however, he quotes 1 John, 1 Peter, Jude, Revelation, the Pauline epistles and the four Gospels. In his later books, he also started to use the Shepherd of Hermas. Tertullian made no references to the book of Tobit; however, in his book &quot;Adversus Marcionem&quot; he quotes the book of Judith. He quoted most of the Old Testament including many deuterocanonical books, however he never used the books of Chronicles, Ruth, Esther, 2 Maccabees, 2 John and 3 John. He defended the Book of Enoch and he believed that the book was omitted by the Jews from the canon. He believed that the epistle to the Hebrews was made by Barnabas. For Tertullian, scripture was authoritative; he used scripture as the primary source in almost every chapter of his every work, and very rarely anything else. He seems to prioritize the authority of scripture above anything else.

When interpreting scripture, he would occasionally believe passages to be allegorical or symbolic, while in other places he would support a literal interpretation. He would especially use allegorical interpretations when dealing with Christological prophecies of the Old Testament. Scripture was a record of the earlier Tradition that should not be interpreted outside that tradition: scripture should not be cherry-picked and early interpretations should be preferred over later ones.

=== Other beliefs ===
Tertullian denied Mary&#x27;s virginity &quot;in partu&quot;, and he was quoted by Helvidius in his debate with Jerome. He held similar views as Antidicomarians.J. N. D. Kelly argued that Tertullian believed that Mary had imperfections, thus denying her sinlessness. 

Tertullian is said to have held to a view similar to the Protestant priesthood of all believers and that the distinction of the clergy and the laity is only because of ecclesiastical institution and thus in an absence of a priest the laity can act as priests; his theory on the distinction of the laity and clergy is influenced by Montanism and his early writings do not have the same beliefs.

He believed in Iconoclasm.

He believed in historic premillennialism: that Christians will go through a period of tribulation, to be followed by a literal 1000-year reign of Christ.

He attacked the use of Greek philosophy in Christian theology. For him, philosophy supported religious idolatry and heresy. He believed that many people became heretical because of relying on philosophy. He stated &quot;What has Athens to do with Jerusalem?&quot;

Tertullian&#x27;s views of angels and demons were influenced by the Book of Enoch. He held that the Nephilim were born out of fallen angels who mingled with human women and had sexual relations. He believed that because of the actions of the watchers as described in the Book of Enoch, men would later judge angels. He believed that angels are inferior to humans, and not made in the image of God. He believed that Angels are imperceptible to our senses, but they may choose to take on a human form or change shape.

He taught fideistic concepts such as the later philosophers William of Ockham and Søren Kierkegaard.

=== Montanism ===
The extent and nature of Tertullian&#x27;s involvement to Montanism is now disputed by modern scholars. Montanism in North Africa seems to have been a counter-reaction against secularism. The form of Montanism in North Africa seems to have differed from the views of Montanus, and thus the North African Montanists believed Catholic bishops to be successors of the apostles, the New Testament to be the supreme authority on Christianity and they did not deny most doctrines of the Church.

Tertullian was drawn to Montanism, if he was, mainly because of its strict moral standards. He believed that the Church had forsaken the Christian way of life and entered a path of destruction. 

==== Tertullianists ====
Tertullianists were a group mentioned by Augustine as founded by Tertullian. There exists differences of opinion on Tertullianists; Augustine seems to have believed that Tertullian, soon after joining the Montanists, started his own sect derived from Montanism, while some scholars believe that Augustine was in error, and that Tertullianists was simply an alternative name of North African Montanism and not a separate sect.

== Moral principles ==

Tertullian was an advocate of discipline and an austere code of practise, and like many of the African fathers, one of the leading representatives of the rigorist element in the early Church. His writings on public amusements, the veiling of virgins, the conduct of women, and the like, reflect these opinions. His views may have led him to adopt Montanism with its ascetic rigor and its belief in chiliasm and the continuance of the prophetic gifts. Geoffrey D. Dunn writes that &quot;Some of Tertullian&#x27;s treatises reveal that he had much in common with Montanism ... To what extent, if at all, this meant that he joined a group that was schismatic (or, to put it another way, that he left the church) continues to be debated&quot;.

On the principle that we should not look at or listen to what we have no right to practise, and that polluted things, seen and touched, pollute (&quot;De spectaculis&quot;, viii, xvii), he declared a Christian should abstain from the theatre and the amphitheatre. There pagan religious rites were applied and the names of pagan divinities invoked; there the precepts of modesty, purity, and humanity were ignored or set aside, and there no place was offered to the onlookers for the cultivation of the Christian graces. Women should put aside their gold and precious stones as ornaments, and virgins should conform to the law of St. Paul for women and keep themselves strictly veiled (&quot;De virginibus velandis&quot;). He praised the unmarried state as the highest (&quot;De monogamia&quot;, xvii; &quot;Ad uxorem&quot;, i.3) and called upon Christians not to allow themselves to be excelled in the virtue of celibacy by Vestal Virgins and Egyptian priests. He even labeled second marriage a species of adultery (&quot;De exhortatione castitatis&quot;, ix), but this directly contradicted the Epistles of the Apostle Paul. Tertullian&#x27;s resolve to never marry again and that no one else should remarry eventually led to his break with Rome because the orthodox church refused to follow him in this resolve. He, instead, favored the Montanist sect where they also condemned second marriage. One reason for Tertullian&#x27;s disdain for marriage was his belief about the transformation that awaited a married couple. He believed that marital relations coarsened the body and spirit and would dull their spiritual senses and avert the Holy Spirit since husband and wife became one flesh once married.

Tertullian has been criticised as misogynistic, on the basis of the contents of his &quot;De Cultu Feminarum&quot;, section I.I, part 2 (trans. C.W. Marx): &quot;Do you not know that you are Eve? The judgment of God upon this sex lives on in this age; therefore, necessarily the guilt should live on also. You are the gateway of the devil; you are the one who unseals the curse of that tree, and you are the first one to turn your back on the divine law; you are the one who persuaded him whom the devil was not capable of corrupting; you easily destroyed the image of God, Adam. Because of what you deserve, that is, death, even the Son of God had to die.&quot;

The critic Amy Place notes, however, that &quot;Revisionist studies later rehabilitated&quot; Tertullian. This is discussed by other theorists such as Benjamin H. Dunning.

Tertullian had a radical view on the cosmos. He believed that heaven and earth intersected at many points and that it was possible that sexual relations with supernatural beings can occur.

== Works ==

Tertullian&#x27;s writings are edited in volumes 1–2 of the &quot;Patrologia Latina&quot;, and modern texts exist in the &quot;Corpus Christianorum Latinorum&quot;. English translations by Sydney Thelwall and Philip Holmes can be found in volumes III and IV of the &quot;Ante-Nicene Fathers&quot; which are freely available online; more modern translations of some of the works have been made.

;Apologetic
* &quot;Apologeticus pro Christianis&quot;.
* &quot;Libri duo ad Nationes&quot;.
* &quot;De Testimonio animae&quot;.
* &quot;Ad Martyres&quot;.
* &quot;De Spectaculis&quot;.
* &quot;De Idololatria&quot;.
* &quot;Ad Scapulam liber&quot;.
;Dogmatic
* &quot;De Oratione&quot;.
* &quot;De Baptismo&quot;.
* &quot;De Poenitentia&quot;.
* &quot;De Patientia&quot;.
* &quot;Ad Uxorem libri duo&quot;.
* &quot;De Cultu Feminarum lib. II&quot;.
;Polemical
* &quot;De Praescriptionibus adversus Haereticos&quot;.
* &quot;De Corona Militis&quot;.
* &quot;De Fuga in Persecutione&quot;.
* &quot;Adversus Gnosticos Scorpiace&quot;.
* &quot;Adversus Praxeam&quot;.
* &quot;Adversus Hermogenem&quot;.
* &quot;Adversus Marcionem libri V&quot;.
* &quot;Adversus Valentinianos&quot;.
* &quot;Adversus Judaeos&quot;.
* &quot;De Anima&quot;.
* &quot;De Carne Christi&quot;.
* &quot;De Resurrectione Carnis&quot;.
;On morality
* &quot;De velandis Virginibus&quot;.
* &quot;De Exhortatione Castitatis&quot;.
* &quot;De Monogamia&quot;.
* &quot;De Jejuniis&quot;.
* &quot;De Pudicitia&quot;.
* &quot;De Pallio&quot;.

===Possible chronology===
The following chronological ordering was proposed by John Kaye, Bishop of Lincoln in the 19th century:

Probably mainstream (Pre-Montanist):
* 1. &quot;De Poenitentia&quot; (On Repentance)
* 2. &quot;De Oratione&quot; (On Prayer)
* 3. &quot;De Baptismo&quot; (On Baptism)
* 4, 5. &quot;Ad Uxorem&quot;, lib. I &amp; II, (To His Wife)
* 6. &quot;Ad Martyras&quot; (To the Martyrs)
* 7. &quot;De Patientia&quot; (On Patience)
* 8. &quot;Adversus Judaeos&quot; (Against the Jews)
* 9. &quot;De Praescriptione Haereticorum&quot; (On the Prescription of Heretics)

Indeterminate:
* 10. &quot;Apologeticus pro Christianis&quot; (Apology for the Christians)
* 11, 12. &quot;ad Nationes&quot;, lib. I &amp; II (To the Nations)
* 13. &quot;De Testimonio animae&quot; (On the Witness of the Soul)
* 14. &quot;De Pallio&quot; (On the Ascetic Mantle)
* 15. &quot;Adversus Hermogenem&quot; (Against Hermogenes)

Probably Post-Montanist:
* 16. &quot;Adversus Valentinianus&quot; (Against the Valentinians)
* 17. &quot;ad Scapulam&quot; (To Scapula, Proconsul of Africa)
* 18. &quot;De Spectaculis&quot; (On the Games)
* 19. &quot;De Idololatria&quot; (On Idolatry)
* 20, 21. &quot;De cultu Feminarum&quot;, lib. I &amp; II (On Women&#x27;s Dress)

Definitely Post-Montanist:
* 22. &quot;Adversus Marcionem&quot;, lib I (Against Marcion, Bk. I)
* 23. &quot;Adversus Marcionem&quot;, lib II
* 24. &quot;De Anima&quot; (On the Soul),
* 25. &quot;Adversus Marcionem&quot;, lib III
* 26. &quot;Adversus Marcionem&quot;, lib IV
* 27. &quot;De Carne Christi&quot; (On the Flesh of Christ)
* 28. &quot;De Resurrectione Carnis&quot; (On the Resurrection of Flesh)
* 29. &quot;Adversus Marcionem&quot;, lib V
* 30. &quot;Adversus Praxean&quot; (Against Praxeas)
* 31. &quot;Scorpiace&quot; (Antidote to Scorpion&#x27;s Bite)
* 32. &quot;De Corona Militis&quot; (On the Soldier&#x27;s Garland)
* 33. &quot;De velandis Virginibus&quot; (On Veiling Virgins)
* 34. &quot;De Exhortatione Castitatis&quot; (On Exhortation to Chastity)
* 35. &quot;De Fuga in Persecutione&quot; (On Flight in Persecution)
* 36. &quot;De Monogamia&quot; (On Monogamy)
* 37. &quot;De Jejuniis, adversus psychicos&quot; (On Fasting, against the materialists)
* 38. &quot;De Puditicia&quot; (On Modesty)

=== Spurious works ===

There have been many works attributed to Tertullian in the past which have since been determined to be almost definitely written by others. Nonetheless, since their actual authors remain uncertain, they continue to be published together in collections of Tertullian&#x27;s works.

The popular &quot;Passio sanctae Perpetuae et Felicitatis&quot; (Passion of Saints Perpetua and Felicity), much of it presented as the personal diary of Perpetua, was once assumed to have been edited by Tertullian. That view is no longer widely held, and the work is usually published separately from Tertullian&#x27;s own works.

== Influence on Novatianism ==
The Novatians refused forgiveness to idolaters or for people who committed other heinous sins, and made much use of the works of Tertullian; some Novatians even joined Montanists. The views of Novatian on the Trinity and Christology are also strongly influenced by Tertullian.

Ronald E. Heine writes, &quot;With Novatianism we return to the spirit of Tertullian, and the issue of Christian discipline.

== See also ==
* Christian pacifism
* &quot;Credo quia absurdum&quot;
* Septimia gens
* Pseudo-Tertullian
* Tertulia
* Descriptions in antiquity of the execution cross

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Sources ==
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* Ames, Cecilia. 2007. &quot;Roman Religion in the Vision of Tertullian.&quot; In &quot;A Companion to Roman Religion&quot;. Edited by Jörg Rüpke, 457–471. Oxford: Blackwell.
* Dunn, Geoffrey D. 2004. &quot;Tertullian&quot;. New York: Routledge.
* Gero, Stephen. 1970. &quot;Miles gloriosus: The Christians and Military Service according to Tertullian.&quot; &quot;Church History&quot; 39:285–298.
* Hillar, Marian. 2012. &quot;From Logos to Trinity. The Evolution of Religious Beliefs from Pythagoras to Tertullian&quot;. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press.
* Lane, Anthony N. S. 2002. &quot;Tertullianus Totus Noster? Calvin&#x27;s use of Tertullian.&quot; &quot;Reformation and Renaissance Review&quot; 4:9–34.
* O&#x27;Malley, Thomas P. 1967. &quot;Tertullian and the Bible. Language, Imagery, Exegesis&quot;. Latinitas christianorum primaeva 21. Nijmegen, The Netherlands: Dekker &amp; Van de Vegt.
* Otten, Willemien. 2009. &quot;Views on Women in Early Christianity: Incarnational Hermeneutics in Tertullian and Augustine.&quot; In &quot;Hermeneutics, Scriptural Politics, and Human Rights&quot;. Between text and context. Edited by Bas de Gaay Fortman, Kurt Martens, and M. A. Mohamed Salih, 219–235. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.
* Rankin, David. 1995. &quot;Tertullian and the Church&quot;. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press.
* Wilhite, David E. 2007. &quot;Tertullian the African. An Anthropological Reading of Tertullian&#x27;s Context and Identities&quot;. Millennium Studien 14. Berlin and New York: De Gruyter.

== External links ==


Primary sources
* Tertullian&#x27;s works in many languages, including Latin, and English, website intratext.com.
* English translations of all Tertullian&#x27;s works can be found in Rev. Alexander Roberts and James Donaldson, editors, 1867–1872, &quot;Ante-Nicene Christian Library: Translation of the Writings of the Fathers, Down to AD 325&quot;, Edinburgh: T&amp;T Clark: Vol. 7 (Tertullian&#x27;s Against Marcion), Vol. 11(Tertullian&#x27;s Treatises, Pt. 1), Vol. 15 (Tertullian&#x27;s Treatises, Pt.2), Vol. 18 (Tertullian&#x27;s Treatises, Pt. 3)
* Works by Tertullian at Perseus Digital Library

Secondary sources
* EarlyChurch.org.uk Detailed bibliography and on-line articles.
* Jerome&#x27;s On Famous Men Chapter 53 is devoted to Tertullian.
* 
* The Tertullian Project, a site which provides all of Tertullian&#x27;s works in Latin, translations in many languages, manuscripts etc.
* J. Kaye, Bishop of Lincoln (1845, third edition) &quot;The Ecclesiastical History of the Second and Third Centuries, illustrated from the writings of Tertullian&quot;. London: Rivington.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q174929" start="0" end="10" title="Tertullian" label="Tertullian"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="45" end="60" title="Early Christianity" label="early Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q23670612" start="73" end="81" title="Roman Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q181238" start="89" end="113" title="Africa (Roman province)" label="Roman province of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q184890" start="183" end="188" title="Latin literature" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377898" start="227" end="246" title="Christian apologetics" label="Christian apologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912496" start="272" end="278" title="Heresy in Christianity" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q48420" start="303" end="323" title="Christian Gnosticism" label="Christian Gnosticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q597526" start="425" end="443" title="Latin Christianity" label="Latin Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5775678" start="468" end="499" title="History of Christian theology" label="the founder of Western theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="597" end="604" title="trinity" label="trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q946399" start="789" end="802" title="Subordinationism" label="subordination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141210" start="806" end="813" title="God the Son" label="the Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q58646537" start="818" end="824" title="Holy Spirit in Christianity" label="Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q186350" start="828" end="838" title="God the Father" label="the Father"/>
<link wikidata="Q44248" start="888" end="894" title="Jerome" label="Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q138681" start="916" end="925" title="Montanist" label="Montanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q223681" start="944" end="955" title="apostasized" label="apostasized"/>
<link wikidata="Q181238" start="1139" end="1151" title="Africa (Roman province)" label="Roman Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859263" start="1178" end="1184" title="orator" label="orator"/>
<link wikidata="Q20826540" start="1333" end="1340" title="scholar" label="scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q107358" start="1403" end="1414" title="Koine Greek" label="Koine Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="1471" end="1477" title="Berbers" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383747" start="1528" end="1533" title="Punics" label="Punic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114493" start="2073" end="2083" title="Roman army" label="Roman army"/>
<link wikidata="Q142999" start="2219" end="2239" title="Eusebius of Caesarea" label="Eusebius of Caesarea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235854" start="2247" end="2261" title="Church History (Eusebius)" label="Church History"/>
<link wikidata="Q44248" start="2284" end="2290" title="Jerome" label="Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q929625" start="2304" end="2324" title="De Viris Illustribus (Jerome)" label="De viris illustribus"/>
<link wikidata="Q838526" start="2545" end="2553" title="Pandects" label="Pandects"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596516" start="2792" end="2799" title="agnomen" label="agnomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q164699" start="3137" end="3150" title="Adolf Harnack" label="Adolf Harnack"/>
<link wikidata="Q99571" start="3152" end="3161" title="Bonwetsch" label="Bonwetsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q138681" start="3713" end="3722" title="Montanism" label="Montanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="4166" end="4175" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q190240" start="4601" end="4608" title="Cyprian" label="Cyprian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140178" start="4970" end="4987" title="Codex Agobardinus" label="Codex Agobardinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q191776" start="5072" end="5083" title="apologetics" label="apologetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q27406" start="5114" end="5121" title="polemic" label="polemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="5356" end="5365" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678054" start="5514" end="5527" title="Miles Christianus" label="Miles Christi"/>
<link wikidata="Q201346" start="5987" end="5994" title="Marcion" label="Marcion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780426" start="6330" end="6342" title="Apologeticus" label="Apologeticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q575970" start="6388" end="6399" title="anti-Judaism" label="anti-Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q48420" start="6593" end="6603" title="Gnosticism" label="Gnosticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="7219" end="7238" title="freedom of religion" label="freedom of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="7435" end="7472" title="Eucharist" label="celebration of the Lord&amp;#x27;s Supper"/>
<link wikidata="Q168707" start="7594" end="7611" title="Pliny the Younger" label="Pliny the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q9012745" start="8354" end="8369" title="Legal burden of proof" label="burden of proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q87167" start="9177" end="9187" title="manuscript" label="manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585442" start="9535" end="9539" title="Lost literary work" label="lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q48235" start="10082" end="10087" title="stoicism" label="Stoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q207937" start="10240" end="10255" title="Nicene Creed" label="Nicene doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q766575" start="10308" end="10322" title="Logos (Christianity)" label="Logos doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="10374" end="10390" title="immanent Trinity" label="immanent Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269621" start="10436" end="10451" title="patripassianism" label="patripassianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293300" start="11580" end="11588" title="Sabellianism" label="Modalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250630" start="12226" end="12238" title="J.N.D. Kelly" label="J.N.D. Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q946399" start="12668" end="12681" title="subordinationism" label="subordination"/>
<link wikidata="Q83922" start="12988" end="12996" title="Arianism" label="Arianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q49482" start="13389" end="13409" title="apostolic succession" label="apostolic succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q188883" start="13513" end="13534" title="Clement of Alexandria" label="Clement of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q24944880" start="13814" end="13849" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s Supper in Reformed theology" label="spiritual presence in the Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q122376" start="15130" end="15143" title="Pope Callixtus I" label="Pope Calixtus"/>
<link wikidata="Q518917" start="15147" end="15157" title="Agrippinus of Carthage" label="Agrippinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="15660" end="15682" title="Reformation" label="Protestant reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q842798" start="16591" end="16605" title="Western Christianity" label="western church"/>
<link wikidata="Q131101" start="17007" end="17013" title="First Epistle of John" label="1 John"/>
<link wikidata="Q131119" start="17015" end="17022" title="First Epistle of Peter" label="1 Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q131466" start="17024" end="17028" title="Epistle of Jude" label="Jude"/>
<link wikidata="Q192906" start="17030" end="17040" title="Revelation" label="Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q265283" start="17046" end="17062" title="Pauline epistles" label="Pauline epistles"/>
<link wikidata="Q34274" start="17071" end="17083" title="four Gospels" label="four Gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q898808" start="17132" end="17150" title="The Shepherd of Hermas" label="Shepherd of Hermas"/>
<link wikidata="Q131737" start="17189" end="17202" title="book of Tobit" label="book of Tobit"/>
<link wikidata="Q202129" start="17270" end="17284" title="book of Judith" label="book of Judith"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="17308" end="17321" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q201410" start="17337" end="17359" title="deuterocanonical books" label="deuterocanonical books"/>
<link wikidata="Q161953" start="17396" end="17406" title="Books of Chronicles" label="Chronicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q80038" start="17408" end="17412" title="Book of Ruth" label="Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q131068" start="17414" end="17420" title="Book of Esther" label="Esther"/>
<link wikidata="Q209748" start="17422" end="17433" title="2 Maccabees" label="2 Maccabees"/>
<link wikidata="Q131453" start="17435" end="17441" title="Second Epistle of John" label="2 John"/>
<link wikidata="Q131462" start="17446" end="17452" title="Third Epistle of John" label="3 John"/>
<link wikidata="Q220890" start="17470" end="17483" title="Book of Enoch" label="Book of Enoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q128608" start="17575" end="17597" title="epistle to the Hebrews" label="epistle to the Hebrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q185856" start="17610" end="17618" title="Barnabas" label="Barnabas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052733" start="18443" end="18452" title="Helvidius" label="Helvidius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774684" start="18505" end="18520" title="Antidicomarians" label="Antidicomarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250630" start="18521" end="18535" title="John Norman Davidson Kelly" label="J. N. D. Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q85801323" start="18614" end="18625" title="Sinlessness of Mary" label="sinlessness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156551" start="18697" end="18724" title="priesthood of all believers" label="priesthood of all believers"/>
<link wikidata="Q181543" start="19039" end="19049" title="Iconoclasm" label="Iconoclasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5773791" start="19067" end="19092" title="historic premillennialism" label="historic premillennialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q999259" start="19230" end="19246" title="Ancient Greek philosophy" label="Greek philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469326" start="19714" end="19721" title="Watcher (angel)" label="watcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q196667" start="19999" end="20008" title="Fideism" label="fideistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43936" start="20049" end="20066" title="William of Ockham" label="William of Ockham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6512" start="20071" end="20088" title="Søren Kierkegaard" label="Søren Kierkegaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2312602" start="20376" end="20384" title="Montanus" label="Montanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q26048811" start="20712" end="20718" title="Great Church" label="Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="20861" end="20870" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q138681" start="21025" end="21035" title="Montanism" label="Montanists"/>
<link wikidata="Q138681" start="21618" end="21627" title="Montanism" label="Montanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890076" start="21645" end="21650" title="rigor" label="rigor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567687" start="21669" end="21677" title="chiliasm" label="chiliasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q188761" start="22936" end="22949" title="Vestal Virgin" label="Vestal Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="23124" end="23136" title="Apostle Paul" label="Apostle Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q308857" start="23752" end="23764" title="misogynistic" label="misogynistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q830183" start="23909" end="23912" title="Eve" label="Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q70899" start="24292" end="24296" title="Adam" label="Adam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24393" end="24402" title="Amy Place" label="Amy Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q548044" start="24824" end="24841" title="Patrologia Latina" label="Patrologia Latina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24885" end="24915" title="Corpus Christianorum Latinorum" label="Corpus Christianorum Latinorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660176" start="24947" end="24962" title="Sydney Thelwall" label="Sydney Thelwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4771068" start="25029" end="25048" title="Ante-Nicene Fathers (book)" label="Ante-Nicene Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780426" start="25173" end="25201" title="Apologeticus" label="Apologeticus pro Christianis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244978" start="25317" end="25331" title="De Spectaculis" label="De Spectaculis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686723" start="25901" end="25923" title="Adversus Valentinianos" label="Adversus Valentinianos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244306" start="25995" end="26011" title="De Carne Christi" label="De Carne Christi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6242547" start="26339" end="26348" title="John Kaye (bishop)" label="John Kaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q309864" start="27264" end="27276" title="Valentinus (Gnostic)" label="Valentinians"/>
<link wikidata="Q201346" start="27600" end="27607" title="Marcion" label="Marcion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270333" start="28015" end="28022" title="Praxeas" label="Praxeas"/>
<link wikidata="Q771956" start="28997" end="29005" title="Perpetua" label="Perpetua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276913" start="29210" end="29219" title="Novatianism" label="Novatians"/>
<link wikidata="Q138681" start="29374" end="29384" title="Montanism" label="Montanists"/>
<link wikidata="Q222890" start="29399" end="29407" title="Novatian" label="Novatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="29415" end="29422" title="Trinity" label="Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q187900" start="29427" end="29438" title="Christology" label="Christology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352447" start="29627" end="29645" title="Christian pacifism" label="Christian pacifism"/>
<link wikidata="Q644804" start="29654" end="29673" title="Credo quia absurdum" label="Credo quia absurdum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3479020" start="29682" end="29695" title="Septimia gens" label="Septimia gens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7254427" start="29698" end="29715" title="Pseudo-Tertullian" label="Pseudo-Tertullian"/>
<link wikidata="Q252717" start="29718" end="29726" title="Tertulia" label="Tertulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47008061" start="29729" end="29777" title="Descriptions in antiquity of the execution cross" label="Descriptions in antiquity of the execution cross"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31206" wikidata="Q332399" url="?curid=31206" title="Traveling Wilburys">
<text>The Traveling Wilburys were a British-American supergroup formed in Los Angeles in 1988, consisting of Bob Dylan, George Harrison, Jeff Lynne, Roy Orbison and Tom Petty. They were a roots rock band and described as &quot;perhaps the biggest supergroup of all time&quot;.

Originating from an idea discussed by Harrison and Lynne during the sessions for Harrison&#x27;s 1987 album &quot;Cloud Nine&quot;, the band formed in April 1988 after the five members united to record a bonus track for Harrison&#x27;s next European single. When this collaboration, &quot;Handle with Care&quot;, was deemed too good for such a limited release, the group agreed to record a full album, titled &quot;Traveling Wilburys Vol. 1&quot;, released in October 1988. Following Orbison&#x27;s death in December 1988, the Wilburys continued as a quartet and released a second album, incongruously titled &quot;Traveling Wilburys Vol. 3&quot;, in 1990.

The release of their debut album was much anticipated because of the stature of the participants. The band members adopted tongue-in-cheek pseudonyms as half-brothers from the fictional Wilbury family of travelling musicians. &quot;Vol. 1&quot; was a critical and commercial success, helping to revitalise Dylan&#x27;s and Petty&#x27;s careers. In 1990, the album won the Grammy for Best Rock Performance by a Duo or Group.

Although Harrison envisioned a series of Wilburys albums and a film about the band, to be produced through his company HandMade, the group became dormant after 1991 and never officially reunited, though the individual members continued to collaborate on each other&#x27;s solo projects at various times. Harrison died in 2001, followed by Petty in 2017, leaving Dylan and Lynne as the only surviving members. After being unavailable for several years, the two Wilburys albums were reissued by the Harrison estate in the 2007 box set &quot;The Traveling Wilburys Collection&quot;.

==History==

===Background===
George Harrison first mentioned the Traveling Wilburys publicly during a radio interview with Bob Coburn on the show &quot;Rockline&quot; in February 1988. When asked how he planned to follow up the success of his &quot;Cloud Nine&quot; album, Harrison replied: &quot;What I&#x27;d really like to do next is ... to do an album with me and some of my mates ... It&#x27;s this new group I got [in mind]: it&#x27;s called the Traveling Wilburys, I&#x27;d like to do an album with them and then later we can all do our own albums again.&quot; According to Jeff Lynne, who co-produced &quot;Cloud Nine&quot;, Harrison introduced the idea of the two of them starting a band together around two months into the sessions for his album, which began in early January 1987. When discussing who the other members might be, Harrison chose Bob Dylan and Lynne opted for Roy Orbison.&lt;ref name=&quot;Lynne/Mojo&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The term &quot;Wilbury&quot; also originated during the &quot;Cloud Nine&quot; sessions. Referring to recording errors created by faulty equipment, Harrison jokingly remarked to Lynne, &quot;&quot;We&#x27;ll bury&quot; &#x27;em in the mix.&quot; Thereafter, they used the term for any small error in performance. Harrison first suggested &quot;the Trembling Wilburys&quot; as the group&#x27;s name; at Lynne&#x27;s suggestion, they amended it to &quot;Traveling Wilburys&quot;.

During his &quot;Rockline&quot; interview, Harrison voiced his support for Dylan, at a time when Dylan was experiencing an artistic and commercial low point in his career. Harrison and Lynne became friends with Tom Petty in October 1987, when Petty and his band, Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers, toured Europe as Dylan&#x27;s backing group on the Temples in Flames Tour. The friendship continued in Los Angeles later that year. There, Harrison struck up a musical rapport with Petty based on their shared love of 1950s rock &#x27;n&#x27; roll, and Lynne began collaborating with Petty on what became Petty&#x27;s debut solo album, &quot;Full Moon Fever&quot;, and writing songs with Orbison, Lynne&#x27;s longtime musical hero, for Orbison&#x27;s comeback album, &quot;Mystery Girl&quot;. According to Petty, Harrison&#x27;s dream for the Wilburys was to handpick the participants and create &quot;the perfect little band&quot;, but the criteria for inclusion were governed most by &quot;who you could hang out with&quot;. The five musicians also bonded over a shared appreciation of the English comedy troupe Monty Python. Harrison, who had worked with the members of Monty Python on various productions by his company HandMade Films since the late 1970s, particularly appreciated Orbison&#x27;s gift for impersonation and his ability to recite entire sketches by the troupe.

===1988–1991===

====&quot;Handle with Care&quot; and band formation====
The band came together in April 1988, when Harrison was in Los Angeles to oversee the filming of his HandMade production &quot;Checking Out&quot;. At that time, Warner Bros. Records asked Harrison for a new song to serve as the B-side for the European release of his third single from &quot;Cloud Nine&quot;, &quot;This Is Love&quot;. During a meal with Lynne and Orbison, Harrison asked Lynne to help him record the track and invited Orbison to attend the session, which he then arranged to take place at Dylan&#x27;s garage studio in Malibu since no professional studios were available at such short notice. Petty&#x27;s involvement came about when Harrison went to retrieve his guitar from Petty&#x27;s house and invited him to attend also.

Working on a song that Harrison had recently started writing, the ensemble completed the track, which they titled &quot;Handle with Care&quot; after a label on a box in Dylan&#x27;s garage. When Harrison presented the recording to Mo Ostin and Lenny Waronker of Warner Bros., the executives insisted that the song was too good to be used as a B-side. In Petty&#x27;s recollection, Harrison and Lynne then decided to realise their idea of forming a Wilburys band, and first invited him to join before phoning Dylan, who also agreed to join. That night, Harrison, Lynne and Petty drove to Anaheim to see Orbison perform at the Celebrity Theatre and recruited him for the group shortly before he went on stage. In Petty&#x27;s description, Orbison performed an &quot;unbelievable show&quot;, during which &quot;we&#x27;d punch each other and go, &#x27;He&#x27;s in our band, too.&#x27; ... We were all so excited.&quot;&lt;ref name=&quot;Zimmer/BAM&quot;&gt; Available at Rock&#x27;s Backpages (subscription required).&lt;/ref&gt;

====Debut album====

The band members decided to create a full album together, &quot;Traveling Wilburys Vol. 1&quot;. Video footage of the creative process was later edited by Harrison into a promotional film for Warner Bros. staff, titled &quot;Whatever Wilbury Wilbury&quot;. The album was recorded primarily over a ten-day period in May 1988, to allow for Dylan&#x27;s limited availability as he prepared for the start of what became known as his Never Ending Tour and for Orbison&#x27;s tour schedule. These sessions were held in the house of Eurythmics member Dave Stewart, in Los Angeles.

The five band members sat in a circle playing acoustic guitars in Stewart&#x27;s kitchen; once each song&#x27;s basic track had been written and recorded there (with accompaniment from a drum machine),&lt;ref name=&quot;Hurwitz/Mix&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; the group recorded their vocals in another room, usually after dinner each night. Petty recalled that, as a friend but also an avowed fan of Dylan&#x27;s, Harrison felt the need to clear the air on the first day by saying to him: &quot;We know that you&#x27;re Bob Dylan and everything, but we&#x27;re going to just treat you and talk to you like we would anybody else.&quot; Dylan replied: &quot;Well, great. Believe it or not, I&#x27;m in awe of you guys, and it&#x27;s the same for me.&quot; While most of the songs had a primary composer, all of the band members were creative equals. Petty later described Harrison as the Wilburys&#x27; &quot;leader and manager&quot;, and credited him with being a bandleader and producer that had a natural instinct for bringing out the best in people and keeping a recording session productive. As the group&#x27;s producers, Harrison and Lynne directed the sessions, with Harrison often auditioning each member to decide who should sing a particular lead vocal part. The two producers then flew back to England; Lynne recalls that, throughout the flight, he and Harrison enthused about how to turn the sparse, acoustic-based tracks into completed recordings. Overdubs and further recording took place at Harrison&#x27;s studio, FPSHOT, with &quot;Sideburys&quot; Jim Keltner (drums), Jim Horn (saxophones) and Ray Cooper (percussion). Harrison described the band&#x27;s sound as &quot;skiffle for the 1990s&quot;.

The album was released on 18 October 1988. Distributed by Warner Bros., it appeared on the new Wilbury record label rather than on Harrison&#x27;s Dark Horse label, in the interests of maintaining the group identity. Over the months following the end of recording in the summer, contractual issues had been successfully negotiated between Warner and the record companies representing Dylan, Petty, Lynne and Orbison. As was the case in 1971 when EMI prepared Harrison&#x27;s multi-artist live album from the Concert for Bangladesh for release, Dylan&#x27;s label, Columbia, presented the main stumbling block. In the album credits, the &quot;Wilburys&quot; joke was extended further, with the band members listed under various pseudonyms and pretending to be half-brothers – sons of a fictional Charles Truscott Wilbury Sr. During promotion for the album, Orbison played along with the mock history, saying: &quot;Some people say Daddy was a cad and a bounder, but I remember him as a Baptist minister.&quot;

&quot;Vol. 1&quot; was a critical and commercial success, and revitalised the careers of Dylan, Orbison and Petty. As Harrison had intended, the album defied contemporary musical trends such as hip hop, acid house and synthesised pop; author Alan Clayson likens its release to &quot;a Viking longship docking in a hovercraft terminal&quot;. The album produced two successful singles and went on to achieve triple-platinum certification for sales in the United States. It was nominated for several awards and won the 1990 Grammy Award for Best Rock Performance by a Duo or Group. Liner notes on the album cover were written by Monty Python&#x27;s Michael Palin under a pseudonym. Palin&#x27;s essay was based on an idea by Derek Taylor, who wrote an extensive fictional history of the Wilburys family that otherwise went unused. Harrison planned a feature film about the band, to be produced by HandMade and directed by David Leland, but contractual problems ended the project.

====Orbison&#x27;s death, &quot;Nobody&#x27;s Child&quot; and &quot;Vol. 3&quot;====
Roy Orbison died of a heart attack on 6 December 1988. In tribute to him, the music video for the band&#x27;s second single, &quot;End of the Line&quot;, shows a black-and-white framed photo of Orbison, and his guitar is shown, rocking in a chair, whenever his vocals are heard. Lynne recalled that Orbison&#x27;s death in the wake of &quot;Vol. 1&quot;″s success was &quot;the most sickening thing to me&quot;. He added: &quot;I was devastated for ages ... Me and Roy had had plans to do much more together, and his voice was in really good shape. It was just so sad for that to happen.&quot; Although there was speculation in the press that Del Shannon or Roger McGuinn might join the Wilburys, the remaining members never considered replacing Orbison. Lynne later said: &quot;We&#x27;d become this unit, we were all good pals … We always knew we were going to do another one, and now it&#x27;s just the four of us.&quot;

Harrison was the most active in promoting the Wilburys, carrying out interviews well into 1989. He said he was &quot;wait[ing] for all the other Wilburys to finish being solo artists&quot; so that they could renew the collaboration. By contrast, according to author Clinton Heylin, Dylan appeared to give the band little attention as he focused on re-establishing himself as a live performer before recording his 1989 album &quot;Oh Mercy&quot;.

In March 1990, Harrison, Lynne, Petty and Dylan reunited to work on a second Wilburys album, which they intentionally misnumbered &quot;Traveling Wilburys Vol. 3&quot;. It was preceded by a non-album single, a cover of &quot;Nobody&#x27;s Child&quot;, which the band recorded for Olivia Harrison&#x27;s Romanian Angel Appeal charity project. The duration of the main album sessions was again dictated by Dylan&#x27;s touring schedule and limited availability. Having asked Dylan to record a lead vocal for all the songs before his departure, Harrison was then loath to replace many of the parts, resulting in a greater prominence for Dylan as a lead singer. Although he ceded his own role as a lead vocalist to Dylan and to Petty, Harrison took over more of the production and contributed more prominently as a lead guitarist than before. Petty described the album as &quot;a little more rough and ready, a bit more raucous&quot; than &quot;Vol. 1&quot;, while Dylan said the new songs were more developed as compositions relative to the &quot;scraped up from jam tapes&quot; approach to the band&#x27;s debut.

&quot;Vol. 3&quot; was released on 29 October 1990. It was dedicated to Orbison, as &quot;Lefty Wilbury&quot;, the pseudonym that Orbison had used in 1988 in honour of his hero Lefty Frizzell. The album met with less success than the previous one. According to Mo Ostin, the choice of album title came about through &quot;George being George&quot;; apparently Harrison was making a wry reference to the appearance of a bootleg that served as a sort of &quot;Volume 2&quot;. The album&#x27;s liner notes were written by Eric Idle, another Python member, who again adopted a pseudonym. For the band&#x27;s final single, &quot;Wilbury Twist&quot;, they filmed a video in which Idle, John Candy and other comedic actors attempt to master the song&#x27;s eponymous dance style. The clip was filmed in Los Angeles and completed on 28 February 1991.

===After the Wilburys===
According to Jim Keltner, the decision on the group&#x27;s future after &quot;Vol. 3&quot; lay with Harrison. Keltner said that from his conversations with Lynne, Petty and Dylan, they were all keen to reunite, whereas Harrison wavered in his enthusiasm. 

After his 1991 tour of Japan – his first series of concerts since 1974 – Harrison spoke of a possible Traveling Wilburys tour:
The Wilburys tour never came about. Petty said about the Wilburys touring:
==Legacy and influence==

In the Rolling Stone Press book &quot;The New Rolling Stone Encyclopedia of Rock &amp; Roll&quot;, the Traveling Wilburys are described as &quot;the ultimate supergroup&quot;, with a line-up that represented four eras of rock music history and included &quot;three indisputable gods&quot; in Dylan, Harrison and Orbison. The editors also recognise the band as &quot;the antithesis of a supergroup&quot;, due to the musicians&#x27; adoption of fraternal alter egos and the humour inherent in the project. AllMusic managing editor Stephen Thomas Erlewine has similarly written: &quot;It&#x27;s impossible to picture a supergroup with a stronger pedigree than that (all that&#x27;s missing is a Rolling Stone), but in another sense it&#x27;s hard to call the Wilburys a true supergroup, since they arrived nearly two decades after the all-star craze of the &#x27;70s peaked, and they never had the self-important air of nearly all the other supergroups. That, of course, was the key to their charm …&quot;&lt;ref name=&quot;Erlewine/AM&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Speaking to music journalist Paul Zollo in 2004, Petty agreed that humour and self-effacement had been key factors in the Wilburys&#x27; success, adding: &quot;We wanted to make something good in a world that seemed to get uglier and uglier and meaner and meaner … And I&#x27;m really proud that I was part of it. Because I do think that it brought a little sunshine into the world.&quot;

Harrison said the project was an opportunity to &quot;put a finger up to the rules&quot; by challenging the norms associated with the music industry. Discussing the Wilburys in Peter Bogdanovich&#x27;s 2007 documentary &quot;Runnin&#x27; Down a Dream&quot;, Petty said that one of the strengths behind the concept was that it was free of any intervention from record company, management or marketing concerns, and instead developed naturally from a spirit of co-operation and mutual admiration among five established artists. Author Simon Leng recognises the venture as primarily a channel through which Harrison and Dylan could escape the restrictions of their serious media images, but also, in its guise as a &quot;phantom band&quot;, a development by Harrison of the Rutles&#x27; satirical approach to the Beatles&#x27; legacy, in this case by &quot;de-mythologizing&quot; rock history.

Inspired by the Traveling Wilburys&#x27; success and particularly its benefit to Petty and Orbison as artists, Lenny Waronker encouraged American guitarist Ry Cooder to form the band Little Village and record for Warner Bros. The group – comprising Cooder, Keltner, John Hiatt and Nick Lowe – released a self-titled album in 1992. Greg Kot of the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; described the Notting Hillbillies&#x27; &quot;Missing ... Presumed Having a Good Time&quot; as a Traveling Wilburys-type side project for Mark Knopfler of Dire Straits. Writing in &quot;New York&quot; magazine in late 1990, Elizabeth Wurtzel cited the Notting Hillbillies&#x27; album and the self-titled debut by Hindu Love Gods – a band consisting of Warren Zevon and members of R.E.M. – as examples of a trend whereby, following the Wilburys&#x27; &quot;Vol. 1&quot;, &quot;more and more albums seem to be the rock-and-roll equivalents of bowling night.&quot;

Writing in &quot;The Encyclopedia of Popular Music&quot;, Colin Larkin cites the Wilburys&#x27; contemporary skiffle as evidence of Lonnie Donegan&#x27;s continued influence on popular music long after the early 1960s. In his book &quot;Lonnie Donegan and the Birth of British Rock &amp; Roll&quot;, Patrick Humphries describes the Wilburys as &quot;a makeshift quintet whose roots were firmly and joyously planted in low-key, low-tech skiffle music&quot;. He credits the band with inspiring a brief revival of Donegan&#x27;s &quot;DIY skiffle&quot;, which included Knopfler&#x27;s Notting Hillbillies. Each member of the Traveling Wilburys has been inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, although the band itself has not been inducted. Orbison and Dylan were inducted as solo artists, Harrison was inducted as a member of the Beatles and, posthumously, as a solo artist, Petty as the leader of Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers, and Lynne as a member of the Electric Light Orchestra.

==Catalogue reissue and Genesis Publications book==

In the late 1990s and early 2000s, the two Traveling Wilburys albums had limited availability and were out of print in most areas. Harrison, as primary holder of the rights, did not reissue them before his death. In June 2007, the two albums were reissued as &quot;The Traveling Wilburys Collection&quot;, a box set including both albums on CD (with bonus tracks) and a DVD featuring a 25-minute documentary entitled &quot;The True History of the Traveling Wilburys&quot; and a collection of music videos. The box set was released in three editions; the standard edition, with both CDs and DVD in a double Digipak package and a 16-page booklet; a &quot;deluxe&quot; boxed edition with the CDs and DVD and an extensive 40-page booklet, artist postcards, and photographs; or a &quot;deluxe&quot; boxed edition on vinyl. This version omits the DVD, but adds a 12-inch vinyl disc with rare versions of the songs.

The release debuted at number 1 in the UK and topped the albums chart in Australia, Ireland and other countries. On the US &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 it reached number 9. The collection sold 500,000 copies worldwide during the first three weeks and remained in the UK top 5 for seven weeks after its release.

In November 2009, Genesis Publications, a company with which Harrison had been associated since the late 1970s, announced the release of a limited edition fine-bound book titled &quot;The Traveling Wilburys&quot;. Compiled by Olivia Harrison, the book includes rare photographs, recording notes, handwritten lyrics, sketches, and first-hand commentary on the band&#x27;s history, together with a foreword by Lynne. Petty, Lynne, Olivia Harrison, Barbara Orbison, Keltner and Idle were among those who attended the US launch at a Beverly Hills bookshop in March 2010. In an interview to publicise the book, Lynne expressed his sadness at the deaths of Harrison and Orbison, and reflected: &quot;The Wilburys was such a wonderful band, such a marvellous thing to be part of. They were the best people I could ever wish to work with. Every day was like, &#x27;Wow!&#x27; ... it was fun from day one.&quot;&lt;ref name=&quot;Heathcote/Express&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;
==Line-ups==

===Musicians===
;&quot;Volume 1&quot;
* &quot;Nelson Wilbury&quot; – George Harrison
* &quot;Otis Wilbury&quot; – Jeff Lynne
* &quot;Lefty Wilbury&quot; – Roy Orbison
* &quot;Charlie T. Wilbury, Jr.&quot; – Tom Petty
* &quot;Lucky Wilbury&quot; – Bob Dylan

;&quot;Volume 3&quot;
* &quot;Spike Wilbury&quot; – George Harrison
* &quot;Clayton Wilbury&quot; – Jeff Lynne
* &quot;Muddy Wilbury&quot; – Tom Petty
* &quot;Boo Wilbury&quot; – Bob Dylan

Jim Keltner, the session drummer and percussionist, was not officially listed as a Wilbury on either album, but was given the nickname &quot;Buster Sidebury&quot;. Overdubs on the 2007 bonus tracks &quot;Maxine&quot; and &quot;Like a Ship&quot; were credited to &quot;Ayrton Wilbury&quot;, a pseudonym for Dhani Harrison. The name Ayrton was used in honour of F1 driver Ayrton Senna. Jim Horn and Ray Cooper played saxophones and percussion, respectively, on both albums. The lead guitar part on the &quot;Vol. 3&quot; track &quot;She&#x27;s My Baby&quot; was played by rock guitarist Gary Moore, who received the credit &quot;Ken Wilbury&quot;.

===Further Wilbury appellation===
Harrison appeared as Nelson Wilbury on Warner Bros. Records&#x27; Christmas 1988 promotional album &quot;Winter Warnerland&quot; (which also included Paul Reubens as &quot;Pee Wee Wilbury&quot;). In 1992, in his capacity as producer, Harrison credited himself as &quot;Spike and Nelson Wilbury&quot; on his live album &quot;Live in Japan&quot;. During that Japanese tour, in December 1991, Harrison credited himself as Nakihama Wilbury. The Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers 1992 single &quot;Christmas All Over Again&quot; contained a greeting that read &quot;Merry Christmas from Nelson and Pee Wee Wilbury&quot;. Additionally, at Tom Petty Celebration in 2019, Roy Orbison Jr. was dubbed &quot;Lefty Wilbury Jr.&quot; and Alex Orbison as &quot;Ginger Wilbury&quot;. The Harrison-made film promoting the Traveling Wilburys, &quot;Whatever Wilbury Wilbury&quot;, lists the following credits: &quot;Cecil Bidet Wilbury&quot; (directed by), &quot;Lenny W. Wilbury&quot; (sound), &quot;Chopper Wilbury&quot; (editor), &quot;Edison Wilbury&quot; (lighting), &quot;Evelyn Wilbury&quot; (wardrobe), &quot;Clyde B. Wilbury&quot; (special effects), &quot;Big Mac Wilbury&quot; (catering), &quot;Zsa Zsa Wilbury&quot; (make-up) and &quot;Tell M. Wilbury&quot; (production manager). A squirrel is named &quot;Eddie Wilbury&quot; in that film as well.

==Discography==

===Studio albums===
===Box sets===
===Singles===
===Other charted songs===
===Other collaborations between members===
==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==
* Traveling Wilburys&#x27; YouTube channel
* Official book microsite (with Wilburys photos, lyric sheets and quotes)
* Entry at VH1.com </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q332399" start="4" end="22" title="Traveling Wilburys" label="Traveling Wilburys"/>
<link wikidata="Q215048" start="47" end="57" title="Supergroup (music)" label="supergroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="68" end="79" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="103" end="112" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="114" end="129" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q314358" start="131" end="141" title="Jeff Lynne" label="Jeff Lynne"/>
<link wikidata="Q188426" start="143" end="154" title="Roy Orbison" label="Roy Orbison"/>
<link wikidata="Q311655" start="159" end="168" title="Tom Petty" label="Tom Petty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929352" start="182" end="192" title="roots rock" label="roots rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q514298" start="386" end="396" title="Cloud Nine (George Harrison album)" label="Cloud Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405772" start="561" end="577" title="Handle with Care (song)" label="Handle with Care"/>
<link wikidata="Q748411" start="687" end="712" title="Traveling Wilburys Vol. 1" label="Traveling Wilburys Vol. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506513" start="887" end="912" title="Traveling Wilburys Vol. 3" label="Traveling Wilburys Vol. 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="1302" end="1308" title="Grammy" label="Grammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542205" start="1313" end="1352" title="Grammy Award for Best Rock Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal" label="Best Rock Performance by a Duo or Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033488" start="1474" end="1482" title="HandMade Films" label="HandMade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754902" start="1894" end="1927" title="The Traveling Wilburys Collection" label="The Traveling Wilburys Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="1966" end="1981" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q17148173" start="2060" end="2070" title="Bob Coburn" label="Bob Coburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q17148173" start="2089" end="2097" title="Rockline" label="Rockline"/>
<link wikidata="Q514298" start="2186" end="2196" title="Cloud Nine (George Harrison album)" label="Cloud Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q314358" start="2518" end="2528" title="Jeff Lynne" label="Jeff Lynne"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="2792" end="2801" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188426" start="2822" end="2833" title="Roy Orbison" label="Roy Orbison"/>
<link wikidata="Q311655" start="3576" end="3585" title="Tom Petty" label="Tom Petty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117272" start="3628" end="3659" title="Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers" label="Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698797" start="3661" end="3674" title="Temples in Flames Tour" label="toured Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698797" start="3712" end="3734" title="Temples in Flames Tour" label="Temples in Flames Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="3884" end="3907" title="Rock and roll" label="rock &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754734" start="4002" end="4017" title="Full Moon Fever" label="Full Moon Fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889239" start="4134" end="4146" title="Mystery Girl" label="Mystery Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q16402" start="4475" end="4487" title="Monty Python" label="Monty Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033488" start="4585" end="4599" title="HandMade Films" label="HandMade Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605140" start="4943" end="4955" title="Checking Out (1989 film)" label="Checking Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q67030918" start="4977" end="4997" title="Warner Bros. Records" label="Warner Bros. Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341550" start="5131" end="5143" title="This Is Love (George Harrison song)" label="This Is Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q387047" start="5352" end="5358" title="Malibu, California" label="Malibu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405772" start="5681" end="5697" title="Handle with Care (song)" label="Handle with Care"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941311" start="5792" end="5800" title="Mo Ostin" label="Mo Ostin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229498" start="5805" end="5819" title="Lenny Waronker" label="Lenny Waronker"/>
<link wikidata="Q49247" start="6148" end="6155" title="Anaheim, California" label="Anaheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q748411" start="6675" end="6700" title="Traveling Wilburys Vol. 1" label="Traveling Wilburys Vol. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003957" start="7040" end="7057" title="Never Ending Tour 1988" label="Never Ending Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q207706" start="7137" end="7147" title="Eurythmics" label="Eurythmics"/>
<link wikidata="Q325389" start="7155" end="7167" title="Dave Stewart (Eurythmics)" label="Dave Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q831698" start="7373" end="7385" title="drum machine" label="drum machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087616" start="8710" end="8716" title="FPSHOT" label="FPSHOT"/>
<link wikidata="Q453565" start="8745" end="8756" title="Jim Keltner" label="Jim Keltner"/>
<link wikidata="Q346177" start="8766" end="8774" title="Jim Horn" label="Jim Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385135" start="8792" end="8802" title="Ray Cooper" label="Ray Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q606089" start="8867" end="8874" title="skiffle" label="skiffle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663658" start="9044" end="9054" title="Dark Horse Records" label="Dark Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="9343" end="9346" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q11704384" start="9385" end="9395" title="The Concert for Bangladesh (album)" label="live album"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164558" start="9405" end="9427" title="The Concert for Bangladesh" label="Concert for Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="9461" end="9469" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="10101" end="10108" title="Hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q341364" start="10110" end="10120" title="acid house" label="acid house"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706381" start="10149" end="10161" title="Alan Clayson" label="Alan Clayson"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="10428" end="10440" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q223985" start="10553" end="10566" title="Michael Palin" label="Michael Palin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711139" start="10629" end="10641" title="Derek Taylor" label="Derek Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q325805" start="10826" end="10838" title="David Leland" label="David Leland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443475" start="11101" end="11116" title="End of the Line (Traveling Wilburys song)" label="End of the Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q323456" start="11613" end="11624" title="Del Shannon" label="Del Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q449140" start="11628" end="11641" title="Roger McGuinn" label="Roger McGuinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134135" start="12161" end="12175" title="Clinton Heylin" label="Clinton Heylin"/>
<link wikidata="Q929745" start="12325" end="12333" title="Oh Mercy" label="Oh Mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506513" start="12478" end="12503" title="Traveling Wilburys Vol. 3" label="Traveling Wilburys Vol. 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7045884" start="12567" end="12586" title="Nobody&amp;#x27;s Child (Hank Snow song)" label="Nobody&amp;#x27;s Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q442991" start="12622" end="12637" title="Olivia Harrison" label="Olivia Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766646" start="12645" end="12666" title="Romanian Angel Appeal" label="Romanian Angel Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347215" start="13631" end="13645" title="Lefty Frizzell" label="Lefty Frizzell"/>
<link wikidata="Q210741" start="13973" end="13982" title="Eric Idle" label="Eric Idle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8000277" start="14078" end="14091" title="Wilbury Twist" label="Wilbury Twist"/>
<link wikidata="Q218532" start="14134" end="14144" title="John Candy" label="John Candy"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="14815" end="14834" title="Rolling Stone Press" label="Rolling Stone Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="15312" end="15320" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q976031" start="15337" end="15360" title="Stephen Thomas Erlewine" label="Stephen Thomas Erlewine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="15500" end="15513" title="The Rolling Stones" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154552" start="15892" end="15902" title="Paul Zollo" label="Paul Zollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q158250" start="16430" end="16447" title="Peter Bogdanovich" label="Peter Bogdanovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379927" start="16478" end="16503" title="Runnin&amp;#x27; Down a Dream (film)" label="Runnin&amp;#x27; Down a Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q187709" start="17020" end="17030" title="the Rutles" label="the Rutles"/>
<link wikidata="Q318374" start="17301" end="17310" title="Ry Cooder" label="Ry Cooder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431313" start="17328" end="17342" title="Little Village" label="Little Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q719681" start="17411" end="17421" title="John Hiatt" label="John Hiatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q962095" start="17426" end="17435" title="Nick Lowe" label="Nick Lowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q14942485" start="17449" end="17466" title="Little Village (album)" label="self-titled album"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028115" start="17476" end="17484" title="Greg Kot" label="Greg Kot"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="17498" end="17513" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048987" start="17530" end="17553" title="the Notting Hillbillies" label="the Notting Hillbillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q587292" start="17566" end="17605" title="Missing...Presumed Having a Good Time" label="Missing ... Presumed Having a Good Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q185343" start="17658" end="17671" title="Mark Knopfler" label="Mark Knopfler"/>
<link wikidata="Q50040" start="17675" end="17687" title="Dire Straits" label="Dire Straits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507987" start="17706" end="17714" title="New York (magazine)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q442854" start="17744" end="17761" title="Elizabeth Wurtzel" label="Elizabeth Wurtzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5766347" start="17812" end="17829" title="Hindu Love Gods (album)" label="self-titled debut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339877" start="17833" end="17848" title="Hindu Love Gods (band)" label="Hindu Love Gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q375792" start="17872" end="17884" title="Warren Zevon" label="Warren Zevon"/>
<link wikidata="Q134969" start="17900" end="17906" title="R.E.M." label="R.E.M."/>
<link wikidata="Q5375715" start="18100" end="18133" title="The Encyclopedia of Popular Music" label="The Encyclopedia of Popular Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145275" start="18141" end="18153" title="Colin Larkin (writer)" label="Colin Larkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q27743" start="18215" end="18229" title="Lonnie Donegan" label="Lonnie Donegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="18751" end="18777" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q218255" start="19047" end="19071" title="Electric Light Orchestra" label="Electric Light Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q655681" start="19230" end="19242" title="out of print" label="out of print"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754902" start="19392" end="19425" title="The Traveling Wilburys Collection" label="The Traveling Wilburys Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q394970" start="19435" end="19442" title="box set" label="box set"/>
<link wikidata="Q63367831" start="19733" end="19740" title="Digipak" label="Digipak"/>
<link wikidata="Q918887" start="19984" end="20002" title="Twelve-inch single" label="12-inch vinyl disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="20160" end="20185" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q737774" start="20364" end="20384" title="Genesis Publications" label="Genesis Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859202" start="20792" end="20807" title="Barbara Orbison" label="Barbara Orbison"/>
<link wikidata="Q127856" start="20875" end="20888" title="Beverly Hills" label="Beverly Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="21390" end="21405" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q314358" start="21435" end="21445" title="Jeff Lynne" label="Jeff Lynne"/>
<link wikidata="Q188426" start="21476" end="21487" title="Roy Orbison" label="Roy Orbison"/>
<link wikidata="Q311655" start="21528" end="21537" title="Tom Petty" label="Tom Petty"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="21568" end="21577" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q453565" start="21769" end="21780" title="Jim Keltner" label="Jim Keltner"/>
<link wikidata="Q611349" start="22075" end="22089" title="Dhani Harrison" label="Dhani Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q10490" start="22139" end="22151" title="Ayrton Senna" label="Ayrton Senna"/>
<link wikidata="Q346177" start="22153" end="22161" title="Jim Horn" label="Jim Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385135" start="22166" end="22176" title="Ray Cooper" label="Ray Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q185147" start="22354" end="22364" title="Gary Moore" label="Gary Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q67030918" start="22489" end="22509" title="Warner Bros. Records" label="Warner Bros. Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q720581" start="22600" end="22612" title="Paul Reubens" label="Paul Reubens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374172" start="22622" end="22637" title="Pee-wee Herman" label="Pee Wee Wilbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523643" start="22774" end="22787" title="Live in Japan (George Harrison album)" label="Live in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660445" start="22941" end="22965" title="A Very Special Christmas 2" label="Christmas All Over Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q27967819" start="23173" end="23185" title="Alex Orbison" label="Alex Orbison"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31207" wikidata="Q422445" url="?curid=31207" title="Tumor suppressor gene">
<text>A tumor suppressor gene (TSG), or anti-oncogene, is a gene that regulates a cell during cell division and replication. If the cell grows uncontrollably, it will result in cancer. When a tumor suppressor gene is mutated, it results in a loss or reduction in its function. In combination with other genetic mutations, this could allow the cell to grow abnormally. The loss of function for these genes may be even more significant in the development of human cancers, compared to the activation of oncogenes.

TSGs can be grouped into the following categories: caretaker genes, gatekeeper genes, and more recently landscaper genes. Caretaker genes ensure stability of the genome via DNA repair and subsequently when mutated allow mutations to accumulate. Meanwhile, gatekeeper genes directly regulate cell growth by either inhibiting cell cycle progression or inducing apoptosis. Lastly, landscaper genes regulate growth by contributing to the surrounding environment, and when mutated, can cause an environment that promotes unregulated proliferation. The classification schemes are evolving as medical advances are being made from fields including molecular biology, genetics, and epigenetics.

==History==
The discovery of oncogenes and their ability to deregulate cellular processes related to cell proliferation and development appeared first in the literature as opposed to the idea of tumor suppressor genes. However, the idea of genetic mutation leading to increased tumor growth gave way to another possible genetic idea of genes playing a role in decreasing cellular growth and development of cells. This idea was not solidified until experiments by Henry Harris were conducted with somatic cell hybridization in 1969.

Within Harris&#x27;s experiments, tumor cells were fused with normal somatic cells to make hybrid cells. Each cell had chromosomes from both parents and upon growth, a majority of these hybrid cells did not have the capability of developing tumors within animals. The suppression of tumorigenicity in these hybrid cells prompted researchers to hypothesize that genes within the normal somatic cell had inhibitory actions to stop tumor growth. This initial hypothesis eventually lead to the discovery of the first classic tumor suppressor gene by Alfred Knudson, known as the Rb gene, which codes for the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein.

Alfred Knudson, a pediatrician and cancer geneticist, proposed that in order to develop retinoblastoma, two allelic mutations are required to lose functional copies of both the Rb genes to lead to tumorigenicity. Knudson observed that retinoblastoma often developed early in life for younger patients in both eyes, while in some rarer cases retinoblastoma would develop later in life and only be unilateral. This unique development pattern allowed Knudson and several other scientific groups in 1971 to correctly hypothesize that the early development of retinoblastoma was caused by inheritance of one loss of function mutation to an RB germ-line gene followed by a later de novo mutation on its functional Rb gene allele. The more sporadic occurrence of unilateral development of retinoblastoma was hypothesized to develop much later in life due to two de novo mutations that were needed to fully lose tumor suppressor properties. This finding formed the basis of the two-hit hypothesis. In order to verify that the loss of function of tumor suppressor genes causes increased tumorigenicity, interstitial deletion experiments on chromosome 13q14 were conducted to observe the effect of deleting the loci for the Rb gene. This deletion caused increased tumor growth in retinoblastoma, suggesting that loss or inactivation of a tumor suppressor gene can increase tumorigenicity.

==Two-hit hypothesis==
Unlike oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes generally follow the two-hit hypothesis, which states both alleles that code for a particular protein must be affected before an effect is manifested. If only one allele for the gene is damaged, the other can still produce enough of the correct protein to retain the appropriate function. In other words, mutant tumor suppressor alleles are usually recessive, whereas mutant oncogene alleles are typically dominant. 

Proposed by A.G. Knudson for cases of retinoblastoma. He observed that 40% of U.S cases were caused by a mutation in the germ-line. However, affected parents could have children without the disease, but the unaffected children became parents of children with retinoblastoma. This indicates that one could inherit a mutated germ-line but not display the disease. Knudson observed that the age of onset of retinoblastoma followed 2nd order kinetics, implying that two independent genetic events were necessary. He recognized that this was consistent with a recessive mutation involving a single gene, but requiring bi-allelic mutation. Hereditary cases involve an inherited mutation and a single mutation in the normal allele. Non-hereditary retinoblastoma involves two mutations, one on each allele. Knudson also noted that hereditary cases often developed bilateral tumors and would develop them earlier in life, compared to non-hereditary cases where individuals were only affected by a single tumor.

There are exceptions to the two-hit rule for tumor suppressors, such as certain mutations in the p53 gene product. p53 mutations can function as a dominant negative, meaning that a mutated p53 protein can prevent the function of the natural protein produced from the non-mutated allele. Other tumor-suppressor genes that do not follow the two-hit rule are those that exhibit haploinsufficiency, including PTCH in medulloblastoma and NF1 in neurofibroma. Another example is p27, a cell-cycle inhibitor, that when one allele is mutated causes increased carcinogen susceptibility.

==Functions==
The proteins encoded by most tumor suppressor genes inhibit cell proliferation or survival. Inactivation of tumor suppressor genes therefore leads to tumor development by eliminating negative regulatory proteins. In most cases, tumor suppressor proteins inhibit the same cell regulatory pathways that are stimulated by the products of oncogenes. While tumor suppressor genes have the same main function, they have various mechanisms of action, that their transcribed products perform, which include the following:
# Intracellular proteins, that control gene expression of a specific stage of the cell cycle. If these genes are not expressed, the cell cycle does not continue, effectively inhibiting cell division. (e.g., pRB and p16) 
# Receptors or signal transducers for secreted hormones or developmental signals that inhibit cell proliferation (e.g., transforming growth factor (TGF)-β and adenomatous polyposis coli (APC)).
# Checkpoint-control proteins that trigger cell cycle arrest in response to DNA damage or chromosomal defects (e.g., breast cancer type 1 susceptibility protein (BRCA1), p16, and p14).
# Proteins that induce apoptosis. If damage cannot be repaired, the cell initiates programmed cell death to remove the threat it poses to the organism as a whole. (e.g., p53).
#Cell adhesion. Some proteins involved in cell adhesion prevent tumor cells from dispersing, block loss of contact inhibition, and inhibit metastasis. These proteins are known as metastasis suppressors. (e.g., CADM1)
# Proteins involved in repairing mistakes in DNA. Caretaker genes encode proteins that function in repairing mutations in the genome, preventing cells from replicating with mutations. Furthermore, increased mutation rate from decreased DNA repair leads to increased inactivation of other tumor suppressors and activation of oncogenes. (e.g., p53 and DNA mismatch repair protein 2 (MSH2)). 
# Certain genes can also act as tumor suppressors and oncogenes. Dubbed Proto-oncogenes with Tumor suppressor function, these genes act as “double agents” that both positively and negatively regulate transcription. (e.g., NOTCH receptors, TP53 and FAS).

== Epigenetic influences ==
Expression of genes, including tumor suppressors, can be altered through biochemical alterations known as DNA methylation. Methylation is an example of epigenetic modifications, which commonly regulate expression in mammalian genes. The addition of a methyl group to either histone tails or directly on DNA causes the nucleosome to pack tightly together restricting the transcription of any genes in this region. This process not only has the capabilities to inhibit gene expression, it can also increase the chance of mutations. Stephen Baylin observed that if promoter regions experience a phenomenon known as hypermethylation, it could result in later transcriptional errors, tumor suppressor gene silencing, protein misfolding, and eventually cancer growth. Baylin et al. found methylation inhibitors known as azacitidine and decitabine. These compounds can actually help prevent cancer growth by inducing re-expression of previously silenced genes, arresting the cell cycle of the tumor cell and forcing it into apoptosis.

There are further clinical trials under current investigation regarding treatments for hypermethylation as well as alternate tumor suppression therapies that include prevention of tissue hyperplasia, tumor development, or metastatic spread of tumors. The team working with Wajed have investigated neoplastic tissue methylation in order to one day identify early treatment options for gene modification that can silence the tumor suppressor gene. In addition to DNA methylation, other epigenetic modifications like histone deacetylation or chromatin-binding proteins can prevent DNA polymerase from effectively transcribing desired sequences, such as ones containing tumor suppressor genes.

== Clinical significance ==
Gene therapy is used to reinstate the function of a mutated or deleted gene type. When tumor suppressor genes are altered in a way that results in less or no expression, several severe problems can arise for the host. This is why tumor suppressor genes have commonly been studied and used for gene therapy. The two main approaches used currently to introduce genetic material into cells are viral and non-viral delivery methods.

=== Viral methods ===
The viral method of transferring genetic material harnesses the power of viruses. By using viruses that are durable to genetic material alterations, viral methods of gene therapy for tumor suppressor genes have shown to be successful. In this method, vectors from viruses are used. The two most commonly used vectors are adenoviral vectors and adeno-associated vectors. In vitro genetic manipulation of these types of vectors is easy and in vivo application is relatively safe compared to other vectors. Before the vectors are inserted into the tumors of the host, they are prepared by having the parts of their genome that control replication either mutated or deleted. This makes them safer for insertion. Then, the desired genetic material is inserted and ligated to the vector. In the case with tumor suppressor genes, genetic material which encodes p53 has been used successfully, which after application, has shown reduction in tumor growth or proliferation.

=== Non-viral methods ===
The non-viral method of transferring genetic material is used less often than the viral method. However, the non-viral method is a more cost-effective, safer, available method of gene delivery not to mention that non-viral methods have shown to induce fewer host immune responses and possess no restrictions on size or length of the transferable genetic material. Non-viral gene therapy uses either chemical or physical methods to introduce genetic material to the desired cells. The chemical methods are used primarily for tumor suppressor gene introduction and are divided into two categories which are naked plasmid or liposome-coated plasmids. The naked plasmid strategy has garnered interest because of its easy to use methods. Direct injection into the muscles allows for the plasmid to be taken up into the cell of possible tumors where the genetic material of the plasmid can be incorporated into the genetic material of the tumor cells and revert any previous damage done to tumor suppressor genes. The liposome-coated plasmid method has recently also been of interest since they produce relatively low host immune response and are efficient with cellular targeting. The positively charged capsule in which the genetic material is packaged helps with electrostatic attraction to the negatively charged membranes of the cells as well as the negatively charged DNA of the tumor cells. In this way, non-viral methods of gene therapy are highly effective in restoring tumor suppressor gene function to tumor cells that have either partially or entirely lost this function.

=== Limitations ===
The viral and non-viral gene therapies mentioned above are commonly used but each has some limitations which must be considered. The most important limitation these methods have is the efficacy at which the adenoviral and adeno-associated vectors, naked plasmids, or liposome-coated plasmids are taken in by the host’s tumor cells. If proper uptake by the host’s tumor cells is not achieved, re-insertion introduces problems such as the host’s immune system recognizing these vectors or plasmids and destroying them which impairs the overall effectiveness of the gene therapy treatment further.

==Examples==
* Retinoblastoma protein (pRb). pRb was the first tumor-suppressor protein discovered in human retinoblastoma; however, recent evidence has also implicated pRb as a tumor-survival factor. &quot;RB1&quot; gene is a gatekeeper gene that blocks cell proliferation, regulates cell division and cell death. Specifically pRb prevents the cell cycle progression from G1 phase into the S phase by binding to E2F and repressing the necessary gene transcription. This prevents the cell from replicating its DNA if there is damage.
* p53. &quot;TP53&quot;, a caretaker gene, encodes the protein p53, which is nicknamed &quot;the guardian of the genome&quot;. p53 has many different functions in the cell including DNA repair, inducing apoptosis, transcription, and regulating the cell cycle. Mutated p53 is involved in many human cancers, of the 6.5 million cancer diagnoses each year about 37% are connected to p53 mutations. This makes it a popular target for new cancer therapies. Homozygous loss of p53 is found in 65% of colon cancers, 30–50% of breast cancers, and 50% of lung cancers. Mutated p53 is also involved in the pathophysiology of leukemias, lymphomas, sarcomas, and neurogenic tumors. Abnormalities of the p53 gene can be inherited in Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), which increases the risk of developing various types of cancers.
* BCL2. BCL2 is a family of proteins that are involved in either inducing or inhibiting apoptosis. The main function is involved in maintaining the composition of the mitochondria membrane, and preventing cytochrome c release into the cytosol. When cytochrome c is released from the mitochondria it starts a signaling cascade to begin apoptosis.
* SWI/SNF. SWI/SNF is a chromatin remodeling complex, which is lost in about 20% of tumors. The complex consists of 10-15 subunits encoded by 20 different genes. Mutations in the individual complexes can lead to misfolding, which compromises the ability of the complex to work together as a whole. SWI/SNF has the ability move nucleosomes, which condenses DNA, allowing for transcription or block transcription from occurring for certain genes. Mutating this ability could cause genes to be turned on or off at the wrong times.

As the cost of DNA sequencing continues to diminish, more cancers can be sequenced. This allows for the discovery of novel tumor suppressors and can give insight on how to treat and cure different cancers in the future. Other examples of tumor suppressors include pVHL, APC, CD95, ST5, YPEL3, ST7, and ST14, p16, BRCA2.
== See also ==
*Anticancer gene
*Metastasis suppressor
*Adenomatosis polyposis coli
*Oncogene
*Cancer
*DNA repair
*Signal transduction
*Von Hippel Lindau Binding protein 1
*BRCA1
*p53

== References ==
== External links ==
*TCF21 gene discovery at Ohio State University
* &quot;Drosophila&quot; Oncogenes and Tumor Suppressors - The Interactive Fly 
*Tumor Suppressor Gene Database, published in 2012 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q422445" start="2" end="23" title="Tumor suppressor gene" label="tumor suppressor gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q422445" start="25" end="28" title="Tumor suppressor gene" label="TSG"/>
<link wikidata="Q422445" start="34" end="47" title="Tumor suppressor gene" label="anti-oncogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="54" end="58" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="76" end="80" title="cell (biology)" label="cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="171" end="177" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="366" end="382" title="Loss-of-function mutation" label="loss of function"/>
<link wikidata="Q207609" start="495" end="503" title="oncogene" label="oncogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039065" start="558" end="572" title="caretaker gene" label="caretaker gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q14599311" start="866" end="875" title="apoptosis" label="apoptosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202" start="1147" end="1164" title="molecular biology" label="molecular biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="1166" end="1174" title="genetics" label="genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q26939" start="1180" end="1191" title="epigenetics" label="epigenetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q207609" start="1223" end="1232" title="oncogenes" label="oncogenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q189101" start="1295" end="1313" title="cell proliferation" label="cell proliferation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16909647" start="1472" end="1484" title="Tumor progression" label="tumor growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="1530" end="1535" title="genes" label="genes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11251607" start="1657" end="1669" title="Henry Harris (scientist)" label="Henry Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414280" start="1690" end="1716" title="Somatic fusion" label="somatic cell hybridization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="1761" end="1772" title="tumor cells" label="tumor cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q725508" start="1796" end="1809" title="somatic cells" label="somatic cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="1846" end="1857" title="chromosomes" label="chromosomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637543" start="2010" end="2024" title="tumorigenicity" label="tumorigenicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="2088" end="2093" title="genes" label="genes"/>
<link wikidata="Q725508" start="2112" end="2124" title="somatic cell" label="somatic cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q376149" start="2273" end="2287" title="Alfred G. Knudson" label="Alfred Knudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q21111463" start="2331" end="2370" title="Retinoblastoma protein" label="retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q376149" start="2373" end="2387" title="Alfred G. Knudson" label="Alfred Knudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q500695" start="2461" end="2475" title="retinoblastoma" label="retinoblastoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="2481" end="2498" title="mutation" label="allelic mutations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637543" start="2570" end="2584" title="tumorigenicity" label="tumorigenicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q178694" start="2957" end="2968" title="Heredity" label="inheritance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139164" start="3011" end="3025" title="germline" label="germ-line gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330942" start="3046" end="3062" title="De novo mutations" label="de novo mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q80726" start="3089" end="3095" title="allele" label="allele"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330942" start="3228" end="3245" title="de novo mutations" label="de novo mutations"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="3391" end="3407" title="Mutation" label="loss of function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637543" start="3451" end="3465" title="tumorigenicity" label="tumorigenicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q840734" start="3504" end="3520" title="Chromosome 13" label="chromosome 13q14"/>
<link wikidata="Q106227" start="3574" end="3578" title="Locus (genetics)" label="loci"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="3675" end="3695" title="Mutation" label="loss or inactivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637543" start="3736" end="3750" title="tumorigenicity" label="tumorigenicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q207609" start="3783" end="3791" title="oncogene" label="oncogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q387059" start="3838" end="3856" title="two-hit hypothesis" label="two-hit hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131896729" start="4166" end="4175" title="Dominance relationship" label="recessive"/>
<link wikidata="Q207609" start="4192" end="4200" title="oncogene" label="oncogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q131896729" start="4223" end="4231" title="Dominance relationship" label="dominant"/>
<link wikidata="Q376149" start="4247" end="4259" title="Alfred G. Knudson" label="A.G. Knudson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4663" end="4681" title="Rate equation#Second order reactions" label="2nd order kinetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q283350" start="5335" end="5351" title="p53 (protein)" label="p53 gene product"/>
<link wikidata="Q131896729" start="5385" end="5402" title="dominant negative" label="dominant negative"/>
<link wikidata="Q852654" start="5613" end="5631" title="haploinsufficiency" label="haploinsufficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333608" start="5651" end="5666" title="medulloblastoma" label="medulloblastoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418735" start="5678" end="5690" title="neurofibroma" label="neurofibroma"/>
<link wikidata="Q20969983" start="5711" end="5714" title="p27 (gene)" label="p27"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="5835" end="5851" title="genetics" label="proteins encoded"/>
<link wikidata="Q189101" start="5891" end="5909" title="cell proliferation" label="cell proliferation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138797" start="6023" end="6042" title="Regulator gene" label="regulatory proteins"/>
<link wikidata="Q207609" start="6166" end="6175" title="oncogenes" label="oncogenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q26972" start="6384" end="6399" title="gene expression" label="gene expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q188941" start="6427" end="6437" title="cell cycle" label="cell cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q188909" start="6530" end="6543" title="cell division" label="cell division"/>
<link wikidata="Q21111463" start="6552" end="6555" title="Retinoblastoma protein" label="pRB"/>
<link wikidata="Q416259" start="6560" end="6563" title="p16" label="p16"/>
<link wikidata="Q828130" start="6581" end="6599" title="Signal transduction" label="signal transducers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11364" start="6613" end="6620" title="hormone" label="hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q423671" start="6686" end="6712" title="transforming growth factor" label="transforming growth factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q14883378" start="6725" end="6751" title="adenomatous polyposis coli" label="adenomatous polyposis coli"/>
<link wikidata="Q188941" start="6803" end="6813" title="cell cycle" label="cell cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205747" start="6836" end="6846" title="DNA damage (naturally occurring)" label="DNA damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q17487737" start="6877" end="6920" title="BRCA1" label="breast cancer type 1 susceptibility protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q416259" start="6930" end="6933" title="p16" label="p16"/>
<link wikidata="Q7117832" start="6939" end="6942" title="p14arf" label="p14"/>
<link wikidata="Q14599311" start="6968" end="6977" title="apoptosis" label="apoptosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q283350" start="7115" end="7118" title="p53" label="p53"/>
<link wikidata="Q187640" start="7122" end="7135" title="Cell adhesion" label="Cell adhesion"/>
<link wikidata="Q187640" start="7163" end="7176" title="cell adhesion" label="cell adhesion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151077" start="7228" end="7246" title="contact inhibition" label="contact inhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q181876" start="7260" end="7270" title="metastasis" label="metastasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6823243" start="7300" end="7321" title="metastasis suppressor" label="metastasis suppressor"/>
<link wikidata="Q18037595" start="7331" end="7336" title="CADM1" label="CADM1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="7383" end="7386" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q283350" start="7680" end="7683" title="p53" label="p53"/>
<link wikidata="Q14911688" start="7688" end="7717" title="MSH2" label="DNA mismatch repair protein 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q177900" start="7928" end="7941" title="Transcription (biology)" label="transcription"/>
<link wikidata="Q904082" start="7950" end="7965" title="Notch signaling pathway" label="NOTCH receptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q283350" start="7967" end="7971" title="p53" label="TP53"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649375" start="7976" end="7979" title="Fas receptor" label="FAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q874745" start="8117" end="8132" title="DNA methylation" label="DNA methylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36293" start="8285" end="8292" title="histone" label="histone"/>
<link wikidata="Q416451" start="8825" end="8836" title="azacitidine" label="azacitidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181878" start="8841" end="8851" title="decitabine" label="decitabine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535115" start="9554" end="9575" title="Histone acetylation and deacetylation" label="histone deacetylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q213901" start="9759" end="9771" title="Gene therapy" label="Gene therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421706" start="9917" end="9927" title="Expression quantitative trait loci" label="expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298489" start="10150" end="10155" title="Viral vector" label="viral"/>
<link wikidata="Q808" start="10284" end="10289" title="virus" label="virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7917858" start="10462" end="10469" title="Vectors in gene therapy" label="vectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q193447" start="10532" end="10542" title="adenoviral" label="adenoviral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7917858" start="10543" end="10550" title="Vectors in gene therapy" label="vectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q355989" start="10555" end="10571" title="Adeno-associated virus" label="adeno-associated"/>
<link wikidata="Q221681" start="10581" end="10589" title="In vitro" label="In vitro"/>
<link wikidata="Q141124" start="10649" end="10656" title="in vivo" label="in vivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="10756" end="10762" title="Neoplasm" label="tumors"/>
<link wikidata="Q130996" start="10843" end="10854" title="DNA replication" label="replication"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="10862" end="10869" title="Mutation" label="mutated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650834" start="10908" end="10917" title="Insertion (genetics)" label="insertion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756706" start="10970" end="10977" title="ligation (molecular biology)" label="ligated"/>
<link wikidata="Q283350" start="11065" end="11068" title="p53" label="p53"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="11145" end="11150" title="Neoplasm" label="tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q189159" start="11161" end="11174" title="Cell growth" label="proliferation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059" start="11466" end="11472" title="Immune system" label="immune"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="11676" end="11681" title="Cell (biology)" label="cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q172778" start="11814" end="11821" title="plasmid" label="plasmid"/>
<link wikidata="Q410454" start="11825" end="11833" title="liposome" label="liposome"/>
<link wikidata="Q245359" start="11943" end="11952" title="Injection (medicine)" label="injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365" start="11962" end="11968" title="muscle" label="muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612119" start="12320" end="12335" title="immune response" label="immune response"/>
<link wikidata="Q189206" start="12402" end="12409" title="Vesicle (biology and chemistry)" label="capsule"/>
<link wikidata="Q83152" start="12463" end="12487" title="electrostatic attraction" label="electrostatic attraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q29548" start="12514" end="12523" title="Cell membrane" label="membranes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="12571" end="12574" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q21111463" start="13443" end="13446" title="Retinoblastoma protein" label="pRb"/>
<link wikidata="Q500695" start="13506" end="13520" title="retinoblastoma" label="retinoblastoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q306383" start="13771" end="13779" title="G1 phase" label="G1 phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289513" start="13789" end="13796" title="S phase" label="S phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q15333016" start="13811" end="13814" title="E2F1" label="E2F"/>
<link wikidata="Q283350" start="13995" end="13998" title="p53" label="p53"/>
<link wikidata="Q187542" start="14652" end="14672" title="Li-Fraumeni syndrome" label="Li-Fraumeni syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q425201" start="14753" end="14757" title="Bcl-2" label="BCL2"/>
<link wikidata="Q39572" start="14912" end="14924" title="Mitochondrion" label="mitochondria"/>
<link wikidata="Q408223" start="14950" end="14962" title="cytochrome c" label="cytochrome c"/>
<link wikidata="Q21095139" start="15102" end="15109" title="SWI/SNF" label="SWI/SNF"/>
<link wikidata="Q180951" start="15115" end="15124" title="chromatin" label="chromatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q271794" start="15418" end="15428" title="nucleosome" label="nucleosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7941454" start="15884" end="15888" title="Von Hippel–Lindau tumor suppressor" label="pVHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q14883378" start="15890" end="15893" title="APC (gene)" label="APC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649375" start="15895" end="15899" title="CD95" label="CD95"/>
<link wikidata="Q18031742" start="15901" end="15904" title="ST5 (gene)" label="ST5"/>
<link wikidata="Q18047248" start="15906" end="15911" title="YPEL3" label="YPEL3"/>
<link wikidata="Q18032688" start="15913" end="15916" title="ST7" label="ST7"/>
<link wikidata="Q18031745" start="15922" end="15926" title="ST14" label="ST14"/>
<link wikidata="Q416259" start="15928" end="15931" title="p16" label="p16"/>
<link wikidata="Q421651" start="15933" end="15938" title="BRCA2" label="BRCA2"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774587" start="15956" end="15971" title="Anticancer gene" label="Anticancer gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q6823243" start="15973" end="15994" title="Metastasis suppressor" label="Metastasis suppressor"/>
<link wikidata="Q14883378" start="15996" end="16023" title="APC (gene)" label="Adenomatosis polyposis coli"/>
<link wikidata="Q207609" start="16025" end="16033" title="Oncogene" label="Oncogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="16035" end="16041" title="Cancer" label="Cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q210538" start="16043" end="16053" title="DNA repair" label="DNA repair"/>
<link wikidata="Q828130" start="16055" end="16074" title="Signal transduction" label="Signal transduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q24771280" start="16076" end="16111" title="Von Hippel Lindau Binding protein 1" label="Von Hippel Lindau Binding protein 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q17487737" start="16113" end="16118" title="BRCA1" label="BRCA1"/>
<link wikidata="Q283350" start="16120" end="16123" title="p53" label="p53"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31208" wikidata="Q543595" url="?curid=31208" title="The Angry Brigade">
<text>The Angry Brigade was a far-left British terrorist group responsible for a series of bomb attacks in England between 1970 and 1972. Using small bombs, they targeted banks, embassies, a BBC Outside Broadcast vehicle, and the homes of Conservative Members of Parliament (MPs). In total, police attributed 25 bombings to the Angry Brigade. The bombings mostly caused property damage; one person was slightly injured. Of the eight people who stood trial, known as the Stoke Newington Eight, four were acquitted. John Barker, along with Hilary Creek, Anna Mendelssohn and Jim Greenfield, were convicted on majority verdicts, and sentenced to ten years. In a 2014 interview, Barker described the trial as political, but acknowledged that &quot;they framed a guilty man&quot;.

==History==

=== Origins ===
In mid-1968 demonstrations took place in London, centred on the US embassy in Grosvenor Square, against US involvement in the Vietnam War. One of the organisers of these demonstrations, Tariq Ali, has said he recalls an approach by someone representing the Angry Brigade who wished to bomb the embassy; he told them it was a terrible idea and no bombing took place.

=== 1970s ===
The Angry Brigade decided to launch a bombing campaign with small bombs, in order to maximise media exposure to their demands while keeping collateral damage to a minimum. The campaign started in August 1970 and continued for a year until arrests took place the following summer.

Targets included banks, embassies, a BBC Outside Broadcast vehicle earmarked for use in the coverage of the 1970 Miss World event, and the homes of Conservative Members of Parliament (MPs). In total, police attributed 25 bombings to the Angry Brigade. The bombings mostly caused property damage; one person was slightly injured.

===Resurfaced Angry Brigade of the 1980s===
In the 1980s the Angry Brigade resurfaced as the Angry Brigade Resistance Movement, part of the Irish Republican Socialist Movement (IRSM).

==Aftermath==
Jake Prescott, whose origins were in the mining community of Dunfermline, was arrested and tried in 1971. Melford Stevenson sentenced him to 15 years imprisonment (later reduced to 10), mostly spent in Category A high security prisons. Later he said he realised then that he &quot;was the one who was angry and the people [he] met were more like the Slightly Cross Brigade&quot;. The other members of the group from North-East London, the &quot;Stoke Newington Eight&quot;, were prosecuted for carrying out bombings as the Angry Brigade in one of the longest criminal trials of English history (it lasted from 30 May to 6 December 1972). As a result of the trial, John Barker, Jim Greenfield, Hilary Creek and Anna Mendelssohn received prison sentences of 10 years. A number of other defendants were found not guilty, including Stuart Christie, who had previously been imprisoned in Spain for carrying explosives with the intent to assassinate the Spanish dictator General Franco, and Angela Mason who became a director of the LGBT rights group Stonewall and was awarded an OBE for services to homosexual rights.

In February 2002, Prescott apologised for his role in bombing Robert Carr&#x27;s house and called on other members of the Angry Brigade to also come forward.

On 3 February 2002, &quot;The Guardian&quot; reported a history of the Angry Brigade and an update on what its former members were doing then. On 9 August 2002, BBC Radio 4 aired Graham White&#x27;s historical drama, &quot;The Trial of the Angry Brigade&quot;. Produced by Peter Kavanagh, this was a reconstruction of the trial combined with other background information. The cast included Kenneth Cranham, Juliet Stevenson, Tom Hiddleston and Mark Strong.

In 2009, family care activist and novelist Erin Pizzey won a libel case against Macmillan Publishers after &quot;Andrew Marr&#x27;s History of Modern Britain&quot; had falsely linked her to the Angry Brigade. The publisher also recalled and destroyed the offending version of the book, and republished it with the error removed. The link to the Angry Brigade was made in 2001, in an interview with &quot;The Guardian&quot;, in which the article states that she was &quot;thrown out&quot; of the feminist movement after threatening to inform police about a planned bombing by the Angry Brigade of the clothes shop Biba. &quot;I said that if you go on with this – they were discussing bombing Biba [the legendary department store in Kensington] – I&#x27;m going to call the police in, because I really don&#x27;t believe in this&quot;.

The group and trial feature in Jake Arnott&#x27;s 2006 novel &quot;Johnny Come Home&quot;. Hari Kunzru&#x27;s 2007 novel &quot;My Revolutions&quot; is inspired by the Angry Brigade. &quot;The Angry Brigade&quot; is a 2014 play by James Graham.

== Attempted assassinations ==

=== 1971 ===
4 May – Attempted assassination of Marcia Anastasia Christoforides Dunn Beaverbrook. A bomb was attached to the bottom of her car, however the bomb was discovered before it exploded, and the bomb was disarmed.

12 January – Attempted assassination of Robert Carr. Two bombs exploded at the home of British Employment Secretary Robert Carr, his house was severely damaged, no-one was killed or injured.

==See also==
* Terrorist attacks in London
* Walsall Anarchists
* Urban Guerrilla (Hawkwind)
* First of May Group
* Anarchism in the United Kingdom
* Black Mask
* King Mob
* Movement 2 June

==Notes==
==References==

==Further reading==
* &quot;The Angry Brigade: A history of Britain&#x27;s first urban guerrilla group&quot;, Gordon Carr, 1975 (reissued by Stuart Christie 2005) 
* &quot;The Angry Brigade 1967–1984: Documents and Chronology&quot;, Bratach Dubh Anarchist Pamphlets, 1978
* &quot;Anarchy in the UK: The Angry Brigade&quot;, Tom Vague, AK Press, 1997, 
* &quot;Bending the Bars&quot;, John Barker, Christie Books, 2002 (reissued 2006). .
* Alan Burns, &quot;The Angry Brigade: A Documentary Novel&quot; (Allison &amp; Busby, 1973).
* Gordon Carr, John Barker, Stuart Christie, &quot;The Angry Brigade: A History of Britain&#x27;s First Urban Guerilla Group&quot;, 1975 (reissued 2005). .
* Gordon Carr, &quot;The Angry Brigade: The Spectacular Rise and Fall of Britain&#x27;s First Urban Guerilla Group&quot; (DVD), BBC, January 1973. Released on DVD in 2008 by PM Press.
* Gordon Carr, &quot;The Persons Unknown&quot; (DVD) 1980. Features as a DVD extra on the January 1973 BBC documentary &quot;The Angry Brigade: The Spectacular Rise and Fall of Britain&#x27;s First Urban Guerilla Group&quot;.
* &quot;Edward Heath Made Me Angry&quot;, Stuart Christie, Christie Books, 2004. 978-1873976234.
* &quot;Granny Made me an Anarchist: General Franco, The Angry Brigade and Me&quot;, Stuart Christie, Scribner, 2004. 978-0743263566.
* Tom Vague, &quot;Anarchy in the UK: The Angry Brigade&quot;, AK Press, 1997, . (Issue 27 of punk rock fanzine &quot;Vague&quot;. An earlier shorter version appeared as an article in issue 16 &quot;Psychic Terrorism Annual&quot; in 1985, reprinted in issue 25 &quot;The Great British Mistake&quot; in 1994.)
* Graham White, &quot;The Trial of the Angry Brigade&quot;, BBC Radio 4. Produced by Peter Kavanagh and broadcast 9 August 2002.

==External links==

* A personal memory of Anna in 1968
* Libertarian community and organising resource. Libertarian communism and anarchism in the UK
* Angry Brigade: Documents and Chronology, 1967–1984
* John Barker&#x27;s review of Tom Vague&#x27;s &quot;Anarchy in the UK: the Angry Brigade&quot;
* Look back in anger (An article by The Observer on the 30th Anniversary of their trial)
* Interview with Stuart Christie (3:AM Magazine)
* Interview with John Barker (3:AM Magazine)
* British minister&#x27;s home bombed (BBC &#x27;On This Day&#x27; article)
* Timeline of actions (spunk.org)
* Obituary of Anna Mendleson
* 1973 article on the Stoke Newington Eight trial
* John Barker&#x27;s personal page on Through Europe
* Christie Books</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q543595" start="4" end="17" title="The Angry Brigade" label="Angry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129409" start="24" end="32" title="far-left" label="far-left"/>
<link wikidata="Q22687" start="165" end="169" title="bank" label="bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q213283" start="172" end="181" title="embassy" label="embassies"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="185" end="188" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760378" start="189" end="206" title="Outside broadcasting" label="Outside Broadcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="233" end="245" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="246" end="267" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Members of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q554774" start="364" end="379" title="property damage" label="property damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483346" start="464" end="479" title="Stoke Newington" label="Stoke Newington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4767342" start="546" end="562" title="Anna Mendelssohn" label="Anna Mendelssohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q932992" start="878" end="894" title="Grosvenor Square" label="Grosvenor Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254589" start="896" end="937" title="Opposition to the Vietnam War" label="against US involvement in the Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q314787" start="986" end="995" title="Tariq Ali" label="Tariq Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q22687" start="1479" end="1483" title="bank" label="bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q213283" start="1486" end="1495" title="embassy" label="embassies"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="1499" end="1502" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760378" start="1503" end="1520" title="Outside broadcasting" label="Outside Broadcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466694" start="1566" end="1591" title="Miss World 1970" label="the 1970 Miss World event"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="1610" end="1622" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="1623" end="1644" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Members of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q554774" start="1741" end="1756" title="property damage" label="property damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071173" start="1932" end="1967" title="Irish Republican Socialist Movement" label="Irish Republican Socialist Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q211950" start="2052" end="2063" title="Dunfermline" label="Dunfermline"/>
<link wikidata="Q6812228" start="2097" end="2114" title="Melford Stevenson" label="Melford Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2193" end="2225" title="Prisoner security categories in the United Kingdom#Prisoner categories in England and Wales" label="Category A high security prisons"/>
<link wikidata="Q146071" start="2550" end="2564" title="criminal trial" label="criminal trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q4767342" start="2701" end="2717" title="Anna Mendelssohn" label="Anna Mendelssohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763090" start="2727" end="2742" title="prison sentence" label="prison sentence"/>
<link wikidata="Q981988" start="2819" end="2834" title="Stuart Christie" label="Stuart Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="2874" end="2879" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882219" start="2923" end="2934" title="assassinate" label="assassinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q183318" start="2947" end="2955" title="dictator" label="dictator"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="2956" end="2970" title="General Franco" label="General Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4762503" start="2976" end="2988" title="Angela Mason" label="Angela Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="3018" end="3022" title="LGBT" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q681943" start="3036" end="3045" title="Stonewall (charity)" label="Stonewall"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="3065" end="3068" title="Officer of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire" label="OBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q333896" start="3167" end="3178" title="Robert Carr" label="Robert Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="3290" end="3302" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="3425" end="3436" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7175117" start="3537" end="3551" title="Peter Kavanagh (writer)" label="Peter Kavanagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229052" start="3654" end="3669" title="Kenneth Cranham" label="Kenneth Cranham"/>
<link wikidata="Q272518" start="3671" end="3687" title="Juliet Stevenson" label="Juliet Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q295803" start="3689" end="3703" title="Tom Hiddleston" label="Tom Hiddleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q312712" start="3708" end="3719" title="Mark Strong" label="Mark Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q455838" start="3765" end="3776" title="Erin Pizzey" label="Erin Pizzey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108217" start="3802" end="3822" title="Macmillan Publishers" label="Macmillan Publishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757881" start="3835" end="3879" title="Andrew Marr&amp;#x27;s History of Modern Britain" label="Andrew Marr&amp;#x27;s History of Modern Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4902942" start="4335" end="4339" title="Biba" label="Biba"/>
<link wikidata="Q6124547" start="4588" end="4599" title="Jake Arnott" label="Jake Arnott"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4624" end="4640" title="Johnny Come Home#Popular culture" label="Johnny Come Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367133" start="4648" end="4659" title="Hari Kunzru" label="Hari Kunzru"/>
<link wikidata="Q18786490" start="4745" end="4762" title="The Angry Brigade (play)" label="The Angry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6757084" start="4882" end="4930" title="Marcia Anastasia Christoforides" label="Marcia Anastasia Christoforides Dunn Beaverbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642929" start="5265" end="5292" title="Terrorist attacks in London" label="Terrorist attacks in London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963764" start="5295" end="5313" title="Walsall Anarchists" label="Walsall Anarchists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899918" start="5316" end="5331" title="Urban Guerrilla" label="Urban Guerrilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q285966" start="5333" end="5341" title="Hawkwind" label="Hawkwind"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454220" start="5345" end="5363" title="First of May Group" label="First of May Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903793" start="5366" end="5397" title="Anarchism in the United Kingdom" label="Anarchism in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499589" start="5400" end="5410" title="Black Mask (NYC)" label="Black Mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q202606" start="5413" end="5421" title="King Mob" label="King Mob"/>
<link wikidata="Q701181" start="5424" end="5439" title="Movement 2 June" label="Movement 2 June"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706283" start="5906" end="5916" title="Alan Burns (author)" label="Alan Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732723" start="5970" end="5989" title="Allison &amp;amp; Busby" label="Allison &amp;amp; Busby"/>
<link wikidata="Q177136" start="6328" end="6336" title="PM Press" label="PM Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q981988" start="6669" end="6696" title="Granny Made me an Anarchist" label="Granny Made me an Anarchist"/>
<link wikidata="Q294317" start="6858" end="6866" title="AK Press" label="AK Press"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6889" end="6906" title="Fanzine#Punk" label="punk rock fanzine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7175117" start="7189" end="7203" title="Peter Kavanagh (writer)" label="Peter Kavanagh"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31211" wikidata="Q468391" url="?curid=31211" title="Bolzano–Weierstrass theorem">
<text>In mathematics, specifically in real analysis, the Bolzano–Weierstrass theorem, named after Bernard Bolzano and Karl Weierstrass, is a fundamental result about convergence in a finite-dimensional Euclidean space formula_1. The theorem states that each infinite bounded sequence in formula_1 has a convergent subsequence. An equivalent formulation is that a subset of formula_1 is sequentially compact if and only if it is closed and bounded. The theorem is sometimes called the sequential compactness theorem.

== History and significance==

The Bolzano–Weierstrass theorem is named after mathematicians Bernard Bolzano and Karl Weierstrass. It was actually first proved by Bolzano in 1817 as a lemma in the proof of the intermediate value theorem. Some fifty years later the result was identified as significant in its own right, and proved again by Weierstrass. It has since become an essential theorem of analysis.

== Proof ==

First we prove the theorem for formula_4 (set of all real numbers), in which case the ordering on formula_4 can be put to good use. Indeed, we have the following result:

Lemma: Every infinite sequence formula_6 in formula_4 has an infinite monotone subsequence (a subsequence that is either non-decreasing or non-increasing).

Proof: Let us call a positive integer-valued index formula_8 of a sequence a &quot;peak&quot; of the sequence when formula_9 for every formula_10. Suppose first that the sequence has infinitely many peaks, which means there is a subsequence with the following indices formula_11 and the following terms formula_12. So, the infinite sequence formula_6 in formula_4 has a monotone (non-increasing) subsequence, which is formula_15. But suppose now that there are only finitely many peaks, let formula_16 be the final peak if one exists (let formula_17 otherwise) and let the first index of a new subsequence formula_15 be set to formula_19. Then formula_20 is not a peak, since formula_20 comes after the final peak, which implies the existence of formula_22 with formula_23 and formula_24. Again, formula_22 comes after the final peak, hence there is an formula_26 where formula_27 with formula_28. Repeating this process leads to an infinite non-decreasing subsequence  formula_29, thereby proving that every infinite sequence formula_6 in formula_4 has a monotone subsequence.

Now suppose one has a bounded sequence in formula_32; by the lemma proven above there exists a monotone subsequence, likewise also bounded. It follows from the monotone convergence theorem that this subsequence converges.

The general case in formula_33 can be proven using this lemma as follows. Firstly, we will acknowledge that any sequence formula_34 in formula_33 (where formula_36 denotes its index set) has a convergent subsequence if and only if there exists a countable set formula_37 such that formula_38 converges. Let formula_34 be any bounded sequence in formula_33, then it can be expressed as an n-tuple of sequences in formula_4 by writing formula_42, where formula_43 is a sequence for formula_44. Since formula_45 is bounded, formula_46 is also bounded for formula_47. It follows then by the lemma that formula_48 has a convergent subsequence and hence there exists a countable set formula_49 such that formula_50 converges. For the sequence formula_51, by applying the lemma once again there exists a countable set formula_52 such that formula_53 converges and hence formula_51 has a convergent subsequence. This reasoning may be applied until we obtain a countable set formula_55 for which formula_56 converges for formula_44. Hence, formula_58 converges and therefore, since formula_45 was arbitrary, any bounded sequence in formula_33 has a convergent subsequence.

== Alternative proof ==
There is also an alternative proof of the Bolzano–Weierstrass theorem using nested intervals. We start with a bounded sequence formula_6:

Because we halve the length of an interval at each step, the limit of the interval&#x27;s length is zero. Also, by the &quot;nested intervals theorem&quot;, which states that if each formula_62 is a closed and bounded interval, say

: formula_63

with

: formula_64

then under the assumption of nesting, the intersection of the formula_62 is not empty. Thus there is a number formula_66 that is in each interval formula_62. Now we show, that formula_66 is an accumulation point of formula_6.

Take a neighbourhood formula_70 of formula_66. Because the length of the intervals converges to zero, there is an interval formula_72 that is a subset of formula_70. Because formula_72 contains by construction infinitely many members of formula_6 and formula_76, also formula_70 contains infinitely many members of formula_6. This proves that formula_66 is an accumulation point of formula_6. Thus, there is a subsequence of formula_6 that converges to formula_66.

== Sequential compactness in Euclidean spaces ==

Definition: A set &quot;formula_83&quot; is sequentially compact if every sequence &quot;formula_84&quot; in &quot;formula_85&quot; has a convergent subsequence converging to an element of &quot;formula_85&quot;.

Theorem: &quot;formula_83&quot; is sequentially compact if and only if &quot;formula_85&quot; is closed and bounded.

Proof: (sequential compactness implies closed and bounded)

Suppose &quot;formula_85&quot; is a subset of formula_1 with the property that every sequence in &quot;formula_85&quot; has a subsequence converging to an element of &quot;formula_85&quot;. Then &quot;formula_85&quot; must be bounded, since otherwise the following unbounded sequence formula_94 can be constructed. For every formula_95, define formula_96 to be any arbitrary point such that formula_97. Then, every subsequence of formula_84 is unbounded and therefore not convergent. Moreover, &quot;formula_85&quot; must be closed, since any limit point of &quot;formula_85&quot;, which has a sequence of points in &quot;formula_85&quot; converging to itself, must also lie in &quot;formula_85.&quot;

Proof: (closed and bounded implies sequential compactness)

Since &quot;formula_85&quot; is bounded, any sequence &quot;formula_104&quot; is also bounded. From the Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem, &quot;formula_84&quot; contains a subsequence converging to some point formula_106. Since formula_66 is a limit point of &quot;formula_85&quot; and &quot;formula_85&quot; is a closed set, &quot;formula_66&quot; must be an element of &quot;formula_85&quot;.

Thus the subsets &quot;formula_85&quot; of formula_1 for which every sequence in &quot;A&quot; has a subsequence converging to an element of &quot;formula_85&quot; – i.e., the subsets that are sequentially compact in the subspace topology – are precisely the closed and bounded subsets.

This form of the theorem makes especially clear the analogy to the Heine–Borel theorem, which asserts that a subset of formula_1 is compact if and only if it is closed and bounded. In fact, general topology tells us that a metrizable space is compact if and only if it is sequentially compact, so that the Bolzano–Weierstrass and Heine–Borel theorems are essentially the same.

== Application to economics ==
There are different important equilibrium concepts in economics, the proofs of the existence of which often require variations of the Bolzano–Weierstrass theorem. One example is the existence of a Pareto efficient allocation. An allocation is a matrix of consumption bundles for agents in an economy, and an allocation is Pareto efficient if no change can be made to it that makes no agent worse off and at least one agent better off (here rows of the allocation matrix must be rankable by a preference relation). The Bolzano–Weierstrass theorem allows one to prove that if the set of allocations is compact and non-empty, then the system has a Pareto-efficient allocation.

==See also==
*Sequentially compact space
*Heine–Borel theorem
*Completeness of the real numbers
*Ekeland&#x27;s variational principle

== Notes ==
== References ==
* 

==External links==
* A proof of the Bolzano–Weierstrass theorem
* PlanetMath: proof of Bolzano–Weierstrass Theorem
* The Bolzano-Weierstrass Rap</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q854531" start="32" end="45" title="real analysis" label="real analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q468391" start="51" end="78" title="Bolzano–Weierstrass theorem" label="Bolzano–Weierstrass theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q184735" start="92" end="107" title="Bernard Bolzano" label="Bernard Bolzano"/>
<link wikidata="Q57103" start="112" end="128" title="Karl Weierstrass" label="Karl Weierstrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q113576321" start="147" end="171" title="convergence proof techniques" label="result about convergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q17295" start="196" end="211" title="Euclidean space" label="Euclidean space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267362" start="261" end="277" title="bounded sequence" label="bounded sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q847204" start="297" end="307" title="limit of a sequence" label="convergent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332977" start="308" end="319" title="subsequence" label="subsequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="357" end="363" title="subset" label="subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135427" start="380" end="400" title="Sequentially compact space" label="sequentially compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q320357" start="422" end="428" title="closed set" label="closed"/>
<link wikidata="Q726212" start="433" end="440" title="bounded set" label="bounded"/>
<link wikidata="Q468391" start="478" end="508" title="Bolzano–Weierstrass theorem" label="sequential compactness theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q184735" start="604" end="619" title="Bernard Bolzano" label="Bernard Bolzano"/>
<link wikidata="Q57103" start="624" end="640" title="Karl Weierstrass" label="Karl Weierstrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q207505" start="695" end="700" title="Lemma (mathematics)" label="lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q245098" start="721" end="747" title="intermediate value theorem" label="intermediate value theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q854531" start="908" end="916" title="Real analysis" label="analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="985" end="996" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q194404" start="1173" end="1181" title="monotone sequence" label="monotone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332977" start="1182" end="1193" title="subsequence" label="subsequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q133250" start="1224" end="1238" title="non-decreasing" label="non-decreasing"/>
<link wikidata="Q133250" start="1242" end="1256" title="non-increasing" label="non-increasing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267362" start="2361" end="2377" title="bounded sequence" label="bounded sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q773483" start="2419" end="2431" title="there exists" label="there exists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153584" start="2499" end="2527" title="monotone convergence theorem" label="monotone convergence theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q21285678" start="2738" end="2747" title="index set" label="index set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638245" start="3827" end="3843" title="nested intervals" label="nested intervals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638245" start="4015" end="4031" title="nested intervals" label="nested intervals"/>
<link wikidata="Q858223" start="4350" end="4368" title="accumulation point" label="accumulation point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135427" start="4944" end="4964" title="sequentially compact" label="sequentially compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135427" start="5149" end="5169" title="sequentially compact" label="sequentially compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q320357" start="5211" end="5217" title="Closed set" label="closed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135427" start="5240" end="5262" title="sequentially compact" label="sequential compactness"/>
<link wikidata="Q858223" start="5835" end="5846" title="Accumulation point" label="limit point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135427" start="6030" end="6052" title="sequentially compact" label="sequential compactness"/>
<link wikidata="Q468391" start="6159" end="6186" title="Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem" label="Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q858223" start="6294" end="6305" title="Accumulation point" label="limit point"/>
<link wikidata="Q320357" start="6364" end="6374" title="closed set" label="closed set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135427" start="6639" end="6659" title="sequentially compact" label="sequentially compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q660730" start="6667" end="6684" title="subspace topology" label="subspace topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q253214" start="6801" end="6820" title="Heine–Borel theorem" label="Heine–Borel theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q381892" start="6866" end="6873" title="Compact space" label="compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194053" start="6957" end="6973" title="metrizable space" label="metrizable space"/>
<link wikidata="Q836133" start="7173" end="7184" title="economic equilibrium" label="equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q36829" start="7340" end="7356" title="Pareto efficiency" label="Pareto efficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q44337" start="7388" end="7394" title="Matrix (mathematics)" label="matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q25036211" start="7635" end="7654" title="preference relation" label="preference relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q226183" start="7755" end="7764" title="Empty set" label="non-empty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135427" start="7832" end="7858" title="Sequentially compact space" label="Sequentially compact space"/>
<link wikidata="Q253214" start="7860" end="7879" title="Heine–Borel theorem" label="Heine–Borel theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324487" start="7881" end="7913" title="Completeness of the real numbers" label="Completeness of the real numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945203" start="7915" end="7951" title="Ekeland&amp;#x27;s variational principle" label="Ekeland&amp;#x27;s variational principle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31212" wikidata="Q223802" url="?curid=31212" title="Tabula rasa">
<text>Tabula rasa (; Latin for &quot;blank slate&quot;) is the idea of individuals being born empty of any built-in mental content, so that all knowledge comes from later perceptions or sensory experiences. Proponents typically form the extreme &quot;nurture&quot; side of the nature versus nurture debate, arguing that humans are born without any &quot;natural&quot; psychological traits and that all aspects of one&#x27;s personality, social and emotional behaviour, knowledge, or sapience are later imprinted by one&#x27;s environment onto the mind as one would onto a wax tablet. This idea is the central view posited in the theory of knowledge known as empiricism. Empiricists disagree with the doctrines of innatism or rationalism, which hold that the mind is born already in possession of specific knowledge or rational capacity.

== Etymology ==

&quot;Tabula rasa&quot; is a Latin phrase often translated as &quot;clean slate&quot; in English and originates from the Roman &quot;tabula&quot;, a wax-covered tablet used for notes, which was blanked (&quot;rasa&quot;) by heating the wax and then smoothing it. This roughly equates to the English term &quot;blank slate&quot; (or, more literally, &quot;erased slate&quot;) which refers to the emptiness of a slate prior to it being written on with chalk. Both may be renewed repeatedly, by melting the wax of the tablet or by erasing the chalk on the slate.

==Philosophy==

=== Ancient Greek philosophy ===
In Western philosophy, the concept of &quot;tabula rasa&quot; can be traced back to the writings of Aristotle who writes in his treatise &quot;De Anima&quot; () of the &quot;unscribed tablet.&quot; In one of the more well-known passages of this treatise, he writes that:
Haven&#x27;t we already disposed of the difficulty about interaction involving a common element, when we said that mind is in a sense potentially whatever is thinkable, though actually it is nothing until it has thought? What it thinks must be in it just as characters may be said to be on a writing tablet on which as yet nothing stands written: this is exactly what happens with mind. 
This idea was further evolved in Ancient Greek philosophy by the Stoic school. Stoic epistemology emphasizes that the mind starts blank, but acquires knowledge as the outside world is impressed upon it. The doxographer Aetius summarizes this view as &quot;When a man is born, the Stoics say, he has the commanding part of his soul like a sheet of paper ready for writing upon.&quot; Diogenes Laërtius attributes a similar belief to the Stoic Zeno of Citium when he writes in &quot;Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers&quot; that: 
Perception, again, is an impression produced on the mind, its name being appropriately borrowed from impressions on wax made by a seal; and perception they divide into comprehensible and incomprehensible: Comprehensible, which they call the criterion of facts, and which is produced by a real object, and is, therefore, at the same time conformable to that object; Incomprehensible, which has no relation to any real object, or else, if it has any such relation, does not correspond to it, being but a vague and indistinct representation.

=== Ibn Sina (11th century) ===
In the 11th century, the theory of &quot;tabula rasa&quot; was developed more clearly by Ibn Sina. He argued that the &quot;human intellect at birth resembled a &quot;tabula rasa&quot;, a pure potentiality that is actualized through education and comes to know.&quot; Thus, according to Ibn Sina, knowledge is attained through &quot;empirical familiarity with objects in this world from which one abstracts universal concepts,&quot; which develops through a &quot;syllogistic method of reasoning; observations lead to propositional statements, which when compounded lead to further abstract concepts.&quot; He further argued that the intellect itself &quot;possesses levels of development from the static/material intellect, that potentiality can acquire knowledge to the active intellect, the state of the human intellect at conjunction with the perfect source of knowledge.&quot;

=== Ibn Tufail (12th century) ===
In the 12th century, the Andalusian-Islamic philosopher and novelist, Ibn Tufail (known as Abubacer or Ebn Tophail in the West) demonstrated the theory of &quot;tabula rasa&quot; as a thought experiment through his Arabic philosophical novel, &quot;Hayy ibn Yaqdhan&quot;, in which he depicts the development of the mind of a feral child &quot;from a tabula rasa to that of an adult, in complete isolation from society&quot; on a desert island, through experience alone.

The Latin translation of his philosophical novel, entitled &quot;Philosophus Autodidactus&quot;, published by Edward Pococke the Younger in 1671, had an influence on John Locke&#x27;s formulation of &quot;tabula rasa&quot; in &quot;An Essay Concerning Human Understanding&quot;.

=== Aquinas (13th century) ===

In the 13th century, St. Thomas Aquinas brought the Aristotelian and Avicennian notions to the forefront of Christian thought. These notions sharply contrasted with the previously-held Platonic notions of the human mind as an entity that pre-existed somewhere in the heavens, before being sent down to join a body here on Earth (cf. Plato&#x27;s &quot;Phaedo&quot; and &quot;Apology&quot;, as well as others). St. Bonaventure (also 13th century) was one of the fiercest intellectual opponents of Aquinas, offering some of the strongest arguments toward the Platonic idea of the mind.

=== Descartes (17th century) ===
Descartes, in his work &quot;The Search for Truth by Natural Light&quot;, summarizes an empiricist view in which he uses the words &quot;table rase&quot;, in French; in the following English translation, this was rendered &quot;tabula rasa&quot;:

All that seems to me to explain itself very clearly if we compare children&#x27;s imagination to a &quot;tabula rasa&quot; on which our ideas, which resemble portraits of each object taken from nature, should depict themselves. The senses, the inclinations, our masters and our intelligence, are the various painters who have the power to execute this work; and amongst them, those who are least adapted to succeed in it, i.e., the imperfect senses, blind instinct, and foolish nurses, are the first to mingle themselves with it. There finally comes the best of all, intelligence, and yet it is still requisite for it to have an apprenticeship of several years, and to follow the example of its masters for long, before daring to rectify a single one of their errors. In my opinion this is one of the principal causes of the difficulty we experience in attaining to true knowledge. For our senses really perceive that alone which is most coarse and common; our natural instinct is entirely corrupted; and as to our masters, although there may no doubt be very perfect ones found amongst them, they yet cannot force our minds to accept their reasoning before our understanding has examined it, for the accomplishment of this end pertains to it alone. But it is like a clever painter who might have been called upon to put the last touches on a bad picture sketched out by prentice hands, and who would probably have to employ all the rules of his art in correcting little by little first a trait here, then a trait there, and finally be required to add to it from his own hand all that was lacking, and who yet could not prevent great faults from remaining in it, because from the beginning the picture would have been badly conceived, the figures badly placed, and the proportions badly observed.

=== Locke (17th century) ===
The modern idea of the theory is attributed mostly to John Locke&#x27;s expression of the idea in &quot;Essay Concerning Human Understanding&quot;, particularly using the term &quot;white paper&quot; in Book II, Chap. I, 2. In Locke&#x27;s philosophy, &quot;tabula rasa&quot; was the theory that at birth the (human) mind is a &quot;blank slate&quot; without rules for processing data, and that data is added and rules for processing are formed solely by one&#x27;s sensory experiences. The notion is central to Lockean empiricism; it serves as the starting point for Locke&#x27;s subsequent explication (in Book II) of simple ideas and complex ideas.

As understood by Locke, &quot;tabula rasa&quot; meant that the mind of the individual was born blank, and it also emphasized the freedom of individuals to author their own soul. Individuals are free to define the content of their character—but basic identity as a member of the human species cannot be altered. This presumption of a free, self-authored mind combined with an immutable human nature leads to the Lockean doctrine of &quot;natural&quot; rights. Locke&#x27;s idea of &quot;tabula rasa&quot; is frequently compared with Thomas Hobbes&#x27;s viewpoint of human nature, in which humans are endowed with inherent mental content—particularly with selfishness.

=== Freud (19th century) ===
The concept of &quot;Tabula rasa&quot; can be constructed from Sigmund Freud&#x27;s psychoanalysis. Freud argued that the psyche was largely formed by socialization, not biology or genealogy. (see Oedipus complex). In Freud&#x27;s schema of psycho-sexual development, the conflicting drives imprinted by the parents (the id versus the superego) produce ego, and that in spite of his neuroses, the analysand would discuss matters in a non-adversarial manner. The clinician would simply pose questions to the patient about his neuroses. Exposure to such questions would inculcate the patient&#x27;s secondary defenses against the neuroses, helping him shed &#x27;substitutive satisfactions,&#x27; sadomasochism. Freud&#x27;s theories implied that humans are largely products of their socialization. In Freudian psychoanalysis, ones&#x27; neuroses are agitated until transference neuroses are projected onto the psychoanalyst. Freud posited the individual as a blank slate with an imprint of regressive characteristics through socialization. 

==Science==

===Psychology and neurobiology===

Psychologists and neurobiologists have shown evidence that initially, the entire cerebral cortex is programmed and organized to process sensory input, control motor actions, regulate emotion, and respond reflexively (under predetermined conditions). These programmed mechanisms in the brain subsequently act to learn and refine the ability of the organism.
Psychological research has shown that — in contrast to written language — the brain is &quot;hard-wired&quot; at birth to acquire spoken language, something argued by both psychologist Steven Pinker and by the universal grammar theory of Noam Chomsky.

There have been claims by a minority in psychology and neurobiology, however, that the brain is &quot;tabula rasa&quot; only for certain behaviours. For instance, with respect to one&#x27;s ability to acquire both general and special types of knowledge or skills, Michael Howe argued against the existence of innate talent. There also have been neurological investigations into specific learning and memory functions, such as Karl Lashley&#x27;s study on mass action and serial interaction mechanisms.

Important evidence against the &quot;tabula rasa&quot; model of the mind comes from behavioural genetics, especially twin and adoption studies (see below). These indicate strong genetic influences on personal characteristics such as IQ, alcoholism, gender identity, and other traits. Critically, multivariate studies show that the distinct faculties of the mind, such as memory and reason, fractionate along genetic boundaries. Cultural universals such as emotion and the relative resilience of psychological adaptation to accidental biological changes also support basic biological mechanisms in the mind.

====Social pre-wiring hypothesis====
Twin studies have resulted in important evidence against the &quot;tabula rasa&quot; model of the mind, specifically, of social behaviour. The &quot;social pre-wiring&quot; &quot;hypothesis&quot; (also informally known as &quot;wired to be social&quot;) refers to the ontogeny of social interaction. The theory questions whether there is a propensity to socially oriented action already present &quot;before&quot; birth. Research in the theory concludes that newborns are born into the world with a unique genetic wiring to be social.

Circumstantial evidence supporting the social pre-wiring hypothesis can be revealed when examining newborns&#x27; behaviour. Newborns, not even hours after birth, have been found to display a preparedness for social interaction. This preparedness is expressed in ways such as their imitation of facial gestures. This observed behaviour cannot be attributed to any current form of socialization or social construction. Rather, newborns most likely inherit to some extent social behaviour and identity through genetics.

Principal evidence for this theory is uncovered by examining twin pregnancies. The main argument is, if there are social behaviours that are inherited and developed before birth, then one should expect twin fetuses to engage in some form of social interaction before they are born. Thus, ten fetuses were analyzed over a period of time using ultrasound techniques. Using kinematic analysis, the results of the experiment were that the twin fetuses would interact with each other for longer periods and more often as the pregnancies went on. Researchers were able to conclude that the performance of movements between the co-twins were not accidental but specifically aimed.

The social pre-wiring hypothesis was proven correct:The central advance of this study is the demonstration that &#x27;social actions&#x27; are already performed in the second trimester of gestation. Starting from the 14th week of gestation twin fetuses plan and execute movements specifically aimed at the co-twin. These findings force us to predate the emergence of social behaviour: when the context enables it, as in the case of twin fetuses, other-directed actions are not only possible but predominant over self-directed actions.

===Computer science===
In artificial intelligence, &quot;tabula rasa&quot; refers to the development of autonomous agents with a mechanism to reason and plan toward their goal, but no &quot;built-in&quot; knowledge-base of their environment. Thus, they truly are a blank slate.

In reality, autonomous agents possess an initial data-set or knowledge-base, but this cannot be immutable or it would hamper autonomy and heuristic ability. Even if the data-set is empty, it usually may be argued that there is a built-in bias in the reasoning and planning mechanisms. Either intentionally or unintentionally placed there by the human designer, it thus negates the true spirit of &quot;tabula rasa&quot;.

A synthetic (programming) language parser (LR(1), LALR(1) or SLR(1), for example) could be considered a special case of a &quot;tabula rasa&quot;, as it is designed to accept &quot;any&quot; of a possibly infinite set of source language programs, within a &quot;single&quot; programming language, and to output either a good parse of the program, or a good machine language translation of the program, either of which represents a &quot;success&quot;, or, alternately, a &quot;failure&quot;, and nothing else. The &quot;initial data-set&quot; is a set of tables which are generally produced mechanically by a parser table generator, usually from a BNF representation of the source language, and represents a &quot;table representation&quot; of that &quot;single&quot; programming language.

AlphaZero achieved superhuman performance in chess and shogi using self-play and &quot;tabula rasa&quot; reinforcement learning, meaning it had no access to human games or hard-coded human knowledge about either board game, only the rules of the games.

==See also==

* Hereditarianism
* Innatism
* Pu (Daoism)
* Veil of ignorance

==References==
===Primary sources===
*Aquinas, Thomas. [1485] 1952. &quot;Summa Theologica&quot;, translated by Fathers of the English Dominican Province, edited by D. J. Sullivan, (&quot;Great Books of the Western World&quot; 19–20). Chicago: Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
* Aristotle. [c. 350 BC] 1936. &quot;On the Soul [De Anima],&quot; translated by W. S. Hett. Pp. 1–203 in &quot;Aristotle&quot; 8, (&quot;Loeb Classical Library&quot;). London: William Heinemann.
*Avicenna. [1027] 1954. &quot;The Book of Healing&quot; [&quot;Kitāb al-Shifāʾ&quot;], translated by F. Rahman. London.
*Locke, John. [1689] 1996. &quot;An Essay Concerning Human Understanding&quot; II.i, edited by K. P. Winkler. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company. pp. 33–36, lines 1–9. (See also editor&#x27;s introduction, p. xix.)
* Tufail, Ibn. [11th century] 1708. &quot;The Improvement of Human Reason: Exhibited in the Life of Hai Ebn Yokdhan&quot;, translated by S. Ockley. London: Powell. pp. 1–195, Edm.

=== Secondary sources ===

* Baird, Forrest E., and Walter Kaufmann. 2008. &quot;Philosophic Classics: From Plato to Derrida&quot;. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall. .

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="15" end="20" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817504" start="110" end="124" title="mental content" label="mental content"/>
<link wikidata="Q160402" start="165" end="175" title="perception" label="perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q164359" start="188" end="198" title="experience" label="experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773859" start="271" end="299" title="nature versus nurture debate" label="nature versus nurture debate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="477" end="485" title="Wisdom#Sapience" label="sapience"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428312" start="566" end="576" title="wax tablet" label="wax tablet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="623" end="642" title="theory of knowledge" label="theory of knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q83368" start="652" end="662" title="empiricism" label="empiricism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070614" start="707" end="715" title="innatism" label="innatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q483024" start="719" end="730" title="rationalism" label="rationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="878" end="883" title="Latin language" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="938" end="945" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="970" end="975" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="982" end="988" title=":wikt:tabula#Latin" label="tabula"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1058" end="1062" title=":wikt:rasus#Latin" label="rasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371902" start="1259" end="1264" title="Slate (writing)" label="slate"/>
<link wikidata="Q842333" start="1462" end="1480" title="Western philosophy" label="Western philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="1559" end="1568" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180576" start="1602" end="1610" title="On the Soul" label="De Anima"/>
<link wikidata="Q999259" start="2151" end="2175" title="Ancient Greek philosophy" label="Ancient Greek philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q48235" start="2183" end="2188" title="stoicism" label="Stoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253496" start="2325" end="2336" title="Doxography" label="doxographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q794615" start="2337" end="2343" title="Aetius (philosopher)" label="Aetius"/>
<link wikidata="Q59138" start="2501" end="2518" title="Diogenes Laërtius" label="Diogenes Laërtius"/>
<link wikidata="Q171303" start="2560" end="2574" title="Zeno of Citium" label="Zeno of Citium"/>
<link wikidata="Q59138" start="2599" end="2641" title="Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers" label="Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011" start="3316" end="3324" title="Avicenna" label="Ibn Sina"/>
<link wikidata="Q83021" start="3560" end="3569" title="empirical" label="empirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q107342" start="3691" end="3702" title="Syllogism" label="syllogistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q178354" start="3713" end="3722" title="reasoning" label="reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="4169" end="4179" title="Al-Andalus" label="Andalusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274353" start="4180" end="4199" title="Early Islamic philosophy" label="Islamic philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q251259" start="4214" end="4224" title="Ibn Tufail" label="Ibn Tufail"/>
<link wikidata="Q147027" start="4328" end="4346" title="thought experiment" label="thought experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q194380" start="4359" end="4385" title="Arabic literature" label="Arabic philosophical novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296813" start="4393" end="4409" title="Hayy ibn Yaqdhan" label="Hayy ibn Yaqdhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q258146" start="4470" end="4481" title="feral child" label="feral child"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065592" start="4574" end="4587" title="desert island" label="desert island"/>
<link wikidata="Q164359" start="4597" end="4607" title="experience" label="experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="4620" end="4625" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20737414" start="4645" end="4664" title="philosophical novel" label="philosophical novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748131" start="4726" end="4740" title="Edward Pococke" label="Edward Pococke"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="4782" end="4792" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q482438" start="4848" end="4887" title="An Essay Concerning Human Understanding" label="An Essay Concerning Human Understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="4949" end="4967" title="St. Thomas Aquinas" label="St. Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q263307" start="4980" end="4992" title="Aristotelianism" label="Aristotelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2874323" start="4997" end="5007" title="Avicennism" label="Avicennian"/>
<link wikidata="Q854807" start="5036" end="5053" title="Christian philosophy" label="Christian thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q193589" start="5113" end="5121" title="Platonism" label="Platonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q244161" start="5280" end="5286" title="Phaedo" label="Phaedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q273668" start="5303" end="5310" title="Apology (Plato)" label="Apology"/>
<link wikidata="Q43746" start="5338" end="5353" title="St. Bonaventure" label="St. Bonaventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="5546" end="5555" title="René Descartes" label="Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3421908" start="5575" end="5612" title="The Search for Truth by Natural Light" label="The Search for Truth by Natural Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="7675" end="7685" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q482438" start="7725" end="7761" title="Essay Concerning Human Understanding" label="Essay Concerning Human Understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q173253" start="8087" end="8094" title="sense" label="sensory"/>
<link wikidata="Q83368" start="8141" end="8151" title="empiricism" label="empiricism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165" start="8446" end="8450" title="Soul (spirit)" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q29677" start="8705" end="8731" title="Natural rights and legal rights" label="&amp;quot;natural&amp;quot; rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q37621" start="8806" end="8819" title="Thomas Hobbes" label="Thomas Hobbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="9035" end="9048" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Sigmund Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q41630" start="9056" end="9070" title="psychoanalysis" label="psychoanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131246" start="9169" end="9184" title="Oedipus complex" label="Oedipus complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q75839" start="10142" end="10157" title="cerebral cortex" label="cerebral cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q212730" start="10603" end="10616" title="Steven Pinker" label="Steven Pinker"/>
<link wikidata="Q728252" start="10628" end="10645" title="universal grammar" label="universal grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049" start="10656" end="10668" title="Noam Chomsky" label="Noam Chomsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q6831264" start="10935" end="10947" title="Michael Howe (psychologist)" label="Michael Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q603678" start="11097" end="11109" title="Karl Lashley" label="Karl Lashley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783977" start="11126" end="11137" title="Mass Action Principle (neuroscience)" label="mass action"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204375" start="11258" end="11278" title="behavioural genetics" label="behavioural genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q244775" start="11291" end="11295" title="twin studies" label="twin"/>
<link wikidata="Q180472" start="11300" end="11308" title="adoption" label="adoption"/>
<link wikidata="Q170277" start="11407" end="11409" title="IQ" label="IQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="11411" end="11421" title="alcoholism" label="alcoholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q48264" start="11423" end="11438" title="gender identity" label="gender identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9415" start="11630" end="11637" title="emotion" label="emotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q244775" start="11819" end="11831" title="Twin study" label="Twin studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q921513" start="11940" end="11956" title="social behaviour" label="social behaviour"/>
<link wikidata="Q193603" start="12087" end="12095" title="ontogeny" label="ontogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q853725" start="12099" end="12117" title="social relation" label="social interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q769620" start="12173" end="12197" title="social actions" label="socially oriented action"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="12325" end="12332" title="genetics" label="genetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q634260" start="12355" end="12378" title="Circumstantial evidence" label="Circumstantial evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q853725" start="12564" end="12582" title="social relation" label="social interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q185467" start="12735" end="12748" title="socialization" label="socialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642673" start="12752" end="12771" title="social construction" label="social construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q178694" start="12802" end="12809" title="heredity" label="inherit"/>
<link wikidata="Q921513" start="12825" end="12841" title="social behaviour" label="social behaviour"/>
<link wikidata="Q844569" start="12846" end="12854" title="identity (social science)" label="identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="12863" end="12871" title="genetics" label="genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q921513" start="12988" end="13004" title="social behaviour" label="social behaviour"/>
<link wikidata="Q178694" start="13015" end="13024" title="heredity" label="inherited"/>
<link wikidata="Q853725" start="13115" end="13133" title="social relation" label="social interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q769620" start="13667" end="13681" title="social actions" label="social actions"/>
<link wikidata="Q113297224" start="13737" end="13746" title="Gestational age (obstetrics)" label="gestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q113297224" start="13779" end="13788" title="Gestational age (obstetrics)" label="gestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q921513" start="13916" end="13932" title="social behaviour" label="social behaviour"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="14111" end="14134" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172284" start="14413" end="14421" title="Data set" label="data-set"/>
<link wikidata="Q742736" start="14602" end="14606" title="bias" label="bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q194152" start="14821" end="14827" title="Parsing" label="parser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033355" start="14829" end="14834" title="LR(1)" label="LR(1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204392" start="14836" end="14843" title="LALR(1)" label="LALR(1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709511" start="14847" end="14853" title="SLR(1)" label="SLR(1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q211577" start="15434" end="15437" title="Backus–Naur form" label="BNF"/>
<link wikidata="Q44860007" start="15577" end="15586" title="AlphaZero" label="AlphaZero"/>
<link wikidata="Q718" start="15622" end="15627" title="chess" label="chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q131375" start="15632" end="15637" title="shogi" label="shogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q112108756" start="15644" end="15653" title="Self-play (reinforcement learning technique)" label="self-play"/>
<link wikidata="Q830687" start="15682" end="15704" title="reinforcement learning" label="reinforcement learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111125" start="15749" end="15759" title="Hard coding" label="hard-coded"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503927" start="15847" end="15862" title="Hereditarianism" label="Hereditarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070614" start="15865" end="15873" title="Innatism" label="Innatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207352" start="15876" end="15887" title="Pu (Daoism)" label="Pu (Daoism)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17149311" start="15890" end="15907" title="Veil of ignorance" label="Veil of ignorance"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="15947" end="15962" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Aquinas, Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q653871" start="15983" end="15999" title="Summa Theologica" label="Summa Theologica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339531" start="16097" end="16129" title="Great Books of the Western World" label="Great Books of the Western World"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743906" start="16153" end="16182" title="Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc." label="Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="16185" end="16194" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180576" start="16220" end="16231" title="On the Soul" label="On the Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="16321" end="16343" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q6273015" start="16360" end="16377" title="Heinemann (book publisher)" label="William Heinemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011" start="16380" end="16388" title="Avicenna" label="Avicenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030940" start="16409" end="16428" title="The Book of Healing" label="The Book of Healing"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="16500" end="16511" title="John Locke" label="Locke, John"/>
<link wikidata="Q482438" start="16532" end="16571" title="An Essay Concerning Human Understanding" label="An Essay Concerning Human Understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637282" start="16623" end="16649" title="Hackett Publishing Company" label="Hackett Publishing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q251259" start="16722" end="16733" title="Ibn Tufail" label="Tufail, Ibn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296813" start="16762" end="16835" title="Hayy ibn Yaqdhan" label="The Improvement of Human Reason: Exhibited in the Life of Hai Ebn Yokdhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401430" start="16857" end="16866" title="Simon Ockley" label="S. Ockley"/>
<link wikidata="Q62977" start="16953" end="16968" title="Walter Kaufmann (philosopher)" label="Walter Kaufmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q443253" start="17057" end="17078" title="Pearson Prentice Hall" label="Pearson Prentice Hall"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31216" wikidata="Q1378080" url="?curid=31216" title="Tsurugi (sword)">
<text>A or is a Japanese sword. The word is used in the West to refer to a specific type of Japanese straight, double-edged sword used in antiquity (as opposed to curved, single-edged swords such as the katana). In Japanese the term &quot;tsurugi&quot; or &quot;ken&quot; (:ja:剣) is used as a term for all sorts of international long, double-edged swords.

==History==
The term &quot;tsurugi&quot; (剣) designates a straight, double-edged, bladed weapon from Japan. It is a sword with two cutting edges, one on each side of its blade, unlike the &quot;tachi&quot;, &quot;katana&quot;, &quot;wakizashi&quot;, or &quot;odachi&quot;, which have only one cutting edge on one side of the blade.

The oldest bronze sword excavated in Japan is a Chinese style dagger from around 800 BC in the Yayoi period (1000 BC – 300 AD). A large number of bronze &quot;tsurugi&quot; made around 200 B.C. in the Yayoi period were excavated from several sites, and it is thought that &quot;tsurugi&quot; were mass-produced in Japan in this period. Bronze &quot;tsurugi&quot; of this period were mainly used for religious services. The Yayoi period was the transition period from bronze to iron. However, the iron &quot;tsurugi&quot; were usually forged from the 5th century (Kofun period) to the 9th century (Heian period). 

From the 10th century, the development of the curved &quot;tachi&quot; began, from which the &quot;katana&quot; emerged. For a long time, &quot;tsurugi&quot; were made as weapons or for religious services, but after the 10th century, they completely disappeared as weapons and came to be made only as offerings to Shinto shrines and Buddhist temples. One of the most famous &quot;tsurugi&quot; is the one made in the Heian period (794－1185) owned by Kongō-ji and stored by Kyoto National Museum. It is made to imitate the sword &quot;Fudo Myōō&quot; holds in his right hand, and the hilt is in the shape of a vajra, a Buddhist altar tool.
Nowadays it is mainly associated with very remote historical times, as well as legends and mythology. There are some similarities with some variants of Chinese &quot;jian&quot; (called &quot;chugokuken&quot; (中国剣) in Japanese).

==&quot;Kusanagi-no-Tsurugi&quot;==

The most famous example is the legendary sword &quot;Kusanagi no Tsurugi&quot; which is one of the Three Imperial Regalia of Japan.

==&quot;Tsurugi-tachi&quot;==
The &quot;tsurugi-tachi&quot; (剣太刀), a straight sword with only one side of the blade sharpened throughout, was similar to the &quot;tsurugi&quot; or &quot;ken&quot;. The other (back) side was only worked into a second cutting edge in the front part near the tip.

==Literature==
* Toshiro Suga: &quot;Ken, die Wurzeln des Aikido / Ken, les racines de l&#x27;Aïkido von Toshiro Suga (DVD).&quot; Hagenow Ondefo-Verl., 2006, ISBN 978-3-939703-40-2.

==See also==
* Japanese sword mountings

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1768697" start="10" end="24" title="Japanese sword" label="Japanese sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q172736" start="197" end="203" title="katana" label="katana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="209" end="217" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="" start="267" end="272" title=":ja:剣" label=":ja:剣"/>
<link wikidata="Q120676" start="545" end="550" title="tachi" label="tachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q172736" start="564" end="570" title="katana" label="katana"/>
<link wikidata="Q221693" start="584" end="593" title="wakizashi" label="wakizashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q384770" start="610" end="616" title="odachi" label="odachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q207858" start="779" end="791" title="Yayoi period" label="Yayoi period"/>
<link wikidata="Q459939" start="1247" end="1259" title="Kofun period" label="Kofun period"/>
<link wikidata="Q193292" start="1281" end="1293" title="Heian period" label="Heian period"/>
<link wikidata="Q120676" start="1357" end="1362" title="tachi" label="tachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q172736" start="1397" end="1403" title="katana" label="katana"/>
<link wikidata="Q845945" start="1612" end="1625" title="Shinto shrine" label="Shinto shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5393308" start="1631" end="1646" title="Buddhist temple" label="Buddhist temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q193292" start="1715" end="1727" title="Heian period" label="Heian period"/>
<link wikidata="Q11646520" start="1748" end="1756" title="Kongō-ji" label="Kongō-ji"/>
<link wikidata="Q147286" start="1771" end="1792" title="Kyoto National Museum" label="Kyoto National Museum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1832" end="1841" title="Acala#Japan" label="Fudo Myōō"/>
<link wikidata="Q695709" start="1907" end="1912" title="vajra" label="vajra"/>
<link wikidata="Q814158" start="2028" end="2037" title="Japanese mythology" label="mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284919" start="2103" end="2107" title="jian" label="jian"/>
<link wikidata="Q327465" start="2308" end="2333" title="Imperial Regalia of Japan" label="Imperial Regalia of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q371798" start="2830" end="2854" title="Japanese sword mountings" label="Japanese sword mountings"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31217" wikidata="Q159964" url="?curid=31217" title="Typography">
<text>Typography is the art and technique of arranging type to make written language legible, readable and appealing when displayed. The arrangement of type involves selecting typefaces, point sizes, line lengths, line spacing, letter spacing, and spaces between pairs of letters. The term &quot;typography&quot; is also applied to the style, arrangement, and appearance of the letters, numbers, and symbols created by the process. Type design is a closely related craft, sometimes considered part of typography; most typographers do not design typefaces, and some type designers do not consider themselves typographers. Typography also may be used as an ornamental and decorative device, unrelated to the communication of information.

Typography is also the work of graphic designers, art directors, manga artists, comic book artists, and, now, anyone who arranges words, letters, numbers, and symbols for publication, display, or distribution, from clerical workers and newsletter writers to anyone self-publishing materials. Until the Digital Age, typography was a specialized occupation. Personal computers opened up typography to new generations of previously unrelated designers and lay users. As the capability to create typography has become ubiquitous, the application of principles and best practices developed over generations of skilled workers and professionals has diminished.

== Etymology ==
The word &quot;typography&quot; in English derives from the Greek roots &#x27;type&#x27; + &#x27;writing&#x27;.

== History ==


Although typically applied to printed, published, broadcast, and reproduced materials in contemporary times, all words, letters, symbols, and numbers written alongside the earliest naturalistic drawings by humans may be called typography. The word, &quot;typography&quot;, is derived from the Greek words τύπος &quot;typos&quot; &#x27;form&#x27; or &quot;impression&quot; and γράφειν &quot;graphein&quot; &#x27;to write&#x27;, traces its origins to the first punches and dies used to make seals and currency in ancient times, which ties the concept to printing. The uneven spacing of the impressions on brick stamps found in the Mesopotamian cities of Uruk and Larsa, dating from the second millennium B.C., may be evidence of type, wherein the reuse of identical characters was applied to create cuneiform text. Babylonian cylinder seals were used to create an impression on a surface by rolling the seal on wet clay. Typography was also implemented in the Phaistos Disc, an enigmatic Minoan printed item from Crete, which dates to between 1850 and 1600 B.C. It has been proposed that Roman lead pipe inscriptions were created with movable type printing, but German typographer Herbert Brekle recently dismissed this view.

The essential criterion of type identity was met by medieval print artifacts such as the Latin Pruefening Abbey inscription of 1119 that was created by the same technique as the Phaistos Disc. The silver altarpiece of patriarch Pellegrinus II (1195–1204) in the cathedral of Cividale was printed with individual letter punches. Apparently, the same printing technique may be found in tenth to twelfth century Byzantine reliquaries. Other early examples include individual letter tiles where the words are formed by assembling single letter tiles in the desired order, which were reasonably widespread in medieval Northern Europe.

Typography with movable type was invented during the eleventh-century Song dynasty in China by Bi Sheng (990–1051). His movable type system was manufactured from ceramic materials, and clay type printing continued to be practiced in China until the Qing dynasty.

Wang Zhen was one of the pioneers of wooden movable type. Although the wooden type was more durable under the mechanical rigors of handling, repeated printing wore the character faces down and the types could be replaced only by carving new pieces.

Metal movable type was first invented in Korea during the Goryeo Dynasty, approximately 1230. Hua Sui introduced bronze type printing to China in 1490 AD. The diffusion of both movable-type systems was limited and the technology did not spread beyond East and Central Asia, however.

Modern lead-based movable type, along with the mechanical printing press, is most often attributed to the goldsmith Johannes Gutenberg in 1439. His type pieces, made from a lead-based alloy, suited printing purposes so well that the alloy is still used today. Gutenberg developed specialized techniques for casting and combining cheap copies of letter punches in the vast quantities required to print multiple copies of texts. This technical breakthrough was instrumental in starting the Printing Revolution and the first book printed with lead-based movable type was the Gutenberg Bible.

Rapidly advancing technology revolutionized typography in the latter twentieth century. During the 1960s some camera-ready typesetting could be produced in any office or workshop with stand-alone machines such as those introduced by IBM (see: IBM Selectric typewriter). During the same period Letraset introduced dry transfer technology that allowed designers to transfer types instantly. The famous Lorem Ipsum gained popularity due to its usage in Letraset. During the mid-1980s personal computers allowed type designers to create typefaces digitally using commercial graphic design software such as Fontographer. Digital technology also enabled designers to create more experimental typefaces as well as the practical typefaces of traditional typography. Designs for typefaces could be created faster with the new technology, and for more specific functions. The cost for developing typefaces was drastically lowered, becoming widely available to the masses. The change has been called the &quot;democratization of type&quot; and has given new designers more opportunities to enter the field.

=== Evolution ===
The design of typefaces has developed alongside the development of typesetting systems. Although typography has evolved significantly from its origins, it is a largely conservative art that tends to cleave closely to tradition. This is because legibility is paramount, and so the typefaces that are the most readable usually are retained. In addition, the evolution of typography is inextricably intertwined with lettering by hand and related art forms, especially formal styles, which thrived for centuries preceding typography, and so the evolution of typography must be discussed with reference to this relationship.

In the nascent stages of European printing, the typeface (blackletter, or Gothic) was designed in imitation of the popular hand-lettering styles of scribes. Initially, this typeface was difficult to read, because each letter was set in place individually and made to fit tightly into the allocated space. The art of manuscript writing, the origin of which was during Hellenistic and Roman bookmaking, reached its zenith in the illuminated manuscripts of the Middle Ages. Metal typefaces notably altered the style, making it &quot;crisp and uncompromising&quot;, and also brought about &quot;new standards of composition&quot;.
During the Renaissance period in France, Claude Garamond was partially responsible for the adoption of Roman typeface that eventually supplanted the more commonly used Gothic (blackletter). Roman typeface also was based on hand-lettering styles.

The development of Roman typeface can be traced back to Greek lapidary letters. Greek lapidary letters were carved into stone and &quot;one of the first formal uses of Western letterforms&quot;; after that, Roman lapidary letterforms evolved into the monumental capitals, which laid the foundation for Western typographical design, especially serif typefaces. There are two styles of Roman typefaces: the old style, and the modern. The former is characterized by its similarly weighted lines, while the latter is distinguished by its contrast of light and heavy lines. Often, these styles are combined.

In relation to the international graphics of the 1920s - 1930s, the term &quot;International Typographic Style&quot; is used. In the 1950s - 1960s, such a phenomenon as &quot;Swiss style&quot; was formed in typography.

By the twentieth century, computers turned typeface design into a rather simplified process. This has allowed the number of typefaces and styles to proliferate exponentially, as there now are thousands available. Confusion between typeface and font (the various styles of a single typeface) occurred in 1984 when Steve Jobs mislabeled typefaces as fonts for Apple computers and his error has been perpetuated throughout the computer industry, leading to common misuse by the public of the term &quot;font&quot; when &quot;typeface&quot; is the proper term.

=== Experimental typeface uses ===
&quot;Experimental typography&quot; is defined as the unconventional and more artistic approach to typeface selection. Francis Picabia was a Dada pioneer of this practice in the early twentieth century. David Carson is often associated with this movement, particularly for his work in &quot;Ray Gun&quot; magazine in the 1990s. His work caused an uproar in the design community due to his abandonment of standard practices in typeface selection, layout, and design. Experimental typography is said to place emphasis on expressing emotion, rather than having a concern for legibility while communicating ideas, hence considered bordering on being art.

=== Techniques ===
There are many facets to the expressive use of typography, and with those come many different techniques to help with visual aid and the graphic design. Spacing and kerning, size-specific spacing, x-height and vertical proportions, character variation, width, weight, and contrast, are several techniques that are necessary to be taken into consideration when thinking about the appropriateness of specific typefaces or creating them. When placing two or more differing and/or contrasting fonts together, these techniques come into play for organizational strategies and demanding attractive qualities. For example, if the bulk of a title has a more unfamiliar or unusual font, simpler sans-serif fonts will help complement the title while attracting more attention to the piece as a whole.

== Scope ==
In contemporary use, the practice and study of typography include a broad range, covering all aspects of letter design and application, both mechanical (typesetting, type design, and typefaces) and manual (handwriting and calligraphy). Typographical elements may appear in a wide variety of situations, including:
* Documents
* Presentations
* Display typography (described below)
* Clothing
* Maps and labels
* Vehicle instrument panels
* As a component of industrial design—type on household appliances, pens, and wristwatches, for example
* As a component in modern poetry (for example, the poetry of )

Since digitization, typographical uses have spread to a wider range of applications, appearing on web pages, LCDs mobile phone screens, and hand-held video games.

== Text typefaces ==
Traditionally, text is &quot;composed&quot; to create a readable, coherent, and visually satisfying block of type that works invisibly, without the awareness of the reader. Even distribution of typeset material, with a minimum of distractions and anomalies, aims to produce clarity and transparency.

Choice of typefaces is the primary aspect of text typography—prose fiction, non-fiction, editorial, educational, religious, scientific, spiritual, and commercial writing all have differing characteristics and requirements of appropriate typefaces (and their fonts or styles). For historic material, established text typefaces frequently are chosen according to a scheme of historical &quot;genre&quot; acquired by a long process of accretion, with considerable overlap among historical periods.

Contemporary books are more likely to be set with state-of-the-art &quot;text romans&quot; or &quot;book romans&quot; typefaces with serifs and design values echoing present-day design arts, which are closely based on traditional models such as those of Nicolas Jenson, Francesco Griffo (a punchcutter who created the model for Aldine typefaces), and Claude Garamond. With their more specialized requirements, newspapers and magazines rely on compact, tightly fitted styles of text typefaces with serifs specially designed for the task, which offer maximum flexibility, readability, legibility, and efficient use of page space. Sans serif text typefaces (without serifs) often are used for introductory paragraphs, incidental text, and whole short articles. A fashion at the end of the twentieth century was to pair a sans-serif typeface for headings with a high-performance serif typeface of matching style for the text of an article.

Typesetting conventions are modulated by orthography and linguistics, word structures, word frequencies, morphology, phonetic constructs and linguistic syntax. Typesetting conventions also are subject to specific cultural conventions. For example, in French it is customary to insert a non-breaking space before a colon (:) or semicolon (;) in a sentence, while in English it is not.

=== Color ===
In typesetting, &quot;color&quot; is the overall density of the ink on the page, determined mainly by the typeface, but also by the word spacing, leading, and depth of the margins. Text layout, tone, or color of the set text, and the interplay of text with the white space of the page in combination with other graphic elements impart a &quot;feel&quot; or &quot;resonance&quot; to the subject matter. With printed media, typographers also are concerned with binding margins, paper selection, and printing methods when determining the correct color of the page.

=== Principles of the typographic craft ===

Three fundamental aspects of typography are &quot;legibility&quot;, &quot;readability&quot;, and &quot;aesthetics&quot;. Although in a non-technical sense &quot;legible&quot; and &quot;readable&quot; are often used synonymously, typographically they are separate but related concepts. Legibility and readability tend to support aesthetic aspects of a product.

&quot;Legibility&quot; describes how easily individual characters can be distinguished from one another. It is described by Walter Tracy as &quot;the quality of being decipherable and recognisable&quot;. For instance, if a &quot;b&quot; and an &quot;h&quot;, or a &quot;3&quot; and an &quot;8&quot;, are difficult to distinguish at small sizes, this is a problem of legibility. Typographers are concerned with legibility insofar as it is their job to select the correct font to use. Brush script is an example of a font containing many characters that might be difficult to distinguish. The selection of cases influences the legibility of typography because using only uppercase letters (all-caps) reduces legibility.

&quot;Readability&quot; refers to how easy it is to read the text as a whole, as opposed to the individual character recognition described by legibility. Use of margins, word and line spacing, and clear document structure all impact readability. Some fonts or font styles, for instance sans-serif fonts, are considered to have low readability and so are unsuited for large quantities of prose.

Legibility &quot;refers to perception&quot; (being able to see as determined by physical limitations of the eye), and readability &quot;refers to comprehension&quot; (understanding the meaning). Good typographers and graphic designers aim to achieve excellence in both.

&quot;The typeface chosen should be legible. That is, it should be read without effort. Sometimes legibility is simply a matter of type size; more often, however, it is a matter of typeface design. Case selection always influences legibility. In general, typefaces that are true to the basic letterforms are more legible than typefaces that have been condensed, expanded, embellished, or abstracted.
Studies of both legibility and readability have examined a wide range of factors including type size and type design, comparing serif vs. sans-serif type, roman type vs. &quot;oblique type&quot; and &quot;italic type&quot;, line length, line spacing, color contrast, the design of right-hand edge (for example, justification, straight right hand edge) vs. ragged right, and whether text is hyphenated. Justified copy must be adjusted tightly during typesetting to prevent loss of readability, something beyond the capabilities of typical personal computers.

Legibility research has been published since the late nineteenth century. Although there often are commonalities and agreement on many topics, others often create poignant areas of conflict and variation of opinion. For example, Alex Poole asserts that no one has conclusively answered which typeface style, serif or sans serif, is more legible, although strong opinions exist. Other topics, such as justified vs. unjustified type, use of hyphens, and proper typefaces for people with reading difficulties such as dyslexia, continue to be debated.

Legibility is usually measured through the speed of reading, with comprehension scores used to check for effectiveness (that is, not a rushed or careless read). For example, Miles Tinker, who published numerous studies from the 1930s to the 1960s, used a speed of reading test that required participants to spot incongruous words as an effectiveness filter.

The &quot;Readability of Print Unit&quot; at the Royal College of Art under Professor Herbert Spencer with Brian Coe and Linda Reynolds did important work in this area. It was one of the centers that revealed the importance of the saccadic rhythm of eye movement for readability—in particular, the ability to take in (i.e., recognise the meaning of groups of) about three words at once and the physiognomy of the eye, which means the eye tires if the line required more than three or four of these saccadic jumps. More than this is found to introduce strain and errors in reading (e.g., doubling). The use of all-caps renders words indistinguishable as groups, all letters presenting a uniform line to the eye, requiring special effort for separation and understanding.

Currently, legibility research tends to be limited to critical issues or the testing of specific design solutions (for example, when new typefaces are developed). Examples of critical issues include typefaces for people with visual impairment, typefaces and case selection for highway and street signs, or for other conditions where legibility may make a key difference.

Much of the legibility research literature is atheoretical—various factors were tested individually or in combination (inevitably so, as the different factors are interdependent), but many tests lacked a model of reading or visual perception. Some typographers believe that the overall word shape (Bouma) is essential in readability and that the theory of parallel letter recognition is wrong, less important, or not the entire picture. Word shape differs by outline, influenced by ascending and descending elements of lowercase letters and enables reading the entire word without having to parse out each letter.


Readability also may be compromised by letter-spacing, word spacing, or leading that is too tight or too loose. It may be improved when generous vertical space separates text lines, making it easier for the eye to distinguish one line from the next, or previous line. Poorly designed typefaces and those that are too tightly or loosely fitted also may be less legible. Underlining also may reduce readability by eliminating the recognition effect contributed by the descending elements of letters.

Periodical publications, especially newspapers and magazines, use typographical elements to achieve an attractive, distinctive appearance, to aid readers in navigating the publication, and in some cases for dramatic effect. By formulating a style guide, a publication or periodical standardizes with a relatively small collection of typefaces, each used for specific elements within the publication, and makes consistent use of typefaces, case, type sizes, italic, boldface, colors, and other typographic features such as combining large and small capital letters together. Some publications, such as &quot;The Guardian&quot; and &quot;The Economist&quot;, go so far as to commission a type designer to create customized typefaces for their exclusive use.

Different periodicals design their publications, including their typography, to achieve a particular tone or style. For example, &quot;USA Today&quot; uses a bold, colorful, and comparatively modern style through their use of a variety of typefaces and colors; type sizes vary widely, and the newspaper&#x27;s name is placed on a colored background. In contrast, &quot;The New York Times&quot; uses a more traditional approach, with fewer colors, less typeface variation, and more columns.

Especially on the front page of newspapers and on magazine covers, headlines often are set in larger display typefaces to attract attention, and are placed near the masthead.

&quot;Typography utilized to characterize text:&quot; Typography is intended to reveal the character of the text. Through the use of typography, a body of text can instantaneously reveal the mood the author intends to convey to its readers. The message that a body of text conveys has a direct relationship with the typeface that is chosen. Therefore, when a person focuses on typography and setting type, they must pay very close attention to the typeface they choose. Choosing the correct typeface for a body of text can only be done after thoroughly reading the text, understanding its context, and understanding what the text is wishing to convey. Once the typographer has an understanding of the text, then they have the responsibility of using the appropriate typeface to honor the writing done by the author of the text. Knowledge required to choose the correct typeface comes with understanding the historical background of typefaces and understanding the reason that typeface was created. For example, if the text is titled &quot;Commercial Real Estate Transactions&quot; and elaborates on the real estate market throughout the body, then the appropriate typeface is a serif typeface, because the author intends to inform his audience on a serious topic and not entertain his audience with an anecdote; a serif typeface would convey a sense of seriousness to the audience instantaneously. The typographer would also employ larger type for the title to convey its importance, which directly informs the reader of the structure in which the text is intended to be read, and increases readability from varying distances.

&quot;Typography utilized to make reading practical:&quot; Typography not only must honor the tone of the text but also share the responsibility of making the audience commence reading and sustaining the audience&#x27;s attention throughout the text. Although typography can potentially attract the reader&#x27;s attention and create a beautiful/attractive piece of text, the craft of typography is not limited to the aesthetic appeal of the text. On the contrary, the object of typography is to make the reading experience practical and useful. Bold colors, multiple typefaces, and colorful backgrounds in a typographic design may be eye-catching; however, it may not be appropriate for all bodies of text and could potentially make text illegible. Overuse of design elements such as colors and typefaces can be unsettling, preventing the text from conveying its message to readers. A study from 2020 found that the participating subjects felt music sounded &quot;more pleasant&quot; when the CD cover featured round typeface.

== Display graphics ==
Type may be combined with negative space and images, forming relationships and dialog between the words and images for special effects. Display designs are a potent element in graphic design. Some sign designers exhibit less concern for readability, sacrificing it for an artistic manner. Color and size of type elements may be much more prevalent than in solely text designs. Most display items exploit type at larger sizes, where the details of letter design are magnified. Color is used for its emotional effect in conveying the tone and nature of subject matter.

Display typography encompasses:
* Advertisements in publications, such as newspapers and magazines
* Magazine and newspaper headline type
* Signs and other large-scale-letter designs, such as information signs and billboards
* Posters
* Brochures and flyers
* Packaging and labeling
* Business communications and advertising
* Book covers
* Typographic logos, trademarks, and word marks
* Graffiti
* Inscriptions
* Architectural lettering
* Kinetic typography in motion pictures, television, vending machine displays, online, and computer screen displays

=== Advertising ===
Typography has long been a vital part of promotional material and advertising. Designers often use typefaces to set a theme and mood in an advertisement (for example, using bold, large text to convey a particular message to the reader). Choice of typeface is often used to draw attention to a particular advertisement, combined with efficient use of color, shapes, and images. In the early twenty-first century, typography in advertising often reflects a company&#x27;s brand.

A brand may use typography to express its theme, personality, and message. Just by looking at the typeface, viewers can get an idea about the message and personality of the brand, which the brands are fully aware of and are tapping into the power of good typography.

Typefaces used in advertisements convey different messages to the reader: classical ones are for a strong personality, while more modern ones may convey clean, neutral look. Bold typefaces are used for making statements and attracting attention. In any design, a balance has to be achieved between the visual impact and communication aspects. Digital technology in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries has enabled the creation of typefaces for advertising that are more experimental than traditional typefaces.

=== Inscriptional and architectural lettering ===
The history of inscriptional lettering is intimately tied to the history of writing, the evolution of letterforms and the craft of the hand. The widespread use of the computer and various etching and sandblasting techniques today has made the hand carved monument a rarity, and the number of letter-carvers left in the US continues to dwindle.

For monumental lettering to be effective, it must be considered carefully in its context. Proportions of letters need to be altered as their size and distance from the viewer increases. An expert monument designer gains understanding of these nuances through much practice and observation of the craft. Letters drawn by hand and for a specific project have the possibility of being richly specific and profoundly beautiful in the hand of a master. Each also may take up to an hour to carve, so it is no wonder that the automated sandblasting process has become the industry standard.

==Digital typography==

Whilst the principles of good typography remain into the digital age, new tools are available to the typographer. Digital character encoding means that the presentation of text is independent of the meaning of that text; thus the same text can be used readily in different contexts but using different typefaces as appropriate to each context. Typographers have moved beyond the static pages of print books, newspapers, posters and other display materials, into design of dynamic materials such as web pages (see Web typography).

Typeface designers also have new tools, such as font hinting and font rasterization, that enable them to create new typefaces quickly and easily without needing the traditional skills of letter cutters or acceptance by typesetting machine manufacturers.

== See also ==
* Allograph, different representations of the same grapheme or character in different typefaces have the same meaning
* 
* 
* 
* :Category:Typographical symbols

=== By writing system ===

* Arabic typography
* East Asian typography
* History of Western typography

===Supporting organizations===
* ATypI: Association Typographique Internationale (&quot;International Typographic Association&quot;)
* International Society of Typographic Designers
* Type Directors Club

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== General sources ===

* 
* . A compilation of more than fifty texts on the history, practice, and aesthetics of typeface design and typography
* , 159 pp.
* , devotes entire chapters to the development and uses of individual or small groupings of typefaces
* .
* McLean, Ruari. &quot;The Thames and Hudson Manual of Typography&quot;. New York: Thames and Hudson, 1992.
* 
* 
* . A comprehensive collection of essays on the typographic art. A more classic companion to .
* 
* .


== External links ==

* AIGA on typography – American Institute of Graphic Arts
* Language enablement – World Wide Web Consortium Internationalization (i18n) Activity
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q159964" start="0" end="10" title="Typography" label="Typography"/>
<link wikidata="Q837721" start="39" end="53" title="Typesetting" label="arranging type"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149626" start="62" end="78" title="written language" label="written language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820694" start="79" end="86" title="legibility" label="legible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820650" start="88" end="96" title="readability" label="readable"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242" start="101" end="110" title="beauty" label="appealing"/>
<link wikidata="Q17451" start="170" end="178" title="typeface" label="typeface"/>
<link wikidata="Q156389" start="181" end="192" title="Point (typography)" label="point sizes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2226876" start="194" end="205" title="line length" label="line length"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968967" start="208" end="220" title="line spacing" label="line spacing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756646" start="222" end="236" title="letter spacing" label="letter spacing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139211" start="242" end="273" title="Kerning" label="spaces between pairs of letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892133" start="426" end="437" title="Type design" label="Type design"/>
<link wikidata="Q627325" start="762" end="778" title="graphic designer" label="graphic designer"/>
<link wikidata="Q706364" start="781" end="793" title="art director" label="art director"/>
<link wikidata="Q191633" start="796" end="808" title="manga artist" label="manga artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114448" start="811" end="829" title="comic book artists" label="comic book artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q738142" start="946" end="961" title="clerical worker" label="clerical worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q956129" start="1033" end="1044" title="Digital Age" label="Digital Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="1087" end="1104" title="Personal computer" label="Personal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="1463" end="1468" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="1825" end="1830" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079946" start="1991" end="1998" title="Punch (numismatics)" label="punches"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609080" start="2003" end="2007" title="Die (manufacturing)" label="dies"/>
<link wikidata="Q162919" start="2021" end="2026" title="Seal (device)" label="seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q8142" start="2031" end="2039" title="currency" label="currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q41493" start="2043" end="2056" title="ancient times" label="ancient times"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="2161" end="2173" title="Mesopotamian" label="Mesopotamian"/>
<link wikidata="Q168518" start="2184" end="2188" title="Uruk" label="Uruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q244746" start="2193" end="2198" title="Larsa" label="Larsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q26257" start="2216" end="2238" title="second millennium B.C." label="second millennium B.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1123756" start="2356" end="2369" title="cylinder seal" label="cylinder seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q465338" start="2490" end="2503" title="Phaistos Disc" label="Phaistos Disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q134178" start="2518" end="2524" title="Minoan" label="Minoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="2543" end="2548" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q107389654" start="2618" end="2645" title="Roman lead pipe inscription" label="Roman lead pipe inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q111172" start="2711" end="2725" title="Herbert Brekle" label="Herbert Brekle"/>
<link wikidata="Q175928" start="2784" end="2797" title="Type–token distinction" label="type identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="2809" end="2817" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2846" end="2851" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q685784" start="2852" end="2880" title="Pruefening Abbey inscription" label="Pruefening Abbey inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q434570" start="2961" end="2999" title="Altarpiece of Pellegrino II" label="altarpiece of patriarch Pellegrinus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q53245" start="3032" end="3040" title="Cividale" label="Cividale"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="3166" end="3175" title="Byzantine" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q722604" start="3176" end="3187" title="reliquaries" label="reliquaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940024" start="3218" end="3240" title="individual letter tile" label="individual letter tile"/>
<link wikidata="Q426853" start="3404" end="3416" title="movable type" label="movable type"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="3458" end="3470" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q200662" start="3483" end="3491" title="Bi Sheng" label="Bi Sheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="3637" end="3649" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q716074" start="3652" end="3661" title="Wang Zhen (official)" label="Wang Zhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625629" start="3689" end="3708" title="Wood type" label="wooden movable type"/>
<link wikidata="Q28208" start="3960" end="3974" title="Goryeo Dynasty" label="Goryeo Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088063" start="3996" end="4003" title="Hua Sui" label="Hua Sui"/>
<link wikidata="Q144334" start="4244" end="4258" title="printing press" label="printing press"/>
<link wikidata="Q8958" start="4302" end="4320" title="Johannes Gutenberg" label="Johannes Gutenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="4359" end="4363" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="4370" end="4375" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q278916" start="4531" end="4545" title="Punchcutting" label="letter punches"/>
<link wikidata="Q11034" start="4674" end="4693" title="Printing Revolution" label="Printing Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q158075" start="4758" end="4773" title="Gutenberg Bible" label="Gutenberg Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="5009" end="5012" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q429066" start="5019" end="5043" title="IBM Selectric typewriter" label="IBM Selectric typewriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821134" start="5069" end="5077" title="Letraset" label="Letraset"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937830" start="5089" end="5101" title="dry transfer" label="dry transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821134" start="5226" end="5234" title="Letraset" label="Letraset"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="5257" end="5274" title="personal computer" label="personal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q549528" start="5378" end="5390" title="Fontographer" label="Fontographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q837721" start="5958" end="5969" title="typesetting" label="typesetting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820694" start="6135" end="6145" title="legibility" label="legibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q5538738" start="6304" end="6313" title="lettering" label="lettering"/>
<link wikidata="Q11034" start="6546" end="6554" title="printing" label="printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q213686" start="6570" end="6581" title="blackletter" label="blackletter"/>
<link wikidata="Q916292" start="6660" end="6667" title="scribes" label="scribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="7150" end="7161" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q442851" start="7180" end="7195" title="Claude Garamond" label="Claude Garamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533641" start="7562" end="7573" title="letterforms" label="letterforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q243449" start="7729" end="7734" title="serif" label="serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q17451" start="8441" end="8449" title="typeface" label="typeface"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868296" start="8454" end="8458" title="font" label="font"/>
<link wikidata="Q19837" start="8523" end="8533" title="Steve Jobs" label="Steve Jobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q157321" start="8922" end="8937" title="Francis Picabia" label="Francis Picabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034" start="8944" end="8948" title="Dada" label="Dada"/>
<link wikidata="Q562699" start="9006" end="9018" title="David Carson (graphic designer)" label="David Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297558" start="9094" end="9101" title="Ray Gun (magazine)" label="Ray Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q837721" start="10431" end="10442" title="typesetting" label="typesetting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892133" start="10444" end="10455" title="type design" label="type design"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393642" start="10484" end="10495" title="handwriting" label="handwriting"/>
<link wikidata="Q12681" start="10500" end="10511" title="calligraphy" label="calligraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49848" start="10594" end="10602" title="Document" label="Document"/>
<link wikidata="Q6466900" start="10681" end="10687" title="Labeling (map design)" label="labels"/>
<link wikidata="Q243606" start="10736" end="10753" title="industrial design" label="industrial design"/>
<link wikidata="Q83341" start="10994" end="10998" title="Liquid crystal display" label="LCDs"/>
<link wikidata="Q676" start="11432" end="11437" title="prose" label="prose"/>
<link wikidata="Q8253" start="11438" end="11445" title="fiction" label="fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q213051" start="11447" end="11458" title="non-fiction" label="non-fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q965340" start="12121" end="12135" title="Nicolas Jenson" label="Nicolas Jenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229114" start="12137" end="12153" title="Francesco Griffo" label="Francesco Griffo"/>
<link wikidata="Q442851" start="12218" end="12233" title="Claude Garamond" label="Claude Garamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q43091" start="12845" end="12856" title="orthography" label="orthography"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="12861" end="12872" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q38311" start="12909" end="12919" title="Morphology (linguistics)" label="morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q35395" start="12921" end="12929" title="phonetic" label="phonetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="12956" end="12962" title="syntax" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="13055" end="13061" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053612" start="13090" end="13108" title="non-breaking space" label="non-breaking space"/>
<link wikidata="Q177449" start="13118" end="13123" title="colon (punctuation)" label="colon"/>
<link wikidata="Q104394" start="13131" end="13140" title="semicolon" label="semicolon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968967" start="13349" end="13356" title="leading" label="leading"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544004" start="13464" end="13475" title="White space (visual arts)" label="white space"/>
<link wikidata="Q144334" start="13610" end="13617" title="Printing press" label="printed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820694" start="13861" end="13871" title="legibility" label="legibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820650" start="13885" end="13896" title="readability" label="readability"/>
<link wikidata="Q2178998" start="14655" end="14667" title="Brush Script" label="Brush script"/>
<link wikidata="Q3232321" start="16133" end="16145" title="oblique type" label="oblique type"/>
<link wikidata="Q344098" start="16162" end="16173" title="italic type" label="italic type"/>
<link wikidata="Q2226876" start="16181" end="16192" title="line length" label="line length"/>
<link wikidata="Q184894" start="16268" end="16281" title="Justification (typesetting)" label="justification"/>
<link wikidata="Q180309" start="16347" end="16353" title="hyphen" label="hyphen"/>
<link wikidata="Q132971" start="17030" end="17038" title="dyslexia" label="dyslexia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6851561" start="17239" end="17251" title="Miles Tinker" label="Miles Tinker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753535" start="17473" end="17493" title="Royal College of Art" label="Royal College of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q5735635" start="17510" end="17525" title="Herbert Spencer (graphic designer)" label="Herbert Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q369503" start="17655" end="17663" title="saccadic" label="saccadic"/>
<link wikidata="Q737460" start="18420" end="18437" title="visual impairment" label="visual impairment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294961" start="18865" end="18870" title="Bouma" label="Bouma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756646" start="19222" end="19236" title="letter-spacing" label="letter-spacing"/>
<link wikidata="Q198614" start="19923" end="19934" title="style guide" label="style guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="20289" end="20301" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="20318" end="20331" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q16545060" start="20368" end="20381" title="List of type designers" label="type designer"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="20574" end="20583" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="20808" end="20826" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306599" start="20920" end="20927" title="Column (typography)" label="columns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313396" start="20997" end="21005" title="headline" label="headline"/>
<link wikidata="Q187062" start="21095" end="21103" title="Nameplate (publishing)" label="masthead"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092316" start="23812" end="23826" title="negative space" label="negative space"/>
<link wikidata="Q185925" start="23962" end="23976" title="graphic design" label="graphic design"/>
<link wikidata="Q37038" start="24388" end="24401" title="Advertisement" label="Advertisement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695082" start="24494" end="24498" title="Sign" label="Sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211272" start="24546" end="24562" title="information sign" label="information sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q623149" start="24568" end="24577" title="billboard" label="billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q429785" start="24581" end="24587" title="Poster" label="Poster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5173771" start="24591" end="24599" title="Brochure" label="Brochure"/>
<link wikidata="Q327611" start="24605" end="24611" title="flyer (pamphlet)" label="flyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q207822" start="24614" end="24636" title="Packaging and labeling" label="Packaging and labeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125338" start="24681" end="24691" title="Book cover" label="Book cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886349" start="24707" end="24711" title="logo" label="logo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17514" start="24743" end="24751" title="Graffiti" label="Graffiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="24769" end="24782" title="Architectural" label="Architectural"/>
<link wikidata="Q638636" start="24795" end="24813" title="Kinetic typography" label="Kinetic typography"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="24817" end="24831" title="motion picture" label="motion picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="24834" end="24844" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q211584" start="24846" end="24861" title="vending machine" label="vending machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290" start="24884" end="24899" title="computer screen" label="computer screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q353163" start="24971" end="24991" title="promotional material" label="promotional material"/>
<link wikidata="Q37038" start="24996" end="25007" title="advertising" label="advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q431289" start="25400" end="25405" title="brand" label="brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q917273" start="26442" end="26454" title="sandblasting" label="sandblasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533549" start="26534" end="26548" title="Letter cutting" label="letter-carvers"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="26561" end="26563" title="US" label="US"/>
<link wikidata="Q184759" start="27318" end="27336" title="character encoding" label="character encoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899429" start="27709" end="27723" title="Web typography" label="Web typography"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892133" start="27727" end="27742" title="Typeface design" label="Typeface design"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493777" start="27775" end="27787" title="font hinting" label="font hinting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465095" start="27792" end="27810" title="font rasterization" label="font rasterization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27999" end="28008" title="Allograph#Typography" label="Allograph"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28126" end="28157" title=":Category:Typographical symbols" label=":Category:Typographical symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q104854314" start="28188" end="28205" title="Arabic typography" label="Arabic typography"/>
<link wikidata="Q113987886" start="28208" end="28229" title="East Asian typography" label="East Asian typography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246810" start="28232" end="28261" title="History of Western typography" label="History of Western typography"/>
<link wikidata="Q743360" start="28296" end="28301" title="ATypI" label="ATypI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6053511" start="28398" end="28444" title="International Society of Typographic Designers" label="International Society of Typographic Designers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561995" start="28447" end="28466" title="Type Directors Club" label="Type Directors Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622004" start="29030" end="29064" title="American Institute of Graphic Arts" label="American Institute of Graphic Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q37033" start="29089" end="29114" title="World Wide Web Consortium" label="World Wide Web Consortium"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31222" wikidata="Q105105" url="?curid=31222" title="Theodoric the Great">
<text>Theodoric (or Theoderic) the Great (454 – 30 August 526), also called Theodoric the [[Amal dynasty|Amal]], was king of the Ostrogoths (475–526), and ruler of the independent Ostrogothic Kingdom of Italy between 493 and 526, regent of the Visigoths (511–526), and a patrician of the Eastern Roman Empire. As ruler of the combined Gothic realms, Theodoric controlled an empire stretching from the Atlantic Ocean to the Adriatic Sea. Though Theodoric himself only used the title &#x27;king&#x27; (&quot;rex&quot;), some scholars characterize him as a Western Roman Emperor in all but name, since he ruled a large part of the former Western Roman Empire described as a &quot;Res Publica&quot;, had received the former Western imperial regalia from Constantinople in 497 which he used, was referred to by the imperial title &quot;princeps&quot; by the Italian aristocracy and exercised imperial powers recognized in the East, such as naming consuls.

As a young child of an Ostrogothic nobleman, Theodoric was taken as a hostage to Constantinople, where he spent his formative years and received an East Roman education (&quot;paideia&quot;). Theodoric returned to Pannonia around 470, and throughout the 470s he campaigned against the Sarmatians and competed for influence among the Goths of the Roman Balkans, gaining recognition as King in 471. The emperor Zeno made him commander of the Eastern Roman forces in 483 and consul in 484. Nevertheless, Theodoric remained in constant hostilities with the emperor and frequently raided East Roman territory.

At the behest of Zeno, in 489 Theodoric attacked Odoacer, the king of Italy, emerging victorious in 493. As the new ruler of Italy, he upheld a Roman legal administration and scholarly culture while promoting a major building program across Italy. In 505 he expanded into the Balkans, and by 511 he had brought the Visigothic Kingdom of Spain under his direct control and established hegemony over the Burgundian and Vandal kingdoms. Theodoric died in 526 and was buried in a grand mausoleum in Ravenna. He lived on as the figure Dietrich von Bern in Germanic heroic legend.

== Youth and early exploits ==
Theodoric was born in AD 454 in Pannonia on the banks of the Neusiedler See near Carnuntum, the son of king Theodemir, a Germanic Amali nobleman, and his concubine Ereleuva. This was just a year after the Ostrogoths had thrown off nearly a century of domination by the Huns. To this end, historian Hans-Ulrich Wiemer states that, &quot;Theodoric’s childhood was spent at a time of violent conflicts between non-Roman groups attempting to fill the power vacuum created by the collapse of Attila’s empire&quot;. His Gothic name, which is reconstructed by linguists as &quot;*Þiudareiks&quot;, translates into &quot;people-king&quot; or &quot;ruler of the people&quot;.

In 461, when Theodoric was seven or eight years of age, he was taken hostage in Constantinople to secure the Ostrogoths&#x27; compliance with a treaty Theodemir had concluded with the &quot;augustus&quot; Leo I (ruled 457–474). Under the terms of the treaty, the Pannonian Goths were required to &quot;surrender a hostage of royal descent&quot; to the emperor&#x27;s court; in this case that hostage was Theodoric. The treaty also secured a payment to Constantinople of some 300 pounds&#x27; worth of gold each year. Theodoric was well educated by Constantinople&#x27;s best teachers. His status made him valuable, since the Amal family from which he came (as told by Theodoric), allegedly ruled half of all Goths since the third century AD. Historian Peter Heather argues that Theodoric&#x27;s claims were likely self-aggrandizing propaganda and that the Amal dynasty was more limited than modern commentators presume. Until 469, Theodoric remained in Constantinople where he spent formative years &quot;catching up on all the &quot;Romanitas&quot;&quot; it had taken generations of Visigothic Balthi to acquire. Theodoric was treated with favor by the emperor Leo I. He learned to read, write and perform arithmetic while in captivity in the Eastern Empire.

When Leo heard that his imperial army was retreating from the Goths near Pannonia, he sent Theodoric home with gifts and no promises of any commitments. On his return in 469/470, Theodoric assumed leadership over the Gothic regions previously ruled by his uncle, Valamir, while his father became king. Not long afterwards near Singidunum (modern Belgrade) in upper Moesia, the Tisza Sarmatian king Babai had extended his authority at Constantinople&#x27;s expense. Legitimizing his position as a warrior, Theodoric crossed the Danube with six thousand warriors, defeated the Sarmatians and killed Babai; this moment likely crystallized his position and marked the beginning of his kingship, despite not actually having yet assumed the throne. Perhaps to assert his authority as an Amali prince, Theodoric kept the conquered area of Singidunum for himself.

Throughout the 470s, sometimes in the name of the empire itself, Theodoric launched campaigns against potential Gothic rivals and other enemies of the Eastern Empire, which made him an important military and political figure. One of his chief rivals was the chieftain of the Thracian Goths Theodoric Strabo (Strabo means &quot;the Squinter&quot;), who had led a major revolt against the emperor Zeno. Finding common ground with the emperor, Theodoric was rewarded by Zeno and made commander of East Roman forces, while his people became &quot;foederati&quot; or federates of the Roman army. In 471, Theodoric was recognized as King of the Ostrogoths by 6,000 Goths that had previously rebelled against the Hunnic ruler Dengizich in 467–468.

Zeno attempted to play one Germanic chieftain against another and take advantage of an opportunity sometime in 476/477 when—after hearing demands from Theodoric for new lands since his people were facing a famine—he offered Theodoric Strabo the command once belonging to Theodoric. Enraged by this betrayal, Theodoric turned his wrath against the communities in the Rhodope Mountains, where his forces commandeered livestock and slaughtered peasants, sacked and burned Stobi in Macedonia and requisitioned supplies from the archbishop at Heraclea. Gothic plundering finally elicited a settlement from Zeno, but Theodoric initially refused any compromise. Theodoric sent one of his confidants, Sidimund, forward to Epidaurum for negotiations with Zeno. While the Roman envoy and Theodoric were negotiating, Zeno sent troops against some of Theodoric&#x27;s wagons, which were under the protection of his able general Theodimund. Unaware of this treachery, Theodoric&#x27;s Goths lost around 2,000 wagons and 5,000 of his people were taken captive.

Theodoric settled his people in Epirus in 479 with the help of his relative Sidimund. In 482, he raided Greece and sacked Larissa. Bad luck, rebellions and poor decisions left Zeno in an unfortunate position, which subsequently led him to seek another agreement with Theodoric. In 483, Zeno made Theodoric &quot;magister militum praesentalis&quot; and consul designate in 484, whereby he commanded the Danubian provinces of Dacia Ripensis and Moesia Inferior as well as the adjacent regions.

==Reign==


Seeking further gains, Theodoric frequently ravaged the provinces of the Eastern Roman Empire, eventually threatening Constantinople itself. By 486, there was little disputing the open hostilities between Theodoric and Zeno. The emperor sought the assistance of the Bulgars, who were likewise defeated by Theodoric. In 487, Theodoric began his aggressive campaign against Constantinople, blockading the city, occupying strategically important suburbs, and cutting off its water supply; although it seems Theodoric never intended to occupy the city but instead, to use the assault as a means of gaining power and prestige from the Eastern Empire.

The Ostrogoths needed a place to live and Zeno was having serious problems with Odoacer—the Germanic &quot;foederatus&quot; and King of Italy—who although ostensibly viceroy for Zeno, was menacing Byzantine territory and not respecting the rights of Roman citizens in Italy. In 488, Zeno ordered Theodoric to overthrow Odoacer. For this task, he received support from Rugian king Frideric, the son of Theodoric&#x27;s cousin Giso. Theodoric moved with his people towards Italy in the autumn of 488. On the way he was opposed by the Gepids, whom he defeated at Sirmium in August 489. Arriving in Italy, Theodoric won the battles of Isonzo and Verona in 489.

Once again, Theodoric was pressed by Zeno in 490 to attack Odoacer. Theodoric&#x27;s army was defeated by Odoacer&#x27;s forces at Faenza in 490, but regained the upper hand after securing victory in the Battle of the Adda River on 11 August 490. For several years, the armies of Odoacer and Theodoric vied for supremacy across the Italian peninsula. Theodoric besieged Odoacer in Ravenna until 2 February 493, when a treaty was signed making the kings joint rulers of Italy. Theodoric entered Ravenna on 5 March 493, and a banquet celebrating the treaty was organized on 15 March. At this feast, Theodoric, after making a toast, drew his sword and struck Odoacer, splitting him in two from collarbone to thigh. Theodoric had the king&#x27;s most loyal followers slaughtered as well, making him the master of Italy.

With Odoacer dead and his forces dispersed, Theodoric now faced the problem of settlement for his people. Concerned about thinning out the Amal line too much, Theodoric believed he could not afford to spread some 40,000 of his tribesmen across the entire Italian peninsula. Such considerations led him to the conclusion that it was best to settle the Ostrogoths in three concentrated areas: around Pavia, Ravenna and Picenum. Theodoric&#x27;s kingdom was among the most &quot;Roman&quot; of the barbarian states and he successfully ruled most of Italy for thirty-three years following his treachery against Odoacer.

He visited Rome in 500 where he stayed for 6 months and held games in the Circus, probably also in the Colosseum, and renewed the grain largesse to the Roman populace, which had perhaps been interrupted since the days of Odoacer.

Theodoric extended his hegemony over the Burgundian and Vandal kingdoms (along with Visigothic royals) through marriage alliances. He had married the sister of the mighty Frankish king, Clovis—likely in recognition of Frankish power. He sent a substantial dowry accompanied by a guard of 5,000 troops with his sister Amalafrida when she married the king of the Vandals and Alans, Thrasamund. In 504–505, Theodoric extended his realms in the Balkans by defeating the Gepids, acquiring the province of Pannonia. Theodoric became regent for the infant Visigothic king, his grandson Amalaric, following the defeat of Alaric II by the Franks under Clovis in 507. The Franks were able to wrest control of Aquitaine from the Visigoths, but otherwise Theodoric was able to defeat their incursions.

In 511, the Visigothic Kingdom was brought under Theodoric&#x27;s direct control, forming a Gothic superstate that extended from the Atlantic to the Danube. While territories that were lost to the Franks remained that way, Theodoric concluded a peace arrangement with the heirs of the Frankish Kingdom once Clovis was dead. Additional evidence of the Gothic king&#x27;s extensive royal reach include the acts of ecclesiastical councils that were held in Tarragona and Gerona; while both occurred in 516 and 517, they date back to the &quot;regnal years of Theoderic, which seem to commence in the year 511&quot;.
Like Odoacer, Theodoric was ostensibly only a viceroy for the &quot;augustus&quot; in Constantinople, but he nonetheless adopted the trappings of imperial style, increasingly emphasizing his &quot;neo-imperial status&quot;. According to historian Peter Brown, Theodoric was in the habit of commenting that &quot;An able Goth wants to be like a Roman; only a poor Roman would want to be like a Goth.&quot; Much like the representatives of the Eastern Empire, Theodoric chose to be clad in robes dyed purple, emulating the imperial colors and perhaps even to reinforce the imperial dispatch of the &quot;augustus&quot; Anastasius I, which outlined Theodoric&#x27;s position as an imperial colleague. Chroniclers like Cassiodorus added a layer of legitimacy for Theodoric and the Amal tribe from which he came by casting them as cooperative participants in the greater history of the Mediterranean dating back to the era of Alexander the Great. In reality—at least in part due to his formidable military—he was able to avoid imperial supervision, and dealings between the emperor and Theodoric were as equals. Unlike Odoacer, however, Theodoric respected the agreement he had made and allowed Roman citizens within his kingdom to be subject to Roman law and the Roman judicial system. The Goths, meanwhile, lived under their own laws and customs. In 519, when a mob had burned down the synagogues of Ravenna, Theodoric ordered the town to rebuild them at its own expense.

Theodoric experienced difficulties before his death. He had married off his daughter Amalasuintha to the Visigoth Eutharic, but Eutharic died in August 522 or 523, so no lasting dynastic connection of Ostrogoths and Visigoths was established, which highlighted the tensions between the Eastern Empire and the West. The new &quot;augustus&quot;, Justin I—who replaced Anastasius, a man with whom Theodoric had good relations—was under the influence of his nephew Justinian; somehow, imperial views hardened against the West and talk of Rome&#x27;s fall emerged during this period, leading to questions about the legitimacy of barbarian rule. Theodoric&#x27;s good relations with the Roman Senate deteriorated due to a presumed senatorial conspiracy in 522, and, in 523, Theodoric had the philosopher and court official Boethius and Boethius&#x27; father-in-law Symmachus arrested on charges of treason related to the alleged plot. For his role, Theodoric had Boethius executed in 524.

Despite the complex relationship between Theodoric and his son-in-law, the Catholic Burgundian king Sigismund, the two enjoyed a mutual peace for fifteen years. Then in 522, Sigismund killed his own son—Theodoric&#x27;s grandson—Sigeric; an act which infuriated Theodoric and he retaliated by invading the Burgundian kingdom, accompanied by the Franks. Between the two peoples, Sigismund&#x27;s Burgundian forces faced two fronts and were defeated. Meanwhile, Sigismund&#x27;s Arian brother Godomar established himself as king over the remaining Burgundian territory and ruled for a decade.

When Theodoric&#x27;s sister Amalafrida sought to possibly change the direction of Vandal succession following the death of her spouse, the former Vandal king Thrasamund, the new Catholic Vandal king Hilderic had her, along with the accompanying Gothic retinue, killed. Theodoric was incensed and planned an expedition to restore his power over the Vandal kingdom when he died of dysentery in the summer of 526. The Gothic king was succeeded by his grandson Athalaric, with Theodoric&#x27;s daughter Amalasuintha serving as regent since Athalaric was but ten years of age when Theodoric died. Her role was to carry out the dead ruler&#x27;s political testament, to seek accommodation with the senate, and maintain peace with the emperor. Suddenly the once united Goths were split and Theodoric&#x27;s grandson Amalaric ruled the newly independent Visigothic kingdom for the next five years.

==Family and progeny==
Theodoric was married once. He had a concubine in Moesia, name unknown, with whom he had two daughters:
* Ostrogotho (ca. 475 – 520). She was married to the king Sigismund of Burgundy as a part of her father&#x27;s alliance with the Burgundians.
* Theodegotha (ca. 473 – ?). In 494, she was married to Alaric II as a part of her father&#x27;s alliance with the Visigoths.

By his marriage in 493 to the pagan Audofleda—the sister of Clovis, who was baptized an Arian at the time of their wedding—Theodoric had one daughter:
* Amalasuintha, Queen of the Goths. She was married to Eutharic and had two children: Athalaric and Matasuntha (the latter being married to Witiges first, then, after Witiges&#x27; death, married to Germanus Justinus).

After his death in Ravenna in 526, Theodoric was succeeded by his grandson Athalaric. Athalaric was at first represented by his mother Amalasuintha, who served as regent between 534 and 535. The kingdom of the Ostrogoths, however, began to wane and the personal union of the Gothic tribes, once brought together by Theoderic, collapsed following his demise. The subsequent campaigns into Italy by Justinian—whose long reign from 527 to 565 delineates the transition from &quot;antiquity to the Middle Ages in the Latin West&quot; according to historian Michael Kulikowski—wrought the final blows to Theodoric&#x27;s once dominant kingdom.

==Building program==
Theodoric promoted the rebuilding of Roman cities and the preservation of ancient monuments in Italy. In 500, Rome itself was given special attention by Theodoric, who wanted to restore the structures previously damaged by time and the barbarians alike, since as he mused, Rome&#x27;s great buildings were witness to its grandeur, power, and thereto instructed his architects to restore all that was &quot;ancient&quot;. His preservation efforts were designed to elicit awe and admiration in future generations. The fame of Theodoric&#x27;s building works reached far-away Syria. In the aggregate, Theodoric&#x27;s building program saw more extensive new construction and restoration than that of any of the West Roman emperors after Honorius (395–423).

===Ravenna===

Theodoric devoted most of his architectural attention to his capital, Ravenna. He restored Ravenna&#x27;s water supply by repairing an aqueduct originally built by Trajan. According to the chronicles of Cassiodorus, a number of cities were renewed by Theodoric&#x27;s building enterprises, some of which even surpassed the ancient wonders. Historian Jonathan J. Arnold quips:

 He constructed a &quot;Great Basilica of Hercules&quot; next to a colossal statue of the hero himself. To promote Arianism, the king commissioned a small Arian cathedral, the &quot;Hagia Anastasis&quot;, which contains the Arian Baptistery. Three more churches built by Theodoric in Ravenna and its suburbs, S. Andrea dei Goti, S. Giorgio and S. Eusebio, were destroyed in the 13th, 14th and 15th centuries. Theodoric built the Palace of Theodoric for himself in Ravenna, modeled on the Great Palace of Constantinople. It was an expansion of an earlier Roman structure. The palace church of Christ the Redeemer survives and is known today as the Basilica of Sant&#x27;Apollinare Nuovo. It was Theodoric&#x27;s personal church of worship and was modeled specifically according to his tastes. An equestrian statue of Theodoric was erected in the square in front of the palace. Statues like these were symbols of the ancient world, and Theodoric&#x27;s equestrian likeness was meant to convey his status as the undisputed ruler of the western empire.

Theodoric the Great was interred in Ravenna, but his bones were scattered and his mausoleum was converted to a church after Belisarius conquered the city in 540. His mausoleum is one of the finest monuments in Ravenna. Unlike all the other contemporary buildings in Ravenna, which were made of brick, the Mausoleum of Theodoric was built completely from fine quality stone ashlars. Possibly as a reference to the Goths&#x27; tradition of an origin in Scandinavia, the architect decorated the frieze with a pattern found in 5th- and 6th-century Scandinavian metal adornments.

===Rome===
The Palace of Domitian on the Palatine Hill was reconstructed, using the receipts from a specially levied tax; while the city walls of Rome were rebuilt, a feat celebrated by the Senate of Rome with a gilded statue of Theodoric. The Senate&#x27;s Curia, the Theatre of Pompey, the city aqueducts, sewers and a granary were refurbished and repaired and statues were set up in the Flavian Amphitheatre.

==Religion==
In 522 the philosopher Boethius became his &quot;magister officiorum&quot; (head of all the government and court services). Boethius was a Roman aristocrat and Christian humanist, who was also a philosopher, poet, theologian, mathematician, astronomer, translator and commentator on Aristotle and other Greek luminaries. It is hard to overestimate this one-time servant and eventual victim of Theodoric for his influence on philosophy, particularly Christian philosophy, throughout the Middle Ages. Boethius&#x27; treatises and commentaries became textbooks for medieval students, and the great Greek philosophers were unknown except for his Latin translations. The execution of Boethius did nothing to dissipate tensions between Arians and Catholics but merely raised additional questions about barbarian imperial legitimacy. 

Theodoric was of the Arian (nontrinitarian) faith, and in his final years he was no longer the disengaged Arian patron of religious toleration that he had seemed earlier in his reign. &quot;Indeed, his death cut short what could well have developed into a major persecution of Catholic churches in retaliation for measures taken by Justinian in Constantinople against Arians there.&quot;
Despite the Byzantine &quot;caesaropapism&quot;, which conflated imperial and ecclesiastical authority in the same person—whereby Theodoric&#x27;s Arian beliefs were tolerated under two separate emperors—the fact remained that to most clergy across the Eastern Empire, Theodoric was a heretic. At the end of his reign quarrels arose with his Roman subjects and the Byzantine emperor Justin I over the matter of Arianism. These quarrels ultimately led to the martyrdom of Boethius and Pope John I by starvation in 524 and 526, respectively. Relations between the two realms deteriorated, although Theodoric&#x27;s military abilities dissuaded the Byzantines from waging war against him. After his death, that reluctance faded quickly.

==Legacy==
Seeking to restore the glory of ancient Rome, Theodoric ruled Italy during one of its most peaceful and prosperous periods and was accordingly hailed as a new Trajan and Valentinian I for his building efforts and his religious toleration. His far-sighted goals included taking what was best from Roman culture and combining it with Gothic energy and physical power as a way into the future. Relatively amicable relations between Goths and Romans also make Theodoric&#x27;s kingdom notable. Memories of his reign made him a hero of medieval German legends, as Dietrich von Bern, where the two figures have represented the same person.
Historian John Julius Norwich wrote:
No other Germanic ruler, setting up his throne on the ruins of the Western Empire, possessed a fraction of his statesmanship and political vision; and when he died ... Italy lost the greatest of her early medieval rulers, unequalled until the days of Charlemagne.

===Medieval reception===

Theodoric is an important figure in Germanic heroic legend as the character &quot;Dietrich von Bern&quot; (), known in Old Norse as &quot;Þjóðrekr&quot; or &quot;Þiðrekr&quot;, and Old English as &quot;Þēodrīc&quot;. In German legends, Dietrich becomes an exile from his native kingdom of Lombardy, fighting with the help of Etzel against his usurping uncle, Ermenrich. Only the Old High German &quot;Hildebrandslied&quot; still contains Odoacer () as Dietrich&#x27;s antagonist. The 13th century Norse Þiðreks saga, based on lost Low German sources, moves the location of Dietrich&#x27;s life to Westphalia and northern Germany. The legends paint a generally positive picture of Dietrich, with only some influence visible from the negative traditions of the church.

===Modern historiographical debate===
There is an ongoing debate among modern historians as to how qualify the nature of power Theodoric wielded in his domains. Traditionalists have argued for some time that Theodoric was a Germanic king, citing as their frame of reference later Byzantine sources—written during the Gothic war—that brand him as a barbarian king, who merely mimicked Roman customs. One scholar, Jonathan J. Arnold, advocates that this nature changed during the course of the 6th century; Arnold alludes to local and contemporary sources such as Magnus Felix Ennodius&#x27;s &quot;Vita beatissimi viri Epiphani episcopi Ticinensis ecclesiae&quot;, Cassiodorus&#x27;s &quot;Variae&quot; and &quot;Laudes&quot; or the &quot;Pars Posterior&quot; of the Anonymus Valesianus, arguing therefrom that Rome in the West did not fall in 476, but merely awaited a &quot;proper Roman emperor to rule it&quot;. According to Arnold, these two sources ultimately reveal that Theodoric was actually viewed both by the Italian nobility and the Eastern court in Constantinople as a legitimate Western Roman emperor.

Arnold built his case on the fact that Theodoric widely used the title of &quot;princeps&quot; for himself, and employed the term &quot;Res Publica&quot; to describe the domain he ruled. These titles, although archaic, were customarily reserved for the emperor and his empire. Thereto Arnold explains that the restraint shown by Theodoric in refraining to use titles such as &quot;Imperator&quot;, &quot;Imperium&quot; or &quot;Augustus&quot; was aimed at sparing the pride of the Eastern monarchy and ensuring Byzantium of its seniority, but that this did not diminish Theodoric&#x27;s claim to the purple in the West.

This view is however rejected by other scholars, such as Theodoric&#x27;s most recent biographer, Hans-Ulrich Wiemer. He claims that Jonathan J. Arnold takes at face value, comments of a few interested parties among the Italian nobility. Wiemer contends that these few sources, close to Theodoric and of a doubtful impartiality, should not be used to infer the general opinion toward Theodoric from all classes of the Italian population or among the residents of Constantinople. He further states that this vision of Theodoric&#x27;s position fails to address the duality of his rule; namely, having to retain the loyalty of both Romans and Goths alike. Wiemer posits that, &quot;The “Roman” interpretation of Theodoric has recently been taken to extremes in the theory that Theodoric was virtually a Western Roman emperor in Italy. According to this view, Theodoric restored the Roman Empire in the West, which he ruled as &quot;princeps Romanus&quot;. » Demonstrating his doubts on this, Wiemer points out how during Theodoric&#x27;s rule, he kept the two ethnic groups—Italo-Romans and Goths—clearly separated. For instance, only Goths could carry certain military equipment (swords, lances, shields, and helmets) or assume key positions in the military hierarchy, and the hairstyles between Goths and Romans remained distinctive, let alone their language. Wiemer also avows that the Eastern court never formally acknowledged Theodoric as a Western Emperor, a necessary condition to become one, the last of which ever recognized by Constantinople being Julius Nepos, who died in 480. Additionally, Wiemer highlights the fact that for political reasons, the Frankish and Burgundian kings never recognized Theodoric as an emperor—each established as rulers in their own right—and as the Ostrogothic king&#x27;s Germanic kinsman, they were tied to one another via diplomatic marriages.

==See also==

* Alboin
* Alfred the Great
* Anicius Manlius Severinus Boethius
* Ardaric
* Charlemagne
* Clovis I
* Ermanaric
* Gaiseric
* Hermeric
* Liutprand, King of the Lombards
* Liuvigild
* Odoacer
* Ostrogothic Kingdom
* Ricimer
* Theodoric I (Visigothic king)
* Totila
==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==
* Andreas Goltz, &quot;Barbar – König – Tyrann. Das Bild Theoderichs des Großen in der Überlieferung des 5. bis 9. Jahrhunderts&quot; (Berlin: de Gruyter 2008) (Millenium-Studien zu Kultur und Geschichte des ersten Jahrtausends n. Chr., 12).
* 
* 
* 
* Theodoric the Great at MiddleAges.net
* Theodoric the Goth, 1897, by Thomas Hodgkin, from Project Gutenberg

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q105105" start="0" end="9" title="Theodoric the Great" label="Theodoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q105105" start="14" end="23" title="Theodoric the Great" label="Theoderic"/>
<link wikidata="Q105105" start="25" end="34" title="Theodoric the Great" label="the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q105105" start="70" end="105" title="Theodoric the Great" label="Theodoric the [[Amal dynasty|Amal]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q103122" start="123" end="133" title="Ostrogoths" label="Ostrogoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q583038" start="174" end="193" title="Ostrogothic Kingdom" label="Ostrogothic Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="224" end="230" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="238" end="247" title="Visigoths" label="Visigoths"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="265" end="274" title="patrician (ancient Rome)#Late Roman and Byzantine period" label="patrician"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="282" end="302" title="Byzantine Empire#Loss of the Western Roman Empire" label="Eastern Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="395" end="409" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="417" end="429" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="629" end="649" title="Western Roman Empire" label="Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="744" end="758" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365399" start="1122" end="1129" title="paideia" label="paideia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170062" start="1160" end="1168" title="Pannonia" label="Pannonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q162858" start="1231" end="1241" title="Sarmatians" label="Sarmatians"/>
<link wikidata="Q183452" start="1355" end="1359" title="Zeno (emperor)" label="Zeno"/>
<link wikidata="Q209122" start="1369" end="1378" title="Magister militum" label="commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q40779" start="1418" end="1424" title="Roman consul" label="consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q103333" start="1601" end="1608" title="Odoacer" label="Odoacer"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="1828" end="1835" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q126936" start="1867" end="1885" title="Visigothic Kingdom" label="Visigothic Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q13590051" start="1954" end="1964" title="Kingdom of the Burgundians" label="Burgundian"/>
<link wikidata="Q10416611" start="1969" end="1975" title="Vandal Kingdom" label="Vandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q289427" start="2034" end="2054" title="Mausoleum of Theodoric" label="mausoleum in Ravenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224130" start="2082" end="2099" title="Dietrich von Bern" label="Dietrich von Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q105763473" start="2103" end="2125" title="Germanic heroic legend" label="Germanic heroic legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q170062" start="2191" end="2199" title="Pannonia" label="Pannonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396" start="2220" end="2234" title="Neusiedler See" label="Neusiedler See"/>
<link wikidata="Q508815" start="2240" end="2249" title="Carnuntum" label="Carnuntum"/>
<link wikidata="Q334777" start="2267" end="2276" title="Theodemir (Ostrogothic king)" label="Theodemir"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="2280" end="2288" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q452762" start="2289" end="2294" title="Amal dynasty" label="Amali"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309988" start="2323" end="2331" title="Ereleuva" label="Ereleuva"/>
<link wikidata="Q45813" start="2428" end="2432" title="Huns" label="Huns"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="2712" end="2721" title="linguists" label="linguists"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="2907" end="2921" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q183776" start="3032" end="3037" title="Leo I (emperor)" label="Leo I"/>
<link wikidata="Q789757" start="3922" end="3928" title="Balthi" label="Balthi"/>
<link wikidata="Q558533" start="4351" end="4358" title="Valamir" label="Valamir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309687" start="4415" end="4425" title="Singidunum" label="Singidunum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="4434" end="4442" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q199499" start="4453" end="4459" title="Moesia" label="Moesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q134350" start="4465" end="4470" title="Tisza" label="Tisza"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4486" end="4491" title="Babai (king)" label="Babai"/>
<link wikidata="Q671809" start="5235" end="5251" title="Theodoric Strabo" label="Theodoric Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q183452" start="5340" end="5344" title="Zeno (emperor)" label="Zeno"/>
<link wikidata="Q129224" start="5488" end="5497" title="foederati" label="foederati"/>
<link wikidata="Q530617" start="5664" end="5673" title="Dengizich" label="Dengizich"/>
<link wikidata="Q6489" start="6053" end="6070" title="Rhodope Mountains" label="Rhodope Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371168" start="6156" end="6161" title="Stobi" label="Stobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q103251" start="6165" end="6174" title="Macedonia (region)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607763" start="6225" end="6233" title="Heraclea Sintica" label="Heraclea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989678" start="6401" end="6410" title="Epidaurum" label="Epidaurum"/>
<link wikidata="Q565751" start="6767" end="6773" title="Epirus" label="Epirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q56292645" start="6811" end="6819" title="Sidimund" label="Sidimund"/>
<link wikidata="Q209122" start="7047" end="7063" title="magister militum" label="magister militum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="7313" end="7333" title="Eastern Roman Empire" label="Eastern Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q103333" start="7967" end="7974" title="Odoacer" label="Odoacer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253884" start="8255" end="8261" title="Rugii" label="Rugian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16712643" start="8267" end="8275" title="Frideric" label="Frideric"/>
<link wikidata="Q201706" start="8419" end="8425" title="Gepids" label="Gepids"/>
<link wikidata="Q16701442" start="8435" end="8443" title="Battle of Sirmium (489)" label="defeated"/>
<link wikidata="Q833060" start="8447" end="8454" title="Sirmium" label="Sirmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281559" start="8518" end="8524" title="Battle of Isonzo (489)" label="Isonzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q368842" start="8529" end="8535" title="Battle of Verona (489)" label="Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q103333" start="8604" end="8611" title="Odoacer" label="Odoacer"/>
<link wikidata="Q56292726" start="8639" end="8647" title="Battle of Faenza (490)" label="defeated"/>
<link wikidata="Q52981" start="8676" end="8682" title="Faenza" label="Faenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147058" start="8749" end="8773" title="Battle of the Adda River" label="Battle of the Adda River"/>
<link wikidata="Q354560" start="8906" end="8914" title="Siege of Ravenna (490–493)" label="besieged"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259" start="9760" end="9765" title="Pavia" label="Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q510990" start="9779" end="9786" title="Picenum" label="Picenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q13590051" start="10251" end="10261" title="Kingdom of the Burgundians" label="Burgundian"/>
<link wikidata="Q10416611" start="10266" end="10272" title="Vandal Kingdom" label="Vandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q82339" start="10396" end="10402" title="Clovis I" label="Clovis"/>
<link wikidata="Q241526" start="10527" end="10537" title="Amalafrida" label="Amalafrida"/>
<link wikidata="Q311888" start="10590" end="10600" title="Thrasamund" label="Thrasamund"/>
<link wikidata="Q452673" start="10789" end="10797" title="Amalaric" label="Amalaric"/>
<link wikidata="Q110884" start="10823" end="10832" title="Alaric II" label="Alaric II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179" start="10909" end="10918" title="Aquitaine" label="Aquitaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q126936" start="11013" end="11031" title="Visigothic Kingdom" label="Visigothic Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q244741" start="11660" end="11667" title="viceroy" label="viceroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q173470" start="12231" end="12243" title="Anastasius I Dicorus" label="Anastasius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="12535" end="12554" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q34627" start="12997" end="13006" title="synagogue" label="synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q371670" start="13169" end="13181" title="Amalasuintha" label="Amalasuintha"/>
<link wikidata="Q982066" start="13198" end="13206" title="Eutharic" label="Eutharic"/>
<link wikidata="Q183445" start="13429" end="13437" title="Justin I" label="Justin I"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="13546" end="13555" title="Justinian I" label="Justinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="13766" end="13778" title="Roman Senate" label="Roman Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q102851" start="13902" end="13910" title="Boethius" label="Boethius"/>
<link wikidata="Q631833" start="13944" end="13953" title="Quintus Aurelius Memmius Symmachus" label="Symmachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="14144" end="14152" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q318347" start="14169" end="14178" title="Sigismund of Burgundy" label="Sigismund"/>
<link wikidata="Q83922" start="14546" end="14551" title="Arianism" label="Arian"/>
<link wikidata="Q886997" start="14560" end="14567" title="Godomar" label="Godomar"/>
<link wikidata="Q310962" start="14861" end="14869" title="Hilderic" label="Hilderic"/>
<link wikidata="Q110895" start="15119" end="15128" title="Athalaric" label="Athalaric"/>
<link wikidata="Q371670" start="15161" end="15173" title="Amalasuintha" label="Amalasuintha"/>
<link wikidata="Q199499" start="15626" end="15632" title="Moesia" label="Moesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12289430" start="15682" end="15692" title="Ostrogotho" label="Ostrogotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q318347" start="15738" end="15759" title="Sigismund of Burgundy" label="Sigismund of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6141725" start="15824" end="15835" title="Theodegotha" label="Theodegotha"/>
<link wikidata="Q110884" start="15878" end="15887" title="Alaric II" label="Alaric II"/>
<link wikidata="Q181064" start="15985" end="15994" title="Audofleda" label="Audofleda"/>
<link wikidata="Q371670" start="16102" end="16114" title="Amalasuintha" label="Amalasuintha"/>
<link wikidata="Q110895" start="16186" end="16195" title="Athalaric" label="Athalaric"/>
<link wikidata="Q467123" start="16200" end="16210" title="Matasuntha" label="Matasuntha"/>
<link wikidata="Q312607" start="16240" end="16247" title="Witiges" label="Witiges"/>
<link wikidata="Q741798" start="16299" end="16316" title="Germanus Justinus" label="Germanus Justinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q110895" start="16395" end="16404" title="Athalaric" label="Athalaric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228622" start="17554" end="17559" title="Diocese of the East" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="17689" end="17699" title="Western Roman Empire" label="West Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q159798" start="17715" end="17723" title="Honorius (emperor)" label="Honorius"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218676" start="17886" end="17894" title="Roman aqueduct" label="aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425" start="17915" end="17921" title="Trajan" label="Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q240679" start="18170" end="18178" title="Hercules" label="Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449217" start="18352" end="18368" title="Arian Baptistery" label="Arian Baptistery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521593" start="18557" end="18576" title="Palace of Theodoric" label="Palace of Theodoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q832278" start="18775" end="18813" title="Basilica of Sant&amp;#x27;Apollinare Nuovo" label="Basilica of Sant&amp;#x27;Apollinare Nuovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q174943" start="19302" end="19312" title="Belisarius" label="Belisarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q289427" start="19344" end="19353" title="Mausoleum of Theodoric" label="mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122603" start="19551" end="19557" title="ashlar" label="ashlar"/>
<link wikidata="Q183272" start="19670" end="19676" title="frieze" label="frieze"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907580" start="19769" end="19787" title="Palace of Domitian" label="Palace of Domitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q200642" start="19795" end="19808" title="Palatine Hill" label="Palatine Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="19944" end="19958" title="Senate of Rome" label="Senate of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q944814" start="20023" end="20040" title="Theatre of Pompey" label="Theatre of Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q10285" start="20144" end="20164" title="Colosseum" label="Flavian Amphitheatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q102851" start="20203" end="20211" title="Boethius" label="Boethius"/>
<link wikidata="Q83922" start="21030" end="21058" title="Arianism" label="Arian (nontrinitarian) faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q273665" start="21425" end="21438" title="caesaropapism" label="caesaropapism"/>
<link wikidata="Q183445" start="21780" end="21788" title="Justin I" label="Justin I"/>
<link wikidata="Q160916" start="21881" end="21892" title="Pope John I" label="Pope John I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="22175" end="22187" title="ancient Rome" label="ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425" start="22302" end="22308" title="Trajan" label="Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q46720" start="22313" end="22326" title="Valentinian I" label="Valentinian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224130" start="22683" end="22697" title="legends about Theodoric the Great" label="German legends"/>
<link wikidata="Q335071" start="22787" end="22806" title="John Julius Norwich" label="John Julius Norwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="23065" end="23076" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q105763473" start="23141" end="23163" title="Germanic heroic legend" label="Germanic heroic legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q36724" start="23430" end="23435" title="Attila" label="Etzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q28987" start="23464" end="23473" title="Ermanaric" label="Ermenrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q35218" start="23484" end="23499" title="Old High German" label="Old High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q263158" start="23506" end="23521" title="Hildebrandslied" label="Hildebrandslied"/>
<link wikidata="Q195789" start="23608" end="23620" title="Þiðreks saga" label="Þiðreks saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q8614" start="23702" end="23712" title="Westphalia" label="Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q477973" start="24190" end="24200" title="Gothic War (535–554)" label="Gothic war"/>
<link wikidata="Q465322" start="24435" end="24456" title="Magnus Felix Ennodius" label="Magnus Felix Ennodius"/>
<link wikidata="Q192365" start="24537" end="24548" title="Cassiodorus" label="Cassiodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q432263" start="24639" end="24658" title="Anonymus Valesianus" label="Anonymus Valesianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q103860" start="27165" end="27177" title="Julius Nepos" label="Julius Nepos"/>
<link wikidata="Q152877" start="27512" end="27518" title="Alboin" label="Alboin"/>
<link wikidata="Q83476" start="27521" end="27537" title="Alfred the Great" label="Alfred the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q102851" start="27566" end="27574" title="Boethius" label="Boethius"/>
<link wikidata="Q377507" start="27577" end="27584" title="Ardaric" label="Ardaric"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="27587" end="27598" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q82339" start="27601" end="27609" title="Clovis I" label="Clovis I"/>
<link wikidata="Q28987" start="27612" end="27621" title="Ermanaric" label="Ermanaric"/>
<link wikidata="Q152127" start="27624" end="27632" title="Gaiseric" label="Gaiseric"/>
<link wikidata="Q364200" start="27635" end="27643" title="Hermeric" label="Hermeric"/>
<link wikidata="Q251836" start="27646" end="27677" title="Liutprand, King of the Lombards" label="Liutprand, King of the Lombards"/>
<link wikidata="Q313065" start="27680" end="27689" title="Liuvigild" label="Liuvigild"/>
<link wikidata="Q103333" start="27692" end="27699" title="Odoacer" label="Odoacer"/>
<link wikidata="Q583038" start="27702" end="27721" title="Ostrogothic Kingdom" label="Ostrogothic Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q309845" start="27724" end="27731" title="Ricimer" label="Ricimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q110892" start="27734" end="27745" title="Theodoric I" label="Theodoric I"/>
<link wikidata="Q159707" start="27766" end="27772" title="Totila" label="Totila"/>
<link wikidata="Q22673" start="28239" end="28256" title="Project Gutenberg" label="Project Gutenberg"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31225" wikidata="Q7291779" url="?curid=31225" title="Randolph (ship)">
<text>Randolph was a 664-ton ship-rigged merchant vessel constructed in 1849 in Sunderland. She was one of the First Four Ships that brought settlers to Christchurch, New Zealand.

The Canterbury Association chartered &quot;Randolph&quot;, with Captain William Dale serving as the ship&#x27;s captain. &quot;Randolph&quot; left Gravesend on 4 September 1850, and Plymouth on the night of 7 September 1850. She arrived at Lyttelton 99 days later on 16 December 1850, with 34 cabin passengers, 15 intermediate and 161 steerage passengers.

She departed Port Victoria (Lyttelton) on 10 January 1851, bound for the &quot;Straights of Lombock&quot;.

She was lost on 25 June 1851, on a reef off Amber Island, Mauritius. She had on board a cargo of sugar for London, a large amount of money, and 254 Indian emigrants for Port Louis. Nothing belonging to the vessel could be saved. Mr. Scott, an officer of the Madras Army, swam on shore, but died a moment after reaching it from exhaustion. Two European sailors, nine men (immigrants), ten women and three children were drowned.

&quot;Randolph&quot;″s entry in &quot;Lloyd&#x27;s Register&quot; for 1851 carries the annotation &quot;Wrecked&quot;.

The ship is remembered in the name of a road, Randolph Terrace, in the port of Lyttelton.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1581130" start="23" end="34" title="Full-rigged ship" label="ship-rigged"/>
<link wikidata="Q848944" start="35" end="50" title="merchant vessel" label="merchant vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q188304" start="74" end="84" title="Sunderland" label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453028" start="105" end="121" title="First Four Ships" label="First Four Ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q79990" start="147" end="159" title="Christchurch" label="Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q386520" start="179" end="201" title="Canterbury Association" label="Canterbury Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q676689" start="322" end="331" title="Gravesend" label="Gravesend"/>
<link wikidata="Q43382" start="357" end="365" title="Plymouth" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q911909" start="415" end="424" title="Lyttelton, New Zealand" label="Lyttelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879040" start="545" end="558" title="Lyttelton Harbour" label="Port Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="684" end="696" title="Amber Island" label="Amber Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027" start="698" end="707" title="Mauritius" label="Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="747" end="753" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="788" end="793" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929" start="809" end="819" title="Port Louis" label="Port Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q926030" start="1106" end="1127" title="Lloyd&amp;#x27;s Register" label="Lloyd&amp;#x27;s Register"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31227" wikidata="Q483196" url="?curid=31227" title="Terminator">
<text>Terminator may refer to:
==Science and technology==

===Genetics===
* Terminator (genetics), the end of a gene for transcription
* Terminator technology, proposed methods for restricting the use of genetically modified plants by causing second generation seeds to be sterile

===Astronomy===
* Terminator (solar), a moving line that separates the illuminated side and the dark side of a planetary body
** The lunar terminator, specifically

===Electronics and computers===
* Terminator (electrical), a resistor at the end of a transmission line to prevent signal reflection
* Microsoft Terminator, a program analyzer research project
* Terminator (terminal emulator), a cross-platform GPL terminal emulator
* Statement terminator, used to demarcate the end of an individual statement in a programming language

===Military===
* BMPT Ob&#x27;yekt 199 Ramka, armoured tracked vehicle, designed for tanks support, often nicknamed &quot;Terminator&quot;
* Sukhoi Su-37 Air Superiority Fighter, also called the &quot;Terminator&quot;.

==Entertainment==

===Films and television===
* &quot;Terminator&quot; (franchise), a series of science fiction films and derivative works, starring Arnold Schwarzenegger
** &quot;The Terminator&quot;, a 1984 film by James Cameron that began the franchise
** &quot;&quot;, a 2019 film
** &quot;&quot;, a 2008 TV series 
** Terminator (character), a Terminator cyborg portrayed by Arnold Schwarzenegger
** Terminator (character concept), a fictional class of autonomous killer robots in the franchise
* &quot;The Terminators&quot; (film), a 2009 mockbuster distributed by The Asylum
* Terminator, an elimination gameplay element in the game show &quot;Greed&quot;

===Literature===
* &quot;The Terminators&quot;, a 1971 novel by Berkely Mather
* &quot;The Terminators&quot; (novel), a 1975 Matt Helm novel by Donald Hamilton
* &quot;The Terminator&quot;, a novelization of the 1984 film by Shaun Hutson
* &quot;The Terminator&quot;, another novelization of the 1984 film by Randall Frakes and William Wisher Jr.

===Music===
* &quot;The Terminator&quot; (soundtrack), for the 1984 film
* &quot;Terminator&quot; (King Promise song) (2023)
* &quot;Terminator&quot; (1988), song by metal band Powermad
* &quot;Terminator&quot; (1992 track), darkcore track by Goldie
* &quot;Terminator&quot; (1997), song by Sevendust from the album &quot;Sevendust&quot;

===Games===
* Terminator (&quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot;), a type of Space Marine in the &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; setting
* Many video games based on the 1984 franchise; see List of &quot;Terminator&quot; video games

=== Comics ===
* Terminator (DC Comics) or Deathstroke, a DC comic book supervillain
* Terminator (Marvel Comics), a Space Knight character in Marvel Comics
* Many works based on the 1984 franchise; see List of &quot;Terminator&quot; comics

===Other entertainment===
* Nikki Terminator, robot assistant of magician Rudy Coby
* Terminator, a moving city at the edge of light and dark in the planet Mercury, in Kim Stanley Robinson&#x27;s novels and short stories

==People==
* The Terminator (wrestler) (born 1964), American professional wrestler 
* Arbi Barayev (born 1974–2001), Chechen warlord
* Niels Feijen, (born 1977), Dutch pool player 
* Bosco Ntaganda (born c. 1973), Congolese militia leader and war criminal 
* Anatoly Onoprienko (1959–2013), Ukrainian serial killer
* Tom Henke, an American baseball player
* Jeff Reardon, an American baseball player
* Ariarne Titmus (born 2000), Australian swimmer
*Hermann Maier (born 1972), nicknamed &quot;Herminator&quot;

==Other uses==
* Terminator, a cryptonym for the 2003-2004 Ford Mustang SVT Cobra pony car
* Nike Terminator, a high-top shoe by Nike

==See also==
* Terminaator, Estonian band
* &quot;Terminonatator&quot;, a plesiosaur genus
* Termination (disambiguation)
* Terminatrix (disambiguation)
* Terminus (disambiguation)
* Exterminator (disambiguation)
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q483196" start="0" end="10" title="Terminator" label="Terminator"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116233" start="70" end="91" title="Terminator (genetics)" label="Terminator (genetics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402984" start="131" end="152" title="Terminator technology" label="Terminator technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q331824" start="294" end="312" title="Terminator (solar)" label="Terminator (solar)"/>
<link wikidata="Q331824" start="409" end="425" title="lunar terminator" label="lunar terminator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878250" start="475" end="498" title="Terminator (electrical)" label="Terminator (electrical)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840235" start="576" end="596" title="Microsoft Terminator" label="Microsoft Terminator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7702805" start="636" end="666" title="Terminator (terminal emulator)" label="Terminator (terminal emulator)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155966" start="709" end="729" title="Statement terminator" label="Statement terminator"/>
<link wikidata="Q608789" start="828" end="832" title="BMPT" label="BMPT"/>
<link wikidata="Q459133" start="952" end="964" title="Sukhoi Su-37" label="Sukhoi Su-37"/>
<link wikidata="Q620588" start="1079" end="1113" title="Terminator (franchise)" label="&amp;quot;Terminator&amp;quot; (franchise)"/>
<link wikidata="Q162255" start="1211" end="1225" title="The Terminator" label="The Terminator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976616" start="1354" end="1376" title="Terminator (character)" label="Terminator (character)"/>
<link wikidata="Q551327" start="1436" end="1466" title="Terminator (character concept)" label="Terminator (character concept)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153586" start="1533" end="1567" title="The Terminators (film)" label="&amp;quot;The Terminators&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776292" start="1682" end="1687" title="Greed (game show)" label="Greed"/>
<link wikidata="Q820883" start="1759" end="1773" title="Berkely Mather" label="Berkely Mather"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768498" start="1776" end="1811" title="The Terminators (novel)" label="&amp;quot;The Terminators&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496557" start="1920" end="1932" title="Shaun Hutson" label="Shaun Hutson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291541" start="2004" end="2018" title="Randall Frakes" label="Randall Frakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q769868" start="2023" end="2041" title="William Wisher Jr." label="William Wisher Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q9357438" start="2057" end="2096" title="The Terminator (soundtrack)" label="&amp;quot;The Terminator&amp;quot; (soundtrack)"/>
<link wikidata="Q131582118" start="2118" end="2160" title="Terminator (King Promise song)" label="&amp;quot;Terminator&amp;quot; (King Promise song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153327" start="2220" end="2228" title="Powermad" label="Powermad"/>
<link wikidata="Q507845" start="2286" end="2292" title="Goldie" label="Goldie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413754" start="2365" end="2374" title="Sevendust (album)" label="Sevendust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565663" start="2396" end="2437" title="Terminator (Warhammer 40,000)" label="Terminator (&amp;quot;Warhammer 40,000&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178445" start="2558" end="2600" title="List of Terminator video games" label="List of &amp;quot;Terminator&amp;quot; video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181328" start="2619" end="2641" title="Terminator (DC Comics)" label="Terminator (DC Comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088458" start="2689" end="2715" title="Terminator (Marvel Comics)" label="Terminator (Marvel Comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4455894" start="2805" end="2842" title="List of Terminator comics" label="List of &amp;quot;Terminator&amp;quot; comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377592" start="2872" end="2888" title="Nikki Terminator" label="Nikki Terminator"/>
<link wikidata="Q130779" start="3012" end="3032" title="Kim Stanley Robinson" label="Kim Stanley Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6758280" start="3079" end="3104" title="The Terminator (wrestler)" label="The Terminator (wrestler)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292237" start="3152" end="3164" title="Arbi Barayev" label="Arbi Barayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988992" start="3201" end="3213" title="Niels Feijen" label="Niels Feijen"/>
<link wikidata="Q247250" start="3249" end="3263" title="Bosco Ntaganda" label="Bosco Ntaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q488188" start="3325" end="3343" title="Anatoly Onoprienko" label="Anatoly Onoprienko"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816170" start="3383" end="3392" title="Tom Henke" label="Tom Henke"/>
<link wikidata="Q373657" start="3424" end="3436" title="Jeff Reardon" label="Jeff Reardon"/>
<link wikidata="Q33320896" start="3468" end="3482" title="Ariarne Titmus" label="Ariarne Titmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956" start="3516" end="3529" title="Hermann Maier" label="Hermann Maier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3636" end="3658" title="Ford Mustang SVT Cobra#2003–2004" label="Ford Mustang SVT Cobra"/>
<link wikidata="Q17123360" start="3670" end="3685" title="Nike Terminator" label="Nike Terminator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635555" start="3727" end="3738" title="Terminaator" label="Terminaator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984454" start="3762" end="3776" title="Terminonatator" label="Terminonatator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404880" start="3805" end="3833" title="Termination (disambiguation)" label="Termination (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7702823" start="3836" end="3864" title="Terminatrix (disambiguation)" label="Terminatrix (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q346096" start="3867" end="3892" title="Terminus (disambiguation)" label="Terminus (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422003" start="3895" end="3924" title="Exterminator (disambiguation)" label="Exterminator (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31231" wikidata="Q908714" url="?curid=31231" title="Truth serum">
<text>&quot;Truth serum&quot; is a colloquial name for any of a range of psychoactive drugs used in an effort to obtain information from subjects who are unable or unwilling to provide it otherwise. These include ethanol, scopolamine, 3-quinuclidinyl benzilate, midazolam, flunitrazepam, sodium thiopental, and amobarbital, among others.

Although a variety of such substances have been tested, serious issues have been raised about their use scientifically, ethically and legally. There is currently no drug proven to cause consistent or predictable enhancement of truth-telling. Subjects questioned under the influence of such substances have been found to be suggestible and their memories subject to reconstruction and fabrication. When such drugs have been used in the course of investigating civil and criminal cases, they have not been accepted by Western legal systems and legal experts as genuine investigative tools. In the United States, it has been suggested that their use is a potential violation of the Fifth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution (the right to remain silent). Concerns have also been raised through the European Court of Human Rights arguing that use of a truth serum could be considered a violation of a human right to be free from degrading treatment, or could be considered a form of torture. It has been noted to be a violation of the Inter-American Convention to Prevent and Punish Torture.

&quot;Truth serum&quot; was previously used in the management of psychotic patients in the practice of psychiatry. In a therapeutic context, the controlled administration of intravenous hypnotic medications is called &quot;narcosynthesis&quot; or &quot;narcoanalysis&quot;. Such application was first documented by Dr. William Bleckwenn. Reliability and suggestibility of patients are concerns, and the practice of chemically inducing an involuntary mental state is now widely considered to be a form of torture.

== Active chemical substances ==
Sedatives or hypnotics that alter higher cognitive function include ethanol, scopolamine, 3-quinuclidinyl benzilate, potent short or intermediate acting hypnotic benzodiazepines such as midazolam, flunitrazepam, and various short and ultra-short acting barbiturates, including sodium thiopental (commonly known by the brand name Pentothal) and amobarbital (formerly known as sodium amytal).

== Reliability ==
While there have been many clinical studies of the efficacy of narcoanalysis in interrogation or lie detection, there is dispute whether any of them qualify as a randomized, controlled study, that would meet scientific standards for determining effectiveness.

==Use by country==

===India===
India&#x27;s Central Bureau of Investigation has used intravenous barbiturates for interrogation, often in high-profile cases. One such case was the interrogation of Ajmal Kasab, the only terrorist captured alive by police in the 2008 attacks in Mumbai, India. Kasab was a Pakistani militant and a member of the Lashkar-e-Taiba terrorist group. On 3 May 2010, Kasab was found guilty of 80 offences, including murder, waging war against India, possessing explosives, and other charges. On 6 May 2010, the same trial court sentenced him to death on four counts and to a life sentence on five counts.

The Central Bureau of Investigation also conducted this test on Krishna, a key witness and suspect in the high-profile 2008 Aarushi-Hemraj Murder Case to seek more information from Krishna and also determine his credibility as a witness with key information, yet not known to the investigating authorities. Per unverified various media sources, Krishna had purported to have deemed Hemraj (the prime suspect) as not guilty of Aarushi&#x27;s murder, claiming he [Hemraj] &quot;treated Aarushi like his own daughter&quot;.

On May 5, 2010 the Supreme Court Judge Balasubramaniam in the case &quot;Smt. Selvi vs. State of Karnataka&quot; held that narcoanalysis, polygraph and brain mapping tests were to be allowed with the consent of the accused. The judge stated: &quot;We are of the considered opinion that no individual can be forced and subjected to such techniques involuntarily, and by doing so it amounts to unwarranted intrusion of personal liberty.&quot;

In Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh High Court permitted narcoanalysis in the investigation of a killing of a tiger that occurred in May 2010. The Jhurjhura Tigress at Bandhavgarh National Park, a mother of three cubs, was found dead as a result of being hit by a vehicle. A Special Task Force requested the narcoanalysis testing of four persons, one of whom refused to consent on grounds of potential post-test complications.

=== USSR ===
In 2004, &quot;Novaya Gazeta&quot;, with reference to KGB General Oleg Kalugin, published an article that said that since the end of the 1980s the First and Second Directorates of the KGB had used, in exceptional cases and mostly on foreign citizens, a soluble odourless, colourless and tasteless substance code-named SP-117, an improved successor to similar drugs used by the KGB prior, that was effective in making a subject lose control of oneself 15 minutes after intake. Most importantly, a person who would be given, consecutively, two parts of the drug, i.e. both the &quot;dote&quot; and &quot;antidote&quot;, would have no recollection of what had occurred in between and feel afterward as though he had suddenly fallen asleep, the preferable way to administer the &quot;dote&quot; being in an alcoholic drink, as that would serve as a plausible explanation of the sudden onset of drowsiness.

Other reports state that SP-117 was just a form of concentrated alcohol meant to be added to alcoholic drinks such as champagne.

=== Russian Federation ===
According to the Russian Foreign Intelligence Service (SVR) officer, Alexander Kouzminov, who quit the service in the early 1990s, the officers of SVR′s Directorate S, which runs SVR&#x27;s &quot;illegals&quot;, primarily used the drug to verify fidelity and trustworthiness of their agents who operated overseas, such as Vitaly Yurchenko. According to Alexander Litvinenko, Russian presidential candidate Ivan Rybkin was drugged with the same substance by FSB agents during his kidnapping in 2004.

=== United States ===
Scopolamine was promoted by obstetrician Robert Ernest House as an advance that would prevent false convictions, beginning in 1922. He had noted that women in childbirth who were given scopolamine could answer questions accurately even while in a state of twilight sleep, and were oftentimes &quot;exceedingly candid&quot; in their remarks. House proposed that scopolamine could be used when interrogating suspected criminals. He even arranged to administer scopolamine to prisoners in the Dallas County jail. Both men were believed to be guilty, both denied guilt under scopolamine, and both were eventually acquitted. In 1926, the use of scopolamine was rejected in a court case, by Judge Robert Walker Franklin, who questioned both its scientific origin, and the uncertainty of its effect.

The United States Office of Strategic Services (OSS) experimented with the use of mescaline, scopolamine, and marijuana as possible truth drugs during World War II. They concluded that the effects were not much different from those of alcohol: subjects became more talkative but that did not mean they were more truthful. Like hypnosis, there were also issues of suggestibility and interviewer influence. Cases involving scopolamine resulted in a mixture of testimonies both for and against those suspected, at times directly contradicting each other.

LSD was also considered as a possible truth serum, but found unreliable. During the 1950s and 1960s, the United States Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) carried out a number of investigations including Project MKUltra and Project MKDELTA, which involved illegal use of truth drugs including LSD. A CIA report from 1961, released in 1993, concludes:

In 1963, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled, in &quot;Townsend v. Sain&quot;, that confessions produced as a result of ingestion of truth serum were &quot;unconstitutionally coerced&quot; and therefore inadmissible. The viability of forensic evidence produced from truth sera has been addressed in lower courts – judges and expert witnesses have generally agreed that they are not reliable for lie detection.

In 1967, during his investigation into the assassination of President John F. Kennedy, New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison arranged for his key witness, Perry Russo, to be administered sodium pentothal before being questioned about his knowledge regarding an alleged conspiracy. Russo would later describe &quot;his conditioning by the DA&#x27;s office as a complete brainwashing job.&quot;

In 1995, during the search for evidence that could acquit Andres English-Howard, his defense attorney employed methohexital.

More recently, a judge approved the use of narcoanalysis in the 2012 Aurora, Colorado shooting trial to evaluate whether James Eagan Holmes&#x27;s state of mind was valid for an insanity plea. Judge William Sylvester ruled that prosecutors would be allowed to interrogate Holmes &quot;under the influence of a medical drug designed to loosen him up and get him to talk&quot;, such as sodium amytal, if he filed an insanity plea. The hope was that a &#x27;narcoanalytic interview&#x27; could confirm whether or not he had been legally insane on 20 July, the date of the shootings. It is not known whether such an examination was carried out.

William Shepherd, chair of the criminal justice section of the American Bar Association, stated, with respect to the Holmes case, that use of a &quot;truth drug&quot; as proposed, &quot;to ascertain the veracity of a defendant&#x27;s plea of insanity... would provoke intense legal argument relating to Holmes&#x27;s right to remain silent under the fifth amendment of the US constitution.&quot; Discussing possible effectiveness of such an examination, psychiatrist August Piper stated that &quot;amytal&#x27;s inhibition-lowering effects in no way prompt the subject to offer up true statements or memories.&quot; &quot;Psychology Today&quot; Scott Linfield noted, as per Piper, that &quot;there&#x27;s good reason to believe that truth serums merely lower the threshold for reporting virtually all information, both true and false.&quot;

== See also ==
* Human experimentation
* Microexpression
* Narcotics
* Pharmacological torture
* Polygraph
* Project MKUltra
* Project Chatter
* Project Artichoke
* In vino veritas

== References ==
== External links ==
*Informal demonstration of thiopental (video), &quot;BBC&quot;, 4 October 2013.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q908714" start="6" end="17" title="Truth serum" label="Truth serum"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="207" end="214" title="ethanol" label="ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q337188" start="216" end="227" title="Hyoscine hydrobromide" label="scopolamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q223068" start="229" end="254" title="3-quinuclidinyl benzilate" label="3-quinuclidinyl benzilate"/>
<link wikidata="Q423071" start="256" end="265" title="midazolam" label="midazolam"/>
<link wikidata="Q62947" start="267" end="280" title="flunitrazepam" label="flunitrazepam"/>
<link wikidata="Q410179" start="282" end="299" title="sodium thiopental" label="sodium thiopental"/>
<link wikidata="Q415850" start="305" end="316" title="amobarbital" label="amobarbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q240340" start="1012" end="1027" title="Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fifth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="1035" end="1052" title="U.S. Constitution" label="U.S. Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q196995" start="1058" end="1080" title="Right to silence" label="right to remain silent"/>
<link wikidata="Q122880" start="1126" end="1156" title="European Court of Human Rights" label="European Court of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q132781" start="1310" end="1317" title="torture" label="torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044553" start="1362" end="1417" title="Inter-American Convention to Prevent and Punish Torture" label="Inter-American Convention to Prevent and Punish Torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q170082" start="1485" end="1494" title="psychotic" label="psychotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867" start="1523" end="1533" title="psychiatry" label="psychiatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="1594" end="1605" title="intravenous" label="intravenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q62962" start="1606" end="1614" title="hypnotic" label="hypnotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424030" start="1643" end="1657" title="narcosynthesis" label="narcosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8005631" start="1739" end="1756" title="William Bleckwenn" label="William Bleckwenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q847705" start="1967" end="1975" title="Sedative" label="Sedative"/>
<link wikidata="Q62962" start="1980" end="1988" title="hypnotic" label="hypnotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="2035" end="2042" title="ethanol" label="ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q337188" start="2044" end="2055" title="Hyoscine hydrobromide" label="scopolamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q223068" start="2057" end="2082" title="3-quinuclidinyl benzilate" label="3-quinuclidinyl benzilate"/>
<link wikidata="Q83871" start="2129" end="2144" title="benzodiazepines" label="benzodiazepines"/>
<link wikidata="Q423071" start="2153" end="2162" title="midazolam" label="midazolam"/>
<link wikidata="Q62947" start="2164" end="2177" title="flunitrazepam" label="flunitrazepam"/>
<link wikidata="Q206348" start="2220" end="2232" title="barbiturates" label="barbiturates"/>
<link wikidata="Q410179" start="2244" end="2261" title="sodium thiopental" label="sodium thiopental"/>
<link wikidata="Q415850" start="2311" end="2322" title="amobarbital" label="amobarbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q60920" start="2474" end="2487" title="lie detection" label="lie detection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436668" start="2539" end="2549" title="randomized study" label="randomized"/>
<link wikidata="Q367359" start="2551" end="2567" title="controlled study" label="controlled study"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053734" start="2683" end="2714" title="Central Bureau of Investigation" label="Central Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q69573" start="2836" end="2847" title="Ajmal Kasab" label="Ajmal Kasab"/>
<link wikidata="Q76421" start="2900" end="2912" title="2008 Mumbai attacks" label="2008 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="2916" end="2929" title="Mumbai, India" label="Mumbai, India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310017" start="2943" end="2952" title="Pakistani people" label="Pakistani"/>
<link wikidata="Q736955" start="2982" end="2997" title="Lashkar-e-Taiba" label="Lashkar-e-Taiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q15223630" start="3388" end="3419" title="2008 Noida double murder case" label="2008 Aarushi-Hemraj Murder Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q190767" start="3929" end="3938" title="polygraph" label="polygraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q639842" start="3943" end="3956" title="brain mapping" label="brain mapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="4236" end="4243" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q806310" start="4392" end="4417" title="Bandhavgarh National Park" label="Bandhavgarh National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q170135" start="4680" end="4693" title="Novaya Gazeta" label="Novaya Gazeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="4719" end="4722" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q938110" start="4731" end="4743" title="Oleg Kalugin" label="Oleg Kalugin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031025" start="4812" end="4817" title="First Chief Directorate" label="First"/>
<link wikidata="Q863254" start="5750" end="5778" title="Foreign Intelligence Service (Russia)" label="Foreign Intelligence Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q116249968" start="5921" end="5929" title="Non-official cover" label="illegals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620305" start="6047" end="6063" title="Vitaly Yurchenko" label="Vitaly Yurchenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q87015" start="6078" end="6098" title="Alexander Litvinenko" label="Alexander Litvinenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505420" start="6100" end="6130" title="2004 Russian presidential election" label="Russian presidential candidate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062347" start="6131" end="6142" title="Ivan Rybkin" label="Ivan Rybkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q337188" start="6247" end="6258" title="Hyoscine hydrobromide" label="Scopolamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3716949" start="6503" end="6517" title="twilight sleep" label="twilight sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q111168" start="6737" end="6750" title="Dallas County, Texas" label="Dallas County"/>
<link wikidata="Q658626" start="7059" end="7087" title="Office of Strategic Services" label="Office of Strategic Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q193140" start="7123" end="7132" title="mescaline" label="mescaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q337188" start="7134" end="7145" title="scopolamine" label="scopolamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="7151" end="7160" title="marijuana" label="marijuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7192" end="7204" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146337" start="7276" end="7283" title="alcohol (drug)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q8609" start="7368" end="7376" title="hypnosis" label="hypnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23118" start="7594" end="7597" title="LSD" label="LSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="7713" end="7740" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q815614" start="7796" end="7811" title="Project MKUltra" label="Project MKUltra"/>
<link wikidata="Q815614" start="7816" end="7831" title="Project MKDELTA" label="Project MKDELTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="7957" end="7975" title="U.S. Supreme Court" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q19107021" start="7992" end="8008" title="Townsend v. Sain" label="Townsend v. Sain"/>
<link wikidata="Q193484" start="8391" end="8433" title="assassination of President John F. Kennedy" label="assassination of President John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="8435" end="8446" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q452765" start="8465" end="8477" title="Jim Garrison" label="Jim Garrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q16266723" start="8508" end="8519" title="Perry Russo" label="Perry Russo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321697" start="8622" end="8632" title="John F. Kennedy assassination conspiracy theories" label="conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q119039509" start="8805" end="8826" title="Andres English-Howard" label="Andres English-Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q851813" start="8858" end="8870" title="methohexital" label="methohexital"/>
<link wikidata="Q202512" start="8937" end="8967" title="2012 Aurora, Colorado shooting" label="2012 Aurora, Colorado shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196106" start="8994" end="9012" title="James Holmes (mass murderer)" label="James Eagan Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q705920" start="9051" end="9064" title="Insanity defense" label="insanity plea"/>
<link wikidata="Q463465" start="9578" end="9602" title="American Bar Association" label="American Bar Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331083" start="10374" end="10395" title="Human experimentation" label="Human experimentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q559811" start="10398" end="10413" title="Microexpression" label="Microexpression"/>
<link wikidata="Q940" start="10416" end="10425" title="Narcotics" label="Narcotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7180791" start="10428" end="10451" title="Pharmacological torture" label="Pharmacological torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q190767" start="10454" end="10463" title="Polygraph" label="Polygraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q815614" start="10466" end="10481" title="Project MKUltra" label="Project MKUltra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249017" start="10484" end="10499" title="Project Chatter" label="Project Chatter"/>
<link wikidata="Q661875" start="10502" end="10519" title="Project Artichoke" label="Project Artichoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637711" start="10522" end="10537" title="In vino veritas" label="In vino veritas"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="10630" end="10633" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31232" wikidata="Q3579" url="?curid=31232" title="Tripoli, Libya">
<text>Tripoli, historically known as Tripoli-of-the-West, is the capital and largest city of Libya, with a population of about 1.317 million people in 2021. It is located in the northwest of Libya on the edge of the desert, on a point of rocky land projecting into the Mediterranean Sea and forming a bay. It includes the port of Tripoli and the country&#x27;s largest commercial and manufacturing center. It is also the site of the University of Tripoli.

Tripoli was founded in the 7th century BC by the Phoenicians, who gave it the Libyco-Berber name (), before passing into the hands of the Greek rulers of Cyrenaica as Oea (). Due to the city&#x27;s long history, there are many sites of archeological significance in Tripoli. &quot;Tripoli&quot; may also refer to the (top-level administrative division in the Libyan system), the Tripoli District.

==Name==
In the Arab world, Tripoli is also known as &quot;Tripoli-of-the-West&quot; (), to distinguish it from Tripoli, Lebanon, known in Arabic as (), meaning &#x27;Tripoli of the Levant&#x27;. It is affectionately called &quot;The Mermaid of the Mediterranean&quot; (), describing its turquoise waters and whitewashed buildings.

The name derives from Ancient Greek (), from , referring to Oea, Sabratha and Leptis Magna. The city of Oea was the only one of the three to survive antiquity, and became known as Tripoli, within a wider region known as Tripolitania. Neighboring Sabratha was sometimes referred to by sailors as &quot;Old Tripoli&quot;.

==History==
===Oea and Tripolitania===
The city was founded in the 7th century BC by the Phoenicians, who gave it the Libyco-Berber name Oyat (Punic: 𐤅𐤉‬‬𐤏‬𐤕‬, &quot;wyʿt&quot;), suggesting that the city may have been built upon an existing native Berber city. The Phoenicians were probably attracted to the site by its natural harbor, flanked on the western shore by the small, easily defensible peninsula, on which they established their colony. The city then passed into the hands of the Greek rulers of Cyrenaica as Oea (Greek: Ὀία, &quot;Oía&quot;). Cyrene was a colony on the North African shore, a bit east of Tambroli and halfway to Egypt. The Carthaginians later wrested it again from the Greeks.

By the later half of the 2nd century BC, it belonged to the Romans, who included it in their province of Africa, and gave it the name of &quot;Regio Syrtica&quot;. Around the beginning of the 3rd century AD, it became known as the Regio Tripolitana, meaning &quot;region of the three cities&quot;, namely Oea (&quot;i.e.&quot;, modern Tripoli), Sabratha and Leptis Magna. It was probably raised to the rank of a separate province by Septimius Severus, who was a native of Leptis Magna.

In spite of centuries of Roman habitation, the only visible Roman remains, apart from scattered columns and capitals (usually integrated in later buildings), is the Arch of Marcus Aurelius from the 2nd century AD. The fact that Tripoli has been continuously inhabited, unlike &quot;e.g.&quot;, Sabratha and Leptis Magna, has meant that the inhabitants have either quarried material from older buildings (destroying them in the process) or built on top of them, burying them beneath the streets, where they remain largely unexcavated.

There is evidence to suggest that the Tripolitania region was in some economic decline during the 5th and 6th centuries, in part due to the political unrest spreading across the Mediterranean world in the wake of the collapse of the Western Roman Empire, as well as pressure from the invading Vandals. It is recorded by Ibn Abd al-Hakam that during the siege of Tripoli by a general of the Rashidun Caliphate named Amr ibn al-As, seven of his soldiers from the clan of Madhlij, sub branch of Kinana, unintentionally found a section on the western side of Tripoli beach that was not walled during their hunting routine. Those seven soldiers then managed to infiltrate through this way without being detected by the city guards, then managed to incite a riot within the city while shouting Takbir, causing the confused Byzantine garrison soldiers to think the Muslim forces were already inside in the city and flee towards their ship leaving Tripoli, thus allowing Amr to subdue the city easily.

According to al-Baladhuri, Tripoli was, unlike Western North Africa, taken by the Muslims very early after Alexandria, in the 22nd year of the Hijra, that is between 30 November 642 and 18 November 643 AD. Following the conquest, Tripoli was ruled by dynasties based in Cairo, Egypt (first the Fatimids, Banu Khazrun, and later the Mamluks), and Kairouan in Ifriqiya (the Arab Fihrid, Muhallabid, and Aghlabid dynasties). For some time it was a part of the Berber Almohad Caliphate, Hafsid Kingdom, and Banu Thabit dynasty.

===16th to 19th centuries===
In 1510, the city was conquered by Pedro Navarro, Count of Oliveto for Spain. In 1530, it was assigned together with Malta to the Knights of St. John, who had been expelled by the Ottoman Turks from their stronghold on the island of Rhodes. Finding themselves in hostile territory, the Knights reinforced the city walls and built defenses. Though built on top of older buildings (possibly including a Roman public bath), much of the earliest defensive structures of the Tripoli castle (or &quot;Assaraya al-Hamra&quot;, &quot;i.e.&quot;, the &quot;Red Castle&quot;) are attributed to the Knights of St John.

Having previously combated piracy from their base on Rhodes, the Knights were given charge of the city to prevent it from being retaken by Barbary pirates. The disruption the pirates caused to the Christian shipping lanes in the Mediterranean had been one of the main incentives for the Spanish conquest of the city.

The knights held the city until the Siege of Tripoli in 1551 and their surrender to the Ottomans, led by the Muslim Turkish commander Turgut Reis. Turgut Reis served as pasha of Tripoli. During his rule, he adorned and built up the city, making it one of the most impressive cities along the North African Coast. Turgut was buried in Tripoli after his death in 1565. His body was taken from Malta, where he had fallen during the Ottoman siege of the island, to a tomb in the Sidi Darghut Mosque which he had established close to his palace in Tripoli. The palace has since disappeared (supposedly it was situated between the so-called &quot;Ottoman prison&quot; and the Arch of Marcus Aurelius), but the mosque, along with his tomb, still stands, close to the Bab Al-Bahr gate.

After the capture by the Ottoman Turks, Tripoli once again became a base of operation for Barbary pirates. One of several Western attempts to dislodge them again was a Royal Navy attack under John Narborough in 1675, of which a vivid eye-witness account has survived. Effective Ottoman rule during this period (1551–1711) was often hampered by the local Janissary corps. Intended to function as enforcers of local administration, the captain of the Janissaries and his cronies were often the &quot;de facto&quot; rulers.

In 1711, Ahmed Karamanli, a Janissary officer of Turkish origin, killed the Ottoman governor, the &quot;Pasha&quot;, and established himself as ruler of the Tripolitania region. By 1714, he had asserted a sort of semi-independence from the Ottoman Sultan, heralding in the Karamanli dynasty. The Pashas of Tripoli were expected to pay a regular tributary tax to the Sultan but were in all other aspects rulers of an independent kingdom. This order of things continued under the rule of his descendants, accompanied by the brazen piracy and blackmailing until 1835 when the Ottoman Empire took advantage of an internal struggle and re-established its authority.

The Ottoman province (&quot;vilayet&quot;) of Tripoli (including the dependent &quot;sanjak&quot; of Cyrenaica) lay along the southern shore of the Mediterranean between Tunisia in the west and Egypt in the east. Besides the city itself, the area included Cyrenaica (the Barca plateau), the chain of oases in the Aujila depression, Fezzan and the oases of Ghadames and Ghat, separated by sandy and stony wastelands. A 16th century Chinese source mentioned Tripoli and described its agricultural and textile products.

===Barbary Wars (1801 - 1815)===

In the early part of the 19th century, the regency at Tripoli, owing to its piratical practices, was twice involved in war with the United States. In May 1801, the pasha demanded an increase in the tribute ($83,000) which the U.S. government had been paying since 1796 for the protection of their commerce from piracy under the 1796 Treaty with Tripoli. The demand was refused by third President Thomas Jefferson, and a naval force was sent from the United States to blockade Tripoli.

The First Barbary War (1801–1805) dragged on for four years. In 1803, Tripolitan fighters captured the U.S. Navy heavy frigate &quot;Philadelphia&quot; and took its commander, Captain William Bainbridge, and the entire crew as prisoners. This was after the &quot;Philadelphia&quot; was run aground when the captain tried to navigate too close to the port of Tripoli. After several hours aground and Tripolitan gun boats firing upon the &quot;Philadelphia&quot;, though none ever struck the &quot;Philadelphia&quot;, Captain Bainbridge made the decision to surrender. The &quot;Philadelphia&quot; was later turned against the Americans and anchored in Tripoli Harbor as a gun battery while her officers and crew were held prisoners in Tripoli. The following year, U.S. Navy Lieutenant Stephen Decatur led a successful daring nighttime raid to retake and burn the warship rather than see it remain in enemy hands. Decatur&#x27;s men set fire to the &quot;Philadelphia&quot; and escaped.

A notable incident in the war was the expedition undertaken by diplomatic Consul William Eaton with the objective of replacing the pasha with an elder brother living in exile, who had promised to accede to all the wishes of the United States. Eaton, at the head of a mixed force of US Soldiers, Sailors, and Marines, along with Greek, Arab and Turkish mercenaries numbering approximately 500, marched across the Egyptian / Libyan desert from Alexandria, Egypt and with the aid of three American warships, succeeded in capturing Derna. Soon afterward, on 3 June 1805, peace was concluded. The pasha ended his demands and received $60,000 as ransom for the &quot;Philadelphia&quot; prisoners under the 1805 Treaty with Tripoli.

In 1815, in consequence of further outrages and due to the humiliation of the earlier defeat, Captains Bainbridge and Stephen Decatur, at the head of an American squadron, again visited Tripoli and forced the pasha to comply with the demands of the United States. See Second Barbary War.

===Late Ottoman era (1835–1912)===
In 1835, the Ottomans took advantage of a local civil war to reassert their direct authority. After that date, Tripoli was under the direct control of the Sublime Porte. Rebellions in 1842 and 1844 were unsuccessful. After the French occupation of Tunisia (1881), the Ottomans increased their garrison in Tripoli considerably.

===Italian era (1912–1947)===
Italy had long claimed that Tripoli fell within its zone of influence and that Italy had the right to preserve order within the state. Under the pretext of protecting its own citizens living in Tripoli from the Ottoman government, it declared war against the Ottomans on 29 September 1911, and announced its intention of annexing Tripoli. On 1 October 1911, a naval battle was fought at Prevesa, Greece, and three Ottoman vessels were destroyed.

By the Treaty of Lausanne, Italian sovereignty over Tripolitania and Cyrenaica was acknowledged by the Ottomans, although the caliph was permitted to exercise religious authority. Italy officially granted autonomy after the war, but gradually occupied the region. Originally administered as part of a single colony, Tripoli and its surrounding province were a separate colony from 26 June 1927 to 3 December 1934, when all Italian possessions in North Africa were merged into one colony. By 1938, Tripoli had 108,240 inhabitants, including 39,096 Italians.

Tripoli underwent a huge architectural and urbanistic improvement under Italian rule: the first thing the Italians did was to create in the early 1920s a sewage system (that until then it lacked) and a modern hospital.

In the coast of the province was built in 1937–1938 a section of the Litoranea Balbia, a road that went from Tripoli and Tunisia&#x27;s frontier to the border of Egypt. The car tag for the Italian province of Tripoli was &quot;TL&quot;.

Furthermore, in 1927, the Italians founded the Tripoli International Fair, with the goal of promoting Tripoli&#x27;s economy. This is the oldest trade fair in Africa. The so-called &quot;Fiera internazionale di Tripoli&quot; was one of the main international &quot;Fairs&quot; in the colonial world in the 1930s, and was internationally promoted together with the Tripoli Grand Prix as a showcase of Italian Libya.

The Italians created the Tripoli Grand Prix, an international motor racing event first held in 1925 on a racing circuit outside Tripoli. The Tripoli Grand Prix took place until 1940. The first airport in Libya, the Mellaha Air Base was built by the Italian Air Force in 1923 near the Tripoli racing circuit. The airport is currently called Mitiga International Airport.

Tripoli even had a railway station with some small railway connections to nearby cities, when in August 1941 the Italians started to build a new railway (with a gauge, like the one used in Egypt and Tunisia) between Tripoli and Benghazi. But the war stopped the construction the next year.

Tripoli was controlled by Italy until 1943 when the provinces of Tripolitania and Cyrenaica were captured by Allied forces. The city fell to troops of the British Eighth Army on 23 January 1943. Tripoli was then governed by the British until independence in 1951. Under the terms of the 1947 peace treaty with the Allies, Italy relinquished all claims to Libya.

===Gaddafi era (1969–2011)===
Colonel Muammar Gaddafi became leader of Libya on 1 September 1969 after a successful coup d&#x27;état.

On 15 April 1986, U.S. President Ronald Reagan ordered major bombing raids, dubbed Operation El Dorado Canyon, against Tripoli and Benghazi, killing 45 Libyan military and government personnel as well as 15 civilians. This strike followed US interception of telex messages from Libya&#x27;s East Berlin embassy suggesting the involvement of Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi in a bomb explosion on 5 April in West Berlin&#x27;s La Belle discothèque, a nightclub frequented by US servicemen. Among the alleged fatalities of the 15 April retaliatory attack by the United States was Gaddafi&#x27;s adopted daughter, Hana Gaddafi.

The United Nations sanctions against Libya imposed in April 1992 under Security Council Resolution 748 were lifted in September 2003, which increased traffic through the Port of Tripoli and through airports in Libya. This lifting of the resolution had a positive impact on the city&#x27;s economy allowing for more goods to enter the city.

===Libyan Civil War (2011)===

In February and March 2011, Tripoli witnessed intense anti-government protests and violent government responses resulting in hundreds killed and wounded. The city&#x27;s Green Square was the scene of some of the protests. The anti-Gaddafi protests were eventually crushed, and Tripoli was the site of pro-Gaddafi rallies.

The city defenses loyal to Gaddafi included the military headquarters at Bab al-Aziziyah (where Gaddafi&#x27;s main residence was located) and the Mitiga International Airport. At the latter, on 13 March, Ali Atiyya, a colonel of the Libyan Air Force, defected and joined the revolution.

In late February, rebel forces took control of Zawiya, a city approximately to the west of Tripoli, thus increasing the threat to pro-Gaddafi forces in the capital. During the subsequent battle of Zawiya, loyalist forces besieged the city and eventually recaptured it by 10 March.

As the 2011 military intervention in Libya commenced on 19 March to enforce a U.N. no-fly zone over the country, the city once again came under air attack. It was the second time that Tripoli was bombed since the 1986 U.S. airstrikes, and the second time since the 1986 airstrike that bombed Bab al-Azizia, Gaddafi&#x27;s heavily fortified compound.

In July and August, Libyan online revolutionary communities posted tweets and updates on attacks by rebel fighters on pro-government vehicles and checkpoints. In one such attack, Saif al-Islam Gaddafi and Abdullah Senussi were targets. The government, however, denied revolutionary activity inside the capital.

Several months after the initial uprising, rebel forces in the Nafusa Mountains advanced towards the coast, retaking Zawiya and reaching Tripoli on 21 August. On 21 August, the symbolic Green Square, immediately renamed Martyrs&#x27; Square by the rebels, was taken under rebel control and pro-Gaddafi posters were torn down and burned.

During a radio address on 1 September, Gaddafi declared that the capital of the Great Socialist People&#x27;s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya had been moved from Tripoli to Sirte, after rebels had taken control of Tripoli.

In August and September 2014, Islamist armed groups extended their control of central Tripoli. The House of Representatives parliament set up operations on a Greek car ferry in Tobruk. A rival New General National Congress parliament continued to operate in Tripoli.

===Recent developments===
The 2022 Tripoli clashes and 2023 Tripoli clashes continued to disrupt the city.

==Law and government==
Tripoli and its surrounding suburbs all lie within the Tripoli sha&#x27;biyah (district). In accordance with Libya&#x27;s former Jamahiriya political system, Tripoli comprises Local People&#x27;s Congresses where, in theory, the city&#x27;s population discuss different matters and elect their own people&#x27;s committee; at present there are 29 Local People&#x27;s Congresses. In reality, the former revolutionary committees severely limited the democratic process by closely supervising committee and congress elections at the branch and district levels of governments, Tripoli being no exception.

Tripoli is sometimes referred to as &quot;the de jure capital of Libya&quot; because none of the country&#x27;s ministries are actually located in the capital. Even the former National General People&#x27;s Congress was held annually in the city of Sirte rather than in Tripoli. As part of a radical decentralization program undertaken by Gaddafi in September 1988, all General People&#x27;s Committee secretariats (ministries), except those responsible for foreign liaison (foreign policy and international relations) and information, were moved outside Tripoli. According to diplomatic sources, the former Secretariat for Economy and Trade was moved to Benghazi; the Secretariat for Health to Kufra; and the remainder, excepting one, to Sirte, Muammar Gaddafi&#x27;s birthplace. In early 1993 it was announced that the Secretariat for Foreign Liaison and International Co-operation was to be moved to Ra&#x27;s Lanuf. In October 2011, Libya fell to The National Transitional Council (N.T.C.), which took full control, abolishing the Gaddafi-era system of national and local government.

==Geography==

Tripoli lies at the western extremity of Libya close to the Tunisian border, on the continent of Africa. Over a thousand kilometers (621 miles) separates Tripoli from Libya&#x27;s second largest city, Benghazi. Coastal oases alternate with sandy areas and lagoons along the shores of Tripolitania for more than . The city lies about 70 kilometers north from the Nafusa Mountains, the source of seasonal rivers like Wadi Mejenin, which has a dam to collect seasonal water flows.

===Administrative division===
Until 2007, the &quot;Sha&#x27;biyah&quot; included the city, its suburbs and their immediate surroundings. In older administrative systems and throughout history, there existed a province (&quot;muhafazah&quot;), state (&quot;wilayah&quot;) or city-state with a much larger area (though not constant boundaries), which is sometimes mistakenly referred to as Tripoli but more appropriately should be called Tripolitania.

As a District, Tripoli borders the following districts:
* Murqub – east
* Jabal al Gharbi – south
* Jafara – southwest
* Zawiya – west

===Climate===
Tripoli has a hot semi-arid climate (Köppen: &quot;BSh&quot;) with hot and dry, prolonged summers and relatively wet mild winters. Although virtually rainless, summers are hot and muggy with temperatures that often exceed ; average July temperatures are between . In December, temperatures have reached as low as , but the average remains at between . The average annual rainfall is less than . Snowfall has occurred in past years.

The rainfall can be very erratic. Epic floods in 1945 left Tripoli underwater for several days, but two years later an unprecedented drought caused the loss of thousands of head of cattle. Deficiency in rainfall is no doubt reflected in an absence of permanent rivers or streams in the city as is indeed true throughout the entire country. The allocation of limited water is considered of sufficient importance to warrant the existence of the Secretariat of Dams and Water Resources, and damaging a source of water can be penalized by a heavy fine or imprisonment.

The Great Manmade River, a network of pipelines that transport water from the desert to the coastal cities, supplies Tripoli with its water. The grand scheme was initiated by Gaddafi in 1982.

Martyrs&#x27; Square, located near the waterfront is scattered with palm trees, the most abundant plant used for landscaping in the city. The Tripoli Zoo, located south of the city center, is a large reserve of plants, trees and open green spaces and was the country&#x27;s biggest zoo. The zoo was forced to shut for safety reasons due to the Libyan Civil War, with many animals becoming more and more traumatised and distressed. After the overthrow of Muammar Gaddafi, the BBC published a short news film detailing the problems the zoo now faced, from a lack of money to feed the animals, to a fragile security system. The animals, the BBC said, were recovering slowly and returning to normal.

====Climate change====
A 2019 paper published in PLOS One estimated that under Representative Concentration Pathway 4.5, a &quot;moderate&quot; scenario of climate change where global warming reaches ~ by 2100, the climate of Tripoli in the year 2050 would most closely resemble the current climate of Taiz. The annual temperature would increase by , and the temperature of the warmest month by , while the temperature of the coldest month would increase by . According to Climate Action Tracker, the current warming trajectory appears consistent with , which closely matches RCP 4.5.

==Economy==

Tripoli is one of the main hubs of Libya&#x27;s economy along with Misrata. It is the leading center of banking, finance and communication in the country and is one of the leading commercial and manufacturing cities in Libya. Many of the country&#x27;s largest corporations locate their headquarters and home offices in Tripoli as well as the majority of international companies.

Major manufactured goods include processed food, textiles, construction materials, clothing and tobacco products. Since the lifting of sanctions against Libya in 1999 and again in 2003, Tripoli has seen a rise in foreign investment as well as an increase in tourism. Increased traffic has also been recorded in the city&#x27;s port as well as Libya&#x27;s main international airport, Tripoli International Airport.

The city is home to the Tripoli International Fair, an international industrial, agricultural and commercial event located on Omar Muktar Avenue. One of the active members of the Global Association of the Exhibition Industry (UFI), located in the French capital Paris, the international fair is organized annually and takes place from 2–12 April. Participation averages around 30 countries as well as more than 2000 companies and organizations.

Since the rise in tourism and influx of foreign visitors, there has been an increased demand for hotels in the city. To cater for these increased demands, the Corinthia Bab Africa Hotel located in the central business district was constructed in 2003 and is the largest hotel in Libya. Other high end hotels in Tripoli include the Al Waddan Intercontinental and the Tripoli Radisson Blu Hotel as well as others.

Nokia Solutions and Networks, a subsidiary of Finnish giant Nokia operates a technical facility in Tripoli.

Companies with head offices in Tripoli include Afriqiyah Airways and Libyan Airlines. Buraq Air has its head office on the grounds of Mitiga International Airport.

==Architecture==
The city&#x27;s old town, the Medina, mostly took on its current form and appearance during the Ottoman period (16th century and after) and in particular during the period of Karamanli rule. Many ancient Roman columns can be found re-used in various historical buildings in the city.

The city walls were rebuilt and modified many times from the Roman period up to the Ottoman period. Their final form, which determined the overall pentagonal layout of the Medina today, dates from 16th century, when the Ottomans refortified the town. The city historically had at least three gates: Bab Hawwara to the southeast (probably Bab al-Mensha today), Bab Zenata (originally Bab al-Ashdar) to the west, and Bab al-Bahr to the north (close to the sea). Following later demolitions, what remains of the walls today are a section along the southwest flank of the Medina and another section to the southeast.

The oldest Islamic monument in Tripoli is the al-Naqah Mosque, probably first built by the Fatimid caliph al-Mu&#x27;izz in 973 but possibly even older. It was renovated or rebuilt in the early 17th century. Most other mosques in the city date in their current form to the Ottoman era. They generally have a hypostyle form with columns supporting multiple domes. The largest ones include the Mosque of Darghut Pasha (completed in 1556) and the Mosque of Ahmad Pasha al-Karamanli (completed ). In addition to the main prayer space, both of these mosques are accompanied by a complex of other buildings such as madrasas, bathhouses, markets (&quot;suq&quot;s), and the mausoleums of their eponymous founders. Other notable mosques in the city include the Mosque of Sidi Salem (built in the late 15th century and restored in 1670), the Mosque of Mahmud Khaznadar (1680), the Mosque of Shai&#x27;b al-Ain (1699), and the Gurgi Mosque (1834).

The earliest recorded madrasa in the city was the al-Mustansiriyya Madrasa built between 1257 and 1260, but it has not survived. Today, the Madrasa of Uthman Pasha (1654) is one of the most notable preserved examples of this type of building. Its main component is a square courtyard surrounded by vaulted galleries and small rooms where students lived. Attached to the northeast corner of the building are two square domed chambers, with the smaller one serving as a mosque and the larger one housing the tombs of Uthman Pasha and others.

Of the many hammams (bathhouses) that once existed in the city, only three notable examples remain today: the Hammam al-Kabir (&quot;Great Bath&quot;), of which only a large domed chamber survives, the Hammam al-Hilqa, which was still in use in the late 20th century, and the Hammam of Darghut Pasha, built in the 17th century next to the mosque of the same name.The Medina also preserves urban caravanserais ( in Arabic, plural: ) from the Ottoman period. These generally consist of a two-storey building centered around a courtyard. The first floor was usually used for storage while the second floor was for shops. The historic houses in the city also have a similar form, with multiple stories and an internal courtyard. They are roofed with vaults or flat wooden roofs. Their decoration can consist of carved stucco and tilework.

A clock tower, 18 meters tall, was built in 1866–70 by the Ottoman governor and is still one of the city&#x27;s landmarks.

Under Italian colonial rule, various buildings were constructed in an Italianate style. These include, among others, the Galleria De Bono. The Tripoli Cathedral (now a mosque) was also built in this period. There are a number of buildings that were constructed by the Italian colonial rulers and later demolished under Gaddafi. They included the Royal Miramare Theatre, next to the Red Castle, and Tripoli Railway Central Station.

==Culture==
The Red Castle of Tripoli (&quot;Assaraya al-Hamra&quot;), a vast palace complex with numerous courtyards, dominates the city skyline and is located on the outskirts of the Medina. There are some classical statues and fountains from the Ottoman period scattered around the castle. It houses the Red Castle Museum.

==Places of worship==
Among the places of worship, there are predominantly Muslim mosques. There are also Christian churches and temples: Apostolic Vicariate of Tripoli (Catholic Church), Coptic Orthodox Church, Protestant churches, Evangelical Churches.

==Education==
The largest university in Tripoli, the University of Tripoli, is a public university providing free education to the city&#x27;s inhabitants. Private universities and colleges have also begun to crop up in the last few years.

International schools:
* Trafalgar International School Tripoli
* Lycée Français de Tripoli
* Deutsche Schule Tripolis
* Scuola Italiana Al Maziri
* Russian Embassy School in Tripoli
* British School Tripoli
* American School of Tripoli
* ISM International School
* Ladybird International School
* Tripoli International School
* Tripoli World Academy
* Global Knowledge School
* مدرسة المعرفة الدولية السراج

==Sports==
Football is the most popular sport in the Libyan capital. Tripoli is home of the most prominent football clubs in Libya including Al Madina, Al Ahly Tripoli and Al-Ittihad Tripoli. Other sports clubs based in Tripoli include Al Wahda Tripoli and Addahra.

The city also played host to the Italian Super Cup in 2002. The 2017 Africa Cup of Nations were to be played in Libya, three of the venues were supposed to be in Tripoli, but it was cancelled due to the ongoing conflict of the Second Libyan Civil War.

Tripoli hosted the final games of the official 2009 African Basketball Championship.

==Transport==
Two trans-African automobile routes pass through Tripoli:
* Cairo-Dakar Highway
* Tripoli-Cape Town Highway

Tripoli International Airport was the largest airport in Tripoli and Libya before being destroyed during the second Libyan civil war in 2014. Tripoli has since been served by a smaller local airport Mitiga International Airport, which is currently the largest airport in Libya.

In July 2014, the Tripoli international Airport was destroyed, following the Battle of Tripoli Airport, when Zintani militias in charge of security were attacked by Islamist militias of the GNC, code naming the operation &#x27;Libya Dawn&#x27; also known as &quot;Libya Dawn Militias&quot;, led by Misurati militia general Salah Badi. The event happened after secular Zintani militias were accused with claims of smuggling drugs, alcohol and illegal items, known to have past ties with the Gaddafi Regime. Libya&#x27;s Mufti Sadiq al Ghariani has praised the Libya Dawn Operation.

The result of the battle for Tripoli&#x27;s central airport was its complete destruction with 90% of the facilities incapacitated, or burned down with an unknown estimate Billions of dollars in Damage, with another 10 or so planes destroyed. The airport was shelled with Grad rockets with reports of the Air Traffic Control tower completely destroyed, including the main reception building completely wrecked. Surrounding civilian residential areas and infrastructure, of which include Bridges, Electricity equipment, water equipment, and roads were also damaged in the fighting. Oil storage tankers containing large reserves of Kerosene fuels, gases and related chemicals were burnt and large plumes of smoke rose into the air.

Reconstruction efforts are underway with the GNA giving a contract amounting to $78 million to an Italian firm &#x27;Emaco Group&#x27; or &quot;Aeneas Consorzio&quot;, to rebuild the destroyed facilities. All flights have been diverted to ex-military base known as Mitiga International Airport as of 2017.

Tripoli is the interim destination of a railway from Sirte under construction in 2007.

==Gallery==
==International relations==
Sister cities:&lt;br&gt;
 Belgrade, Serbia&lt;br&gt;
 Belo Horizonte, Brazil (2003)&lt;br&gt;
 Madrid, Spain&lt;br&gt;
 Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina (1976)

==See also==

* European enclaves in North Africa before 1830
* Libyan Civil War
* Barbary treaties
* Gran Premio di Tripoli
==Notes==
==References==

* Includes text from &quot;Collier&#x27;s New Encyclopedia&quot; (1921).

==Further reading==

* London, Joshua E. (2005). &quot;Victory in Tripoli – How America&#x27;s War with the Barbary Pirates Established the U.S. Navy and Shaped a Nation&quot; New Jersey: John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc.
* Nora Lafi (2002). &quot;Une ville du Maghreb entre Ancien Régime et réformes ottomanes. Genèse des institutions municipales à Tripoli de Barbarie (1795–1911)&quot;. Paris: L&#x27;Harmattan. 305 p. Amamzon.fr.
* Miss Tully (1816) &quot;Letters written during a ten-year&#x27;s residence at the Court of Tripoli, 1783–1795&quot;, with a new Introduction by Caroline Stone. (Hardinge Simpole, 2008). Hardinge Simpole – Travellers in the Wider Levant Series.
* Journal of Libyan Studies 3, 1 (2002) p. 59–68: &quot;Local Elites and Italian Town Planning Procedures in Early Colonial Tripoli (1911–1912)&quot; by Denis Bocquet and Nora Lafi http://halshs.archives-ouvertes.fr/docs/00/12/82/40/PDF/lafi-bocquet_local_elites.pdf

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="0" end="7" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="31" end="50" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli-of-the-West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="59" end="66" title="capital city" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="87" end="92" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q8514" start="210" end="216" title="desert" label="desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="263" end="280" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q58230" start="316" end="331" title="port of Tripoli" label="port of Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529518" start="427" end="448" title="University of Tripoli" label="University of Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q25340" start="478" end="492" title="7th century BC" label="7th century BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="500" end="509" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823174" start="529" end="542" title="Libyco-Berber" label="Libyco-Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="605" end="614" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994812" start="618" end="621" title="Oea" label="Oea"/>
<link wikidata="Q32837" start="830" end="846" title="Tripoli District, Libya" label="Tripoli District"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="865" end="875" title="Arab world" label="Arab world"/>
<link wikidata="Q168954" start="961" end="977" title="Tripoli, Lebanon" label="Tripoli, Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="1031" end="1037" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="1204" end="1217" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q192918" start="1247" end="1255" title="Sabratha" label="Sabratha"/>
<link wikidata="Q191504" start="1260" end="1272" title="Leptis Magna" label="Leptis Magna"/>
<link wikidata="Q192435" start="1402" end="1414" title="Tripolitania" label="Tripolitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="1592" end="1601" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823174" start="1621" end="1634" title="Libyco-Berber" label="Libyco-Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q535958" start="1646" end="1651" title="Punic language" label="Punic"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="1751" end="1757" title="Berbers" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q34763" start="1900" end="1909" title="peninsula" label="peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="2010" end="2019" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="2028" end="2033" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="2144" end="2149" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383747" start="2155" end="2168" title="Carthaginians" label="Carthaginians"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="2201" end="2207" title="Greeks" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="2270" end="2276" title="Ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q181238" start="2315" end="2321" title="Africa Province" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="2414" end="2416" title="Anno Domini" label="AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q3716754" start="2441" end="2458" title="Tripolitania (Roman province)" label="Regio Tripolitana"/>
<link wikidata="Q192918" start="2555" end="2563" title="Sabratha" label="Sabratha"/>
<link wikidata="Q191504" start="2568" end="2580" title="Leptis Magna" label="Leptis Magna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442" start="2643" end="2660" title="Septimius Severus" label="Septimius Severus"/>
<link wikidata="Q191504" start="2682" end="2694" title="Leptis Magna" label="Leptis Magna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817" start="2793" end="2799" title="column" label="column"/>
<link wikidata="Q193893" start="2805" end="2813" title="Capital (architecture)" label="capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430" start="2870" end="2885" title="Marcus Aurelius" label="Marcus Aurelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="3465" end="3485" title="Western Roman Empire" label="Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q42211" start="3525" end="3532" title="Vandals" label="Vandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q798589" start="3552" end="3568" title="Ibn Abd al-Hakam" label="Ibn Abd al-Hakam"/>
<link wikidata="Q12490507" start="3622" end="3640" title="Rashidun Caliphate" label="Rashidun Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q314781" start="3647" end="3660" title="Amr ibn al-As" label="Amr ibn al-As"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882516" start="3724" end="3730" title="Kinana" label="Kinana"/>
<link wikidata="Q293528" start="4240" end="4252" title="al-Baladhuri" label="al-Baladhuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q317519" start="4334" end="4344" title="Muslim conquest of Egypt" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4146861" start="4370" end="4375" title="Hijri year" label="Hijra"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="4497" end="4502" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="4504" end="4509" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q160307" start="4521" end="4529" title="Fatimid Caliphate" label="Fatimids"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827580" start="4531" end="4543" title="Banu Khazrun" label="Banu Khazrun"/>
<link wikidata="Q947784" start="4559" end="4565" title="Mamluk" label="Mamluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q179570" start="4573" end="4581" title="Kairouan" label="Kairouan"/>
<link wikidata="Q622855" start="4585" end="4593" title="Ifriqiya" label="Ifriqiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448100" start="4604" end="4610" title="Fihrids" label="Fihrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q581266" start="4612" end="4622" title="Muhallabids" label="Muhallabid"/>
<link wikidata="Q207600" start="4628" end="4636" title="Aghlabid dynasty" label="Aghlabid"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="4684" end="4690" title="Berbers" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q199688" start="4691" end="4708" title="Almohad Caliphate" label="Almohad Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q752662" start="4710" end="4724" title="Hafsid dynasty" label="Hafsid Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q117374166" start="4730" end="4741" title="Banu Thabit" label="Banu Thabit"/>
<link wikidata="Q728342" start="4816" end="4847" title="Pedro Navarro, Count of Oliveto" label="Pedro Navarro, Count of Oliveto"/>
<link wikidata="Q187549" start="4911" end="4930" title="Knights Hospitaller" label="Knights of St. John"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359535" start="4961" end="4974" title="Ottoman Turks" label="Ottoman Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="5014" end="5020" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11283904" start="5329" end="5339" title="Red Castle of Tripoli" label="Red Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="5417" end="5423" title="piracy" label="piracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="5443" end="5449" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q899359" start="5529" end="5543" title="Barbary pirate" label="Barbary pirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="5619" end="5632" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860095" start="5744" end="5760" title="Siege of Tripoli (1551)" label="Siege of Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="5796" end="5804" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottomans"/>
<link wikidata="Q367350" start="5842" end="5853" title="Turgut Reis" label="Turgut Reis"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="6099" end="6104" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q58732" start="6133" end="6164" title="Great Siege of Malta" label="the Ottoman siege of the island"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204327" start="6183" end="6202" title="Sidi Darghut Mosque" label="Sidi Darghut Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q3621785" start="6378" end="6401" title="Arch of Marcus Aurelius (Tripoli)" label="Arch of Marcus Aurelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q322987" start="6679" end="6694" title="John Narborough" label="John Narborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q130263" start="6841" end="6850" title="Janissary" label="Janissary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3825115" start="7018" end="7033" title="Ahmed Karamanli" label="Ahmed Karamanli"/>
<link wikidata="Q184951" start="7113" end="7118" title="Pasha" label="Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929987" start="7282" end="7299" title="Karamanli dynasty" label="Karamanli dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q330425" start="7756" end="7762" title="sanjak" label="sanjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="7772" end="7781" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="7841" end="7848" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="7865" end="7870" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q43742" start="7971" end="7976" title="oases" label="oases"/>
<link wikidata="Q188258" start="8003" end="8009" title="Fezzan" label="Fezzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q192237" start="8027" end="8035" title="Ghadames" label="Ghadames"/>
<link wikidata="Q209393" start="8040" end="8044" title="Ghat, Libya" label="Ghat"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="8299" end="8308" title="piracy" label="piratical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456685" start="8551" end="8575" title="Treaty with Tripoli (1796)" label="1796 Treaty with Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="8619" end="8635" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q468293" start="8713" end="8730" title="First Barbary War" label="First Barbary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022439" start="8842" end="8854" title="USS Philadelphia (1799)" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q382533" start="8893" end="8911" title="William Bainbridge" label="William Bainbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q720374" start="9493" end="9508" title="Stephen Decatur" label="Stephen Decatur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568584" start="9776" end="9789" title="William Eaton (soldier)" label="William Eaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="10137" end="10147" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="10149" end="10154" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888407" start="10213" end="10228" title="Battle of Derna (1805)" label="capturing Derna"/>
<link wikidata="Q108427838" start="10395" end="10419" title="Treaty with Tripoli (1805)" label="1805 Treaty with Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q720374" start="10540" end="10555" title="Stephen Decatur" label="Stephen Decatur"/>
<link wikidata="Q233505" start="10690" end="10708" title="Second Barbary War" label="Second Barbary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q18871" start="10901" end="10914" title="Sublime Porte" label="Sublime Porte"/>
<link wikidata="Q385820" start="10973" end="11001" title="French occupation of Tunisia" label="French occupation of Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q203824" start="11338" end="11350" title="Italo-Turkish War" label="declared war"/>
<link wikidata="Q213898" start="11491" end="11498" title="Prevesa" label="Prevesa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11558" end="11576" title="Italo-Turkish War#Treaty of Ouchy" label="Treaty of Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433694" start="11603" end="11615" title="Italian Tripolitania" label="Tripolitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q666893" start="11620" end="11629" title="Italian Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="11677" end="11683" title="caliph" label="caliph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376543" start="12398" end="12414" title="Via Balbia" label="Litoranea Balbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="12491" end="12496" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q22706" start="12502" end="12509" title="car tag" label="car tag"/>
<link wikidata="Q3744628" start="12614" end="12640" title="Tripoli International Fair" label="Tripoli International Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660427" start="12931" end="12949" title="Tripoli Grand Prix" label="Tripoli Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q284568" start="12967" end="12980" title="Italian Libya" label="Italian Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660427" start="13008" end="13026" title="Tripoli Grand Prix" label="Tripoli Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7992372" start="13198" end="13214" title="Mellaha Air Base" label="Mellaha Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q381576" start="13232" end="13249" title="Italian Air Force" label="Italian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q45000" start="13323" end="13351" title="Mitiga International Airport" label="Mitiga International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6092815" start="13399" end="13441" title="Italian Libya Railways" label="small railway connections to nearby cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q40816" start="13582" end="13590" title="Benghazi" label="Benghazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q192435" start="13710" end="13722" title="Tripolitania" label="Tripolitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="13727" end="13736" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q270202" start="13808" end="13819" title="Eighth Army (United Kingdom)" label="Eighth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314717" start="13932" end="13949" title="Treaty of peace with Italy (1947)" label="1947 peace treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="13959" end="13965" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878" start="14046" end="14061" title="Muammar Gaddafi" label="Muammar Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="14161" end="14175" title="President of the United States" label="U.S. President"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="14176" end="14189" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q922661" start="14226" end="14252" title="Operation El Dorado Canyon" label="Operation El Dorado Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q40816" start="14274" end="14282" title="Benghazi" label="Benghazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878" start="14498" end="14513" title="Muammar Gaddafi" label="Muammar Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q536935" start="14519" end="14544" title="1986 Berlin discotheque bombing" label="bomb explosion on 5 April"/>
<link wikidata="Q56036" start="14548" end="14559" title="West Berlin" label="West Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q614906" start="14752" end="14764" title="Hana Gaddafi" label="Hana Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="14771" end="14785" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2181855" start="14838" end="14869" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 748" label="Security Council Resolution 748"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042279" start="15193" end="15250" title="2011 Tripoli clashes" label="anti-government protests and violent government responses"/>
<link wikidata="Q848472" start="15309" end="15321" title="Green Square, Tripoli" label="Green Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q797535" start="15535" end="15550" title="Bab al-Azizia" label="Bab al-Aziziyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q45000" start="15609" end="15637" title="Mitiga International Airport" label="Mitiga International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347042" start="15696" end="15712" title="Libyan Air Force (1951–2011)" label="Libyan Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q221503" start="15798" end="15804" title="Zawiya, Libya" label="Zawiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q923890" start="15938" end="15954" title="First Battle of Zawiya" label="battle of Zawiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q210714" start="16040" end="16075" title="2011 military intervention in Libya" label="2011 military intervention in Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q797535" start="16325" end="16338" title="Bab al-Azizia" label="Bab al-Azizia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208135" start="16563" end="16584" title="Saif al-Islam Gaddafi" label="Saif al-Islam Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q317757" start="16589" end="16605" title="Abdullah Senussi" label="Abdullah Senussi"/>
<link wikidata="Q165620" start="16759" end="16775" title="Nafusa Mountains" label="Nafusa Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545009" start="16804" end="16819" title="Second Battle of Zawiya" label="retaking Zawiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q17435890" start="17114" end="17166" title="Great Socialist People&amp;#x27;s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya" label="Great Socialist People&amp;#x27;s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya"/>
<link wikidata="Q162413" start="17198" end="17203" title="Sirte" label="Sirte"/>
<link wikidata="Q17443556" start="17348" end="17372" title="House of Representatives (Libya)" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q182092" start="17426" end="17432" title="Tobruk" label="Tobruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414558" start="17442" end="17471" title="New General National Congress" label="New General National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q112054790" start="17547" end="17567" title="2022 Tripoli clashes" label="2022 Tripoli clashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q122166505" start="17572" end="17592" title="2023 Tripoli clashes" label="2023 Tripoli clashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q32837" start="17703" end="17725" title="Tarabulus District" label="Tripoli sha&amp;#x27;biyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995403" start="17777" end="17787" title="Jamahiriya" label="Jamahiriya"/>
<link wikidata="Q132555" start="18296" end="18303" title="de jure" label="de jure"/>
<link wikidata="Q162413" start="18499" end="18504" title="Sirte" label="Sirte"/>
<link wikidata="Q188961" start="18550" end="18566" title="decentralization" label="decentralization"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878" start="18589" end="18596" title="Muammar Gaddafi" label="Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q192350" start="18666" end="18676" title="Ministry (government department)" label="ministries"/>
<link wikidata="Q181648" start="18725" end="18739" title="foreign policy" label="foreign policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q166542" start="18744" end="18767" title="international relations" label="international relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q40816" start="18905" end="18913" title="Benghazi" label="Benghazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q172114" start="18945" end="18950" title="Kufra" label="Kufra"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878" start="18996" end="19011" title="Muammar Gaddafi" label="Muammar Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q58462" start="19153" end="19168" title="Ra&amp;#x27;s Lanuf" label="Ra&amp;#x27;s Lanuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q32835" start="19205" end="19234" title="National Transitional Council" label="National Transitional Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q43742" start="19573" end="19578" title="oases" label="oases"/>
<link wikidata="Q187223" start="19610" end="19617" title="lagoons" label="lagoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q192435" start="19638" end="19650" title="Tripolitania" label="Tripolitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q165620" start="19716" end="19732" title="Nafusa Mountains" label="Nafusa Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959235" start="19795" end="19798" title="Wadi Mejenin Dam" label="dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q48242" start="19885" end="19899" title="Sha&amp;#x27;biyah" label="Sha&amp;#x27;biyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764608" start="20059" end="20068" title="muhafazah" label="muhafazah"/>
<link wikidata="Q19576" start="20090" end="20097" title="wilayah" label="wilayah"/>
<link wikidata="Q192435" start="20270" end="20282" title="Tripolitania" label="Tripolitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q209778" start="20343" end="20349" title="Murqub District" label="Murqub"/>
<link wikidata="Q25632" start="20359" end="20374" title="Jabal al Gharbi District" label="Jabal al Gharbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q329060" start="20385" end="20391" title="Jafara" label="Jafara"/>
<link wikidata="Q26153" start="20406" end="20412" title="Zawiya District" label="Zawiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="20449" end="20470" title="hot semi-arid climate" label="hot semi-arid climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="20472" end="20478" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q43059" start="21001" end="21008" title="drought" label="drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q656821" start="21438" end="21457" title="Great Manmade River Project" label="Great Manmade River"/>
<link wikidata="Q848472" start="21627" end="21647" title="Martyrs&amp;#x27; Square, Tripoli" label="Martyrs&amp;#x27; Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q14080" start="21695" end="21705" title="palm trees" label="palm trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843680" start="21769" end="21780" title="Tripoli Zoo" label="Tripoli Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q81545" start="21971" end="21987" title="2011 Libyan Civil War" label="Libyan Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878" start="22081" end="22096" title="Muammar Gaddafi" label="Muammar Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q564954" start="22373" end="22381" title="PLOS One" label="PLOS One"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22403" end="22443" title="Representative Concentration Pathway#4.5" label="Representative Concentration Pathway 4.5"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="22480" end="22494" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q466216" start="22626" end="22630" title="Taiz" label="Taiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101409" start="22797" end="22819" title="Climate Action Tracker" label="Climate Action Tracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q131323" start="22990" end="22997" title="Misrata" label="Misrata"/>
<link wikidata="Q22687" start="23027" end="23034" title="banking" label="banking"/>
<link wikidata="Q43015" start="23036" end="23043" title="finance" label="finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033" start="23048" end="23061" title="mass media" label="communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q26643" start="23103" end="23113" title="commerce" label="commercial"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="23118" end="23131" title="manufacturing" label="manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q627371" start="23337" end="23351" title="processed food" label="processed food"/>
<link wikidata="Q44588" start="23688" end="23717" title="Tripoli International Airport" label="Tripoli International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3744628" start="23744" end="23770" title="Tripoli International Fair" label="Tripoli International Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829168" start="24184" end="24191" title="Tourism in Libya" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3648096" start="24325" end="24351" title="Corinthia Bab Africa Hotel" label="Corinthia Bab Africa Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704929" start="24497" end="24523" title="Al Waddan Hotel" label="Al Waddan Intercontinental"/>
<link wikidata="Q322731" start="24579" end="24607" title="Nokia Solutions and Networks" label="Nokia Solutions and Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418" start="24639" end="24644" title="Nokia" label="Nokia"/>
<link wikidata="Q387901" start="24735" end="24752" title="Afriqiyah Airways" label="Afriqiyah Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056939" start="24757" end="24772" title="Libyan Airlines" label="Libyan Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982661" start="24774" end="24783" title="Buraq Air" label="Buraq Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q45000" start="24822" end="24850" title="Mitiga International Airport" label="Mitiga International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128906" start="24900" end="24906" title="Medina quarter" label="Medina"/>
<link wikidata="Q124307709" start="25815" end="25830" title="al-Naqah Mosque" label="al-Naqah Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q335443" start="25875" end="25889" title="Al-Mu&amp;#x27;izz li-Din Allah" label="al-Mu&amp;#x27;izz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324228" start="26077" end="26086" title="hypostyle" label="hypostyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204327" start="26161" end="26184" title="Sidi Darghut Mosque" label="Mosque of Darghut Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q17636705" start="26213" end="26247" title="Karamanli Mosque" label="Mosque of Ahmad Pasha al-Karamanli"/>
<link wikidata="Q132834" start="26378" end="26385" title="madrasa" label="madrasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q219760" start="26409" end="26425" title="Bazaar" label="&amp;quot;suq&amp;quot;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555175" start="26686" end="26698" title="Gurgi Mosque" label="Gurgi Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q28077" start="27261" end="27267" title="hammam" label="hammam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5222628" start="27525" end="27548" title="Darghouth Turkish Bath" label="Hammam of Darghut Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q186347" start="27644" end="27656" title="caravanserai" label="caravanserai"/>
<link wikidata="Q115759610" start="28056" end="28069" title="Stucco decoration in Islamic architecture" label="carved stucco"/>
<link wikidata="Q468402" start="28074" end="28082" title="tilework" label="tilework"/>
<link wikidata="Q615196" start="28279" end="28289" title="Italianate architecture" label="Italianate"/>
<link wikidata="Q101166748" start="28330" end="28346" title="Galleria De Bono" label="Galleria De Bono"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492859" start="28352" end="28369" title="Tripoli Cathedral" label="Tripoli Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q11283904" start="28591" end="28601" title="Red Castle of Tripoli" label="Red Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11283904" start="28657" end="28678" title="Red Castle of Tripoli" label="Red Castle of Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="28890" end="28897" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498401" start="28948" end="28965" title="Red Castle Museum" label="Red Castle Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370598" start="29000" end="29017" title="places of worship" label="places of worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="29043" end="29049" title="Islam" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="29074" end="29083" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q620449" start="29106" end="29136" title="Apostolic Vicariate of Tripoli" label="Apostolic Vicariate of Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="29138" end="29153" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q198998" start="29156" end="29178" title="Coptic Orthodox Church" label="Coptic Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="29180" end="29199" title="Protestant churches" label="Protestant churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="29201" end="29221" title="Evangelical Churches" label="Evangelical Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529518" start="29277" end="29298" title="University of Tripoli" label="University of Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q19895937" start="29531" end="29556" title="Lycée Français de Tripoli" label="Lycée Français de Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q21474143" start="29650" end="29672" title="British School Tripoli" label="British School Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q20312689" start="29675" end="29701" title="American School of Tripoli" label="American School of Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="29885" end="29893" title="Association football" label="Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q2217433" start="30015" end="30024" title="Almadina S.C." label="Al Madina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932104" start="30026" end="30041" title="Alahly Tripoli S.C." label="Al Ahly Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q429501" start="30046" end="30064" title="Al-Ittihad Club (Tripoli)" label="Al-Ittihad Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470274" start="30110" end="30126" title="Alwahda (Tripoli)" label="Al Wahda Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q19618" start="30174" end="30191" title="Supercoppa Italiana" label="Italian Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q866719" start="30195" end="30199" title="2002 Supercoppa Italiana" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q83145" start="30210" end="30231" title="Africa Cup of Nations" label="Africa Cup of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q16911838" start="30368" end="30391" title="Second Libyan Civil War" label="Second Libyan Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626396" start="30441" end="30477" title="2009 African Basketball Championship" label="2009 African Basketball Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506411" start="30554" end="30573" title="Cairo-Dakar Highway" label="Cairo-Dakar Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081567" start="30576" end="30601" title="Tripoli-Cape Town Highway" label="Tripoli-Cape Town Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q44588" start="30603" end="30632" title="Tripoli International Airport" label="Tripoli International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q16911838" start="30712" end="30735" title="Libyan civil war (2014–2020)" label="second Libyan civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q45000" start="30802" end="30830" title="Mitiga International Airport" label="Mitiga International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q17989430" start="30959" end="30984" title="Battle of Tripoli Airport" label="Battle of Tripoli Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072456" start="30991" end="30998" title="Zintan Brigades" label="Zintani"/>
<link wikidata="Q18209493" start="31146" end="31165" title="Fajr Libya militia" label="Libya Dawn Militias"/>
<link wikidata="Q270289" start="31735" end="31739" title="BM-21 Grad" label="Grad"/>
<link wikidata="Q221395" start="31768" end="31787" title="Air Traffic Control" label="Air Traffic Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q45000" start="32459" end="32487" title="Mitiga International Airport" label="Mitiga International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32541" end="32548" title="Transport in Libya#Railways" label="railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q162413" start="32554" end="32559" title="Sirte" label="Sirte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="32655" end="32663" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q42800" start="32683" end="32697" title="Belo Horizonte" label="Belo Horizonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="32724" end="32730" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="32749" end="32757" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611175" start="32806" end="32851" title="European enclaves in North Africa before 1830" label="European enclaves in North Africa before 1830"/>
<link wikidata="Q81545" start="32854" end="32870" title="2011 Libyan Civil War" label="Libyan Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859499" start="32873" end="32889" title="Barbary treaties" label="Barbary treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660427" start="32892" end="32914" title="Tripoli Grand Prix" label="Gran Premio di Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479654" start="33203" end="33230" title="John Wiley &amp;amp; Sons, Inc." label="John Wiley &amp;amp; Sons, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q3343460" start="33233" end="33242" title="Nora Lafi" label="Nora Lafi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31235" wikidata="Q41213" url="?curid=31235" title="Tower of Babel">
<text>The Tower of Babel is an origin myth and parable in the Book of Genesis meant to explain the existence of different languages and cultures.

According to the story, a united human race speaking a single language migrates to Shinar (Lower Mesopotamia), where they agree to build a great city with a tower that would reach the sky. Yahweh, observing these efforts and remarking on humanity&#x27;s power in unity, confounds their speech so that they can no longer understand each other and scatters them around the world, leaving the city unfinished.

Some modern scholars have associated the Tower of Babel with known historical structures and accounts, particularly from ancient Mesopotamia. The most widely attributed inspiration is Etemenanki, a ziggurat dedicated to the god Marduk in Babylon, which in Hebrew was called &quot;Babel&quot;. A similar story is also found in the ancient Sumerian legend, &quot;Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta&quot;, which describes events and locations in southern Mesopotamia.

== Etymology ==
The phrase &quot;Tower of Babel&quot; does not appear in Genesis nor elsewhere in the Bible; it is always &quot;the city and the tower&quot; or just &quot;the city&quot;. The original derivation of the name Babel, which is the Hebrew name for Babylon, is uncertain. The native Akkadian name of the city was &quot;Bāb-ilim&quot;, meaning &quot;gate of God&quot;. However, that form and interpretation itself are now usually thought to derive from Akkadian folk etymology applied to an earlier form of the name, &quot;Babilla&quot;, of unknown meaning and probably non-Semitic origin.

Per the story in Genesis, the city received the name &quot;Babel&quot; from the Hebrew verb , meaning to jumble or to confuse, after Yahweh distorted the common language of humankind. According to &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot;, this reflects word play due to the Hebrew terms for Babylon and &quot;to confuse&quot; having similar pronunciation.

== Analysis ==

=== Genre ===
The Tower of Babel is a type of myth known as an etiology, which is intended explain the origin of a custom, ritual, geographical feature, name, or other phenomenon —namely the origins of the multiplicity of languages. The confusion of tongues (&quot;confusio linguarum&quot;) resulting from the construction of the Tower of Babel accounts for the fragmentation of human languages: God was concerned that humans had blasphemed by building the tower to avoid a second flood and so God brought into existence multiple languages, rendering humanity unable to understand each other.

Prior to this event, humanity was stated to speak a single language, although the preceding Genesis 10:5 states that the descendants of Japheth, Gomer, and Javan dispersed &quot;with their own tongues.&quot; Augustine explained this apparent contradiction by arguing that the story &quot;without mentioning it, goes back to tell how it came about that the one language common to all men was broken up into many tongues&quot;. Modern scholarship has traditionally held that the two chapters were written by different sources, the former by the Priestly source and the latter by the Jahwist. However, that theory has been debated among scholars in recent years.

=== Themes ===
The story&#x27;s theme of competition between God and humans appears elsewhere in Genesis, in the story of Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden. The first century Jewish interpretation found in Flavius Josephus explains the construction of the tower as a hubristic act of defiance against God ordered by the arrogant tyrant Nimrod.

There have been some contemporary challenges to this classical interpretation, with emphasis placed on the explicit motive of cultural and linguistic homogeneity mentioned in the narrative (v. 1, 4, 6); this reading of the text sees God&#x27;s actions not as a punishment for pride, but as an etiology of cultural differences, presenting Babel as the cradle of civilization.

=== Height ===
The Book of Genesis does not specify the tower&#x27;s height; the phrase, &quot;its top in the sky&quot; (v.4) was an idiom for impressive height, rather than implying arrogance. The Book of Jubilees mentions the tower&#x27;s height as being 5,433 cubits and 2 palms, or , about three times the height of Burj Khalifa, or roughly 1.6 miles high (10:21).

The apocryphal Third Apocalypse of Baruch mentions that the &quot;tower of strife&quot; reached a height of 463 cubits, or , taller than any structure built in human history until the construction of the Eiffel Tower in 1889, which is in height.

Gregory of Tours writing , quotes the earlier historian Orosius () as saying the tower was &quot;laid out foursquare on a very level plain. Its wall, made of baked brick cemented with pitch, is fifty cubits (23 m or 75 ft) wide, two hundred (91.5 m or 300 ft) high, and four hundred and seventy stades (82.72 km or 51.4 miles) in circumference. A &quot;stade&quot; was an ancient Greek unit of length, based on the circumference of a typical sports stadium of the time which was about . Twenty-five gates are situated on each side, which make in all one hundred. The doors of these gates, which are of wonderful size, are cast in bronze. The same historian tells many other tales of this city, and says: &#x27;Although such was the glory of its building still it was conquered and destroyed.&#x27;&quot;

A typical medieval account is given by Giovanni Villani (1300): He relates that &quot;it measured eighty miles [130 km] round, and it was already 4,000 paces high, or and 1,000 paces thick, and each pace is three of our feet.&quot; The 14th-century traveler John Mandeville also included an account of the tower and reported that its height had been 64 furlongs, or , according to the local inhabitants.

The 17th-century historian Verstegan provides yet another figure – quoting Isidore, he says that the tower was 5,164 paces high, or , and quoting Josephus that the tower was wider than it was high, more like a mountain than a tower. He also quotes unnamed authors who say that the spiral path was so wide that it contained lodgings for workers and animals, and other authors who claim that the path was wide enough to have fields for growing grain for the animals used in the construction.

In his book, &quot;Structures: Or Why Things Don&#x27;t Fall Down&quot; (Pelican 1978–1984), Professor J.E. Gordon considers the height of the Tower of Babel. He wrote, &quot;brick and stone weigh about 120 lb per cubic foot (2,000 kg per cubic metre) and the crushing strength of these materials is generally rather better than 6,000 lbs per square inch or 40 mega-pascals. Elementary arithmetic shows that a tower with parallel walls could have been built to a height of before the bricks at the bottom were crushed. However, by making the walls taper towards the top they ... could well have been built to a height where the men of Shinnar would run short of oxygen and had difficulty in breathing before the brick walls crushed beneath their own dead weight.&quot;

==Composition==
=== Authorship ===
Jewish and Christian tradition attributes the composition of the whole Pentateuch, which includes the story of the Tower of Babel, to Moses. Modern biblical scholarship rejects Mosaic authorship of the Pentateuch but is divided on the question of its authorship. Many scholars subscribe to some form of the documentary hypothesis, which argues that the Pentateuch is composed of multiple &quot;sources&quot; that were later merged. Scholars who favor this hypothesis, such as Richard Elliot Friedman, tend to see Genesis 11:1–9 as being composed by the J or Jahwist/Yahwist source.

Michael Coogan suggests that the intentional word play regarding the city of Babel, and the noise of the people&#x27;s &quot;babbling&quot; is found in the Hebrew words as easily as in English, is considered typical of the Yahwist source. John Van Seters, who has put forth substantial modifications to the hypothesis, suggests that these verses are part of what he calls a &quot;Pre-Yahwistic stage&quot;. Other scholars reject the documentary hypothesis altogether. The &quot;minimalist&quot; scholars tend to see the books of Genesis through 2 Kings as written by a single, anonymous author during the Hellenistic period.

=== Historicity ===
Biblical scholars see the Book of Genesis as mythological and not as an historical account of events. Genesis is described as beginning with historicized myth and ending with mythicized history. Nevertheless, the story of Babel can be interpreted in terms of its context: Elsewhere in Genesis, it is stated that Babel (LXX: Βαβυλών) formed part of Nimrod&#x27;s kingdom, which is located in Lower Mesopotamia. The Bible does not specifically mention that Nimrod ordered the building of the tower, but many other sources have associated its construction with him. Genesis 11:9 attributes the Hebrew version of the name, &quot;Babel&quot;, to the verb &quot;balal&quot;, which means &quot;to confuse or confound&quot; in Hebrew. The first century Roman-Jewish author Flavius Josephus similarly explained that the name was derived from the Hebrew word &quot;Babel (בבל)&quot;, meaning &quot;confusion&quot;.

== Possible origins ==
=== Etemenanki ===
Etemenanki (Sumerian: &quot;temple of the foundation of heaven and earth&quot;) was the name of a ziggurat dedicated to Marduk in the city of Babylon. It was famously rebuilt by the 6th-century-BCE Neo-Babylonian dynasty rulers Nabopolassar and Nebuchadnezzar II, but had fallen into disrepair by the time of Alexander the Great&#x27;s conquests. He managed to move the tiles of the tower to another location, but his death stopped the reconstruction, and it was demolished during the reign of his successor Antiochus Soter. Greek historian Herodotus (c. 484 – ) wrote an account of the ziggurat in his &quot;Histories&quot;, which he called the &quot;Temple of Zeus Belus&quot;.

According to modern scholars, the biblical story of the Tower of Babel was likely influenced by Etemenanki. Stephen L. Harris proposed this occurred during the Babylonian captivity. Isaac Asimov speculated that the authors of Genesis 11:1–9 were inspired by the existence of an apparently incomplete ziggurat at Babylon, and by the phonological similarity between Babylonian &quot;Bab-ilu&quot;, meaning &quot;gate of God&quot;, and the Hebrew word &quot;balal&quot;, meaning &quot;mixed&quot;, &quot;confused&quot;, or &quot;confounded&quot;.

=== Mesopotamian analogues ===
There are similar stories to the Tower of Babel. In the Sumerian myth &quot;Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta&quot;, Enmerkar of Uruk is building a massive ziggurat in Eridu and demands a tribute of precious materials from Aratta for its construction, at one point reciting an incantation imploring the god Enki to restore (or in Kramer&#x27;s translation, to disrupt) the linguistic unity of the inhabited regions—named as Shubur, Hamazi, Sumer, Uri-ki (Akkad), and the Martu land, &quot;the whole universe, the well-guarded people—may they all address Enlil together in a single language.&quot;

The Eridu Genesis, an ancient Sumerian flood myth, includes a passage about the unity of human speech before the gods intervened. During the Neo-Assyrian period, a fragmentary text found in Nineveh, from the library of Ashurbanipal (r. 668–627 BCE), which contains parts of the Eridu Genesis, along with the general interest Ashurbanipal&#x27;s library had in preserving older traditions, suggest that these stories of language confusion and divine intervention were still relevant during this period.

This is further evidenced by the Neo-Assyrian divine punishment motif often found in royal inscriptions, which describe the gods punishing nations for their arrogance, particularly through destruction, scattering, or confusion—a theme seen in the Tower of Babel story.

In the annals of the Neo-Assyrian king Sennacherib (r. 705–681 BCE), he describes how the gods “confused the plans” of his enemies and scattered their forces, resulting in his victory and the destruction of Babylon in 689 BCE. These events may have influenced later biblical writers during the period of Babylonian captivity, who viewed the city’s fall as a divine act, reinforcing the idea that Babylon’s pride led to its downfall.

== Later literature ==
=== Book of Jubilees ===
The Book of Jubilees contains one of the most detailed accounts found anywhere of the Tower.
=== Pseudo-Philo ===
In Pseudo-Philo, the direction for the building is ascribed not only to Nimrod, who is made prince of the Hamites, but also to Joktan, as prince of the Semites, and to Phenech son of Dodanim, as prince of the Japhetites. Twelve men are arrested for refusing to bring bricks, including Abraham, Lot, Nahor, and several sons of Joktan. However, Joktan finally saves the twelve from the wrath of the other two princes.

=== Josephus&#x27; &quot;Antiquities of the Jews&quot; ===
The Jewish-Roman historian Flavius Josephus, in his &quot;Antiquities of the Jews&quot; (), recounted history as found in the Hebrew Bible and mentioned the Tower of Babel. He wrote that it was Nimrod who had the tower built and that Nimrod was a tyrant who tried to turn the people away from God. In this account, God confused the people rather than destroying them because annihilation with a Flood had not taught them to be godly.
Now it was Nimrod who excited them to such an affront and contempt of God. He was the grandson of Ham, the son of Noah, a bold man, and of great strength of hand. He persuaded them not to ascribe it to God as if it were through his means they were happy, but to believe that it was their own courage which procured that happiness. He also gradually changed the government into tyranny, seeing no other way of turning men from the fear of God, but to bring them into a constant dependence on his power... Now the multitude were very ready to follow the determination of Nimrod and to esteem it a piece of cowardice to submit to God; and they built a tower, neither sparing any pains, nor being in any degree negligent about the work: and, by reason of the multitude of hands employed in it, it grew very high, sooner than any one could expect; but the thickness of it was so great, and it was so strongly built, that thereby its great height seemed, upon the view, to be less than it really was. It was built of burnt brick, cemented together with mortar, made of bitumen, that it might not be liable to admit water. When God saw that they acted so madly, he did not resolve to destroy them utterly, since they were not grown wiser by the destruction of the former sinners [in the Flood]; but he caused a tumult among them, by producing in them diverse languages, and causing that, through the multitude of those languages, they should not be able to understand one another. The place wherein they built the tower is now called Babylon, because of the confusion of that language which they readily understood before; for the Hebrews mean by the word Babel, confusion. The Sibyl also makes mention of this tower, and of the confusion of the language, when she says thus:—&quot;When all men were of one language, some of them built a high tower, as if they would thereby ascend up to heaven; but the gods sent storms of wind and overthrew the tower, and gave everyone a peculiar language; and for this reason it was that the city was called Babylon.&quot;

=== Greek Apocalypse of Baruch ===
Third Apocalypse of Baruch (or 3 Baruch, c. 2nd century), one of the pseudepigrapha, describes the just rewards of sinners and the righteous in the afterlife. Among the sinners are those who instigated the Tower of Babel. In the account, Baruch is first taken (in a vision) to see the resting place of the souls of &quot;those who built the tower of strife against God, and the Lord banished them.&quot; Next he is shown another place, and there, occupying the form of dogs,
=== Midrash ===
Rabbinic literature offers many different accounts of other causes for building the Tower of Babel, and of the intentions of its builders. According to one midrash the builders of the Tower, called &quot;the generation of secession&quot; in the Jewish sources, said: &quot;God has no right to choose the upper world for Himself, and to leave the lower world to us; therefore we will build us a tower, with an idol on the top holding a sword, so that it may appear as if it intended to war with God&quot; (Gen. R. xxxviii. 7; Tan., ed. Buber, Noah, xxvii. et seq.).

The building of the Tower was meant to bid defiance not only to God, but also to Abraham, who exhorted the builders to reverence. The passage mentions that the builders spoke sharp words against God, saying that once every 1,656 years, heaven tottered so that the water poured down upon the earth, therefore they would support it by columns that there might not be another deluge (Gen. R. l.c.; Tan. l.c.; similarly Josephus, &quot;Ant.&quot; i. 4, § 2).

Some among that generation even wanted to war against God in heaven (Talmud Sanhedrin 109a). They were encouraged in this undertaking by the notion that arrows that they shot into the sky fell back dripping with blood, so that the people really believed that they could wage war against the inhabitants of the heavens (Sefer ha-Yashar, Chapter 9:12–36). According to Josephus and Midrash Pirke R. El. xxiv., it was mainly Nimrod who persuaded his contemporaries to build the Tower, while other rabbinical sources assert, on the contrary, that Nimrod separated from the builders.

According to another midrashic account, one third of the Tower builders were punished by being transformed into semi-demonic creatures and banished into three parallel dimensions, inhabited now by their descendants.

=== Islamic tradition ===
Although not mentioned by name, the Quran has a story with similarities to the biblical story of the Tower of Babel, although set in the Egypt of Moses: Pharaoh asks Haman to build him a stone (or clay) tower so that he can mount up to heaven and confront the God of Moses.

Another story in Sura 2:102 mentions the name of Babil, but tells of when the two angels Harut and Marut taught magic to some people in Babylon and warned them that magic is a sin and that their teaching them magic is a test of faith.
A tale about Babil appears more fully in the writings of Yaqut (i, 448 f.) and the &quot;&quot; (xiii. 72), but without the tower: mankind were swept together by winds into the plain that was afterward called &quot;Babil&quot;, where they were assigned their separate languages by God, and were then scattered again in the same way. In the &quot;History of the Prophets and Kings&quot; by the 9th-century Muslim theologian al-Tabari, a fuller version is given: Nimrod has the tower built in Babil, God destroys it, and the language of mankind, formerly Syriac, is then confused into 72 languages. Another Muslim historian of the 13th century, Abu al-Fida relates the same story, adding that the patriarch Eber (an ancestor of Abraham) was allowed to keep the original tongue, Hebrew in this case, because he would not partake in the building.

Although variations similar to the biblical narrative of the Tower of Babel exist within Islamic tradition, the central theme of God separating humankind on the basis of language is alien to Islam according to the author Yahiya Emerick. In Islamic belief, he argues, God created nations to know each other and not to be separated.

===Book of Mormon===
In the Book of Mormon, a man named Jared and his family ask God that their language not be confounded at the time of the &quot;great tower&quot;. Because of their prayers, God preserves their language and leads them to the Valley of Nimrod. From there, they travel across the sea to the Americas.

Despite no mention of the Tower of Babel in the original text of the Book of Mormon, some leaders in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) assert that the &quot;great tower&quot; was indeed the Tower of Babel – as in the 1981 introduction to the Book of Mormon – despite the chronology of the Book of Ether aligning more closely with the 21st century BC Sumerian tower temple myth of Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta to the goddess Innana. Church apologists have also supported this connection and argue the reality of the Tower of Babel: &quot;Although there are many in our day who consider the accounts of the Flood and tower of Babel to be fiction, Latter-day Saints affirm their reality.&quot; In either case, the church firmly believes in the factual nature of at least one &quot;great tower&quot; built in the region of ancient Sumer/Assyria/Babylonia.

===Gnosticism===
In Gnostic tradition recorded in the Paraphrase of Shem, a tower, interpreted as the Tower of Babel, is brought by demons along with the great flood:

== Linguistics ==

For a long time, historical linguistics wrestled with the idea of a single original language. In the Middle Ages and down to the 17th century, attempts were made to identify a living descendant of the Adamic language.

===Multiplication of languages===
The literal belief that the world&#x27;s linguistic variety originated with the tower of Babel is pseudolinguistics and is contrary to the known facts about the origin and history of languages.

In the biblical introduction of the Tower of Babel account, in Genesis 11:1, it is said that everyone on Earth spoke the same language, but this is inconsistent with the biblical description of the post-Noahic world described in Genesis 10:5, where it is said that the descendants of Shem, Ham, and Japheth gave rise to different nations, each with their own language.

There have also been a number of traditions around the world that describe a divine confusion of the one original language into several, albeit without any tower. Aside from the Ancient Greek myth that Hermes confused the languages, causing Zeus to give his throne to Phoroneus, Frazer specifically mentions such accounts among the Wasania of Kenya, the Kacha Naga people of Assam, the inhabitants of Encounter Bay in Australia, the Maidu of California, the Tlingit of Alaska, and the K&#x27;iche&#x27; Maya of Guatemala.

The Estonian myth of &quot;the Cooking of Languages&quot; has also been compared.

During the Middle Ages, the Hebrew language was widely considered the language used by God to address Adam in Paradise, and by Adam as lawgiver (the Adamic language) by various Jewish, Christian, and Muslim scholastics.

Dante Alighieri addresses the topic in his &quot;De vulgari eloquentia&quot; (1302–1305). He argues that the Adamic language is of divine origin and therefore unchangeable.

In his &quot;Divine Comedy&quot; (c. 1308–1320), however, Dante changes his view to another that treats the Adamic language as the product of Adam. This had the consequence that it could no longer be regarded as immutable, and hence Hebrew could not be regarded as identical with the language of Paradise. Dante concludes (&quot;Paradiso&quot; XXVI) that Hebrew is a derivative of the language of Adam. In particular, the chief Hebrew name for God in scholastic tradition, &quot;El&quot;, must be derived of a different Adamic name for God, which Dante gives as &quot;I&quot;.

Before the acceptance of the Indo-European language family, these languages were considered to be &quot;Japhetite&quot; by some authors (e.g., Rasmus Rask in 1815; see Indo-European studies). Beginning in Renaissance Europe, priority over Hebrew was claimed for the alleged Japhetic languages, which were supposedly never corrupted because their speakers had not participated in the construction of the Tower of Babel. Among the candidates for a living descendant of the Adamic language were: Gaelic (see &quot;Auraicept na n-Éces&quot;); Tuscan (Giovanni Battista Gelli, 1542, Pier Francesco Giambullari, 1564); Dutch (Goropius Becanus, 1569, Abraham Mylius, 1612); Swedish (Olaus Rudbeck, 1675); German (Georg Philipp Harsdörffer, 1641, Schottel, 1641). The Swedish physician Andreas Kempe wrote a satirical tract in 1688, where he made fun of the contest between the European nationalists to claim their native tongue as the Adamic language. Caricaturing the attempts by the Swede Olaus Rudbeck to pronounce Swedish the original language of mankind, Kempe wrote a scathing parody where Adam spoke Danish, God spoke Swedish, and the serpent French.

The primacy of Hebrew was still defended by some authors until the emergence of modern linguistics in the second half of the 18th century, e.g. by (1648–1705) in &quot;A philosophicall essay for the reunion of the languages, or, the art of knowing all by the mastery of one&quot; (1675) and by Gottfried Hensel (1687–1767) in his &quot;Synopsis Universae Philologiae&quot; (1741).

===Enumeration of scattered languages===
There are several mediaeval historiographic accounts that attempt to make an enumeration of the languages scattered at the Tower of Babel. Because a count of all the descendants of Noah listed by name in chapter 10 of Genesis (LXX) provides 15 names for Japheth&#x27;s descendants, 30 for Ham&#x27;s, and 27 for Shem&#x27;s, these figures became established as the 72 languages resulting from the confusion at Babel—although the exact listing of these languages changed over time. (The LXX Bible has two additional names, Elisa and Cainan, not found in the Masoretic text of this chapter, so early rabbinic traditions, such as the &quot;Mishna&quot;, speak instead of &quot;70 languages&quot;.) Some of the earliest sources for 72 (sometimes 73) languages are the 2nd-century Christian writers Clement of Alexandria (&quot;Stromata&quot; I, 21) and Hippolytus of Rome (&quot;On the Psalms&quot; 9); it is repeated in the Syriac book &quot;Cave of Treasures&quot; (), Epiphanius of Salamis&#x27; &quot;Panarion&quot; () and St. Augustine&#x27;s &quot;The City of God&quot; 16.6 (). The chronicles attributed to Hippolytus () contain one of the first attempts to list each of the 72 peoples who were believed to have spoken these languages.

Isidore of Seville in his &quot;Etymologiae&quot; () mentions the number of 72; however, his list of names from the Bible drops the sons of Joktan and substitutes the sons of Abraham and Lot, resulting in only about 56 names total; he then appends a list of some of the nations known in his own day, such as the Longobards and the Franks. This listing was to prove quite influential on later accounts that made the Lombards and Franks themselves into descendants of eponymous grandsons of Japheth, e.g. the &quot;Historia Brittonum&quot; (), &quot;The Meadows of Gold&quot; by al Masudi () and &quot;Book of Roads and Kingdoms&quot; by al-Bakri (1068), the 11th-century &quot;Lebor Gabála Érenn&quot;, and the midrashic compilations &quot;Yosippon&quot; (), &quot;Chronicles of Jerahmeel&quot;, and &quot;Sefer haYashar&quot;.

Other sources that mention 72 (or 70) languages scattered from Babel are the Old Irish poem &quot;Cu cen mathair&quot; by Luccreth moccu Chiara (); the Irish monastic work &quot;Auraicept na n-Éces&quot;; &quot;History of the Prophets and Kings&quot; by the Persian historian Muhammad ibn Jarir al-Tabari (); the Anglo-Saxon dialogue &quot;Solomon and Saturn&quot;; the Russian &quot;Primary Chronicle&quot; (); the Jewish Kabbalistic work &quot;Bahir&quot; (1174); the &quot;Prose Edda&quot; of Snorri Sturluson (); the Syriac &quot;Book of the Bee&quot; (); the &quot;Gesta Hunnorum et Hungarorum&quot; (; mentions 22 for Shem, 31 for Ham and 17 for Japheth for a total of 70); Villani&#x27;s 1300 account; and the rabbinic &quot;Midrash ha-Gadol&quot; (14th century). Villani adds that it &quot;was begun 700 years after the Flood, and there were 2,354 years from the beginning of the world to the confusion of the Tower of Babel. And we find that they were 107 years working at it; and men lived long in those times&quot;. According to the &quot;Gesta Hunnorum et Hungarorum&quot;, however, the project was begun only 200 years following the Deluge.

The tradition of 72 languages persisted into later times. Both José de Acosta in his 1576 treatise &quot;De procuranda indorum salute&quot;, and António Vieira a century later in his &quot;Sermão da Epifania&quot;, expressed amazement at how much this &#x27;number of tongues&#x27; could be surpassed, there being hundreds of mutually unintelligible languages indigenous only to Peru and Brazil.

==Comparable myths==
=== Greco-Roman parallel ===

In Greek mythology, much of which was adopted by the Romans, there is a myth referred to as the Gigantomachy, the battle fought between the Giants and the Olympian gods for supremacy of the cosmos. In Ovid&#x27;s telling of the myth, the Giants attempt to reach the gods in heaven by stacking mountains, but are repelled by Jupiter&#x27;s thunderbolts. A.S. Kline translates Ovid&#x27;s &quot;Metamorphoses&quot; 1.151–155 as:

=== Mexico ===
Various traditions similar to that of the tower of Babel are found in Latin America. Some writers connected the Great Pyramid of Cholula to the Tower of Babel. The Dominican friar Diego Durán (1537–1588) reported hearing an account about the pyramid from a hundred-year-old priest at Cholula, shortly after the conquest of the Aztec Empire. He wrote that he was told when the light of the Sun first appeared upon the land, giants appeared and set off in search of the Sun. Not finding it, they built a tower to reach the sky. An angered God of the Heavens called upon the inhabitants of the sky, who destroyed the tower and scattered its inhabitants. The story was not related to either a flood or the confusion of languages, although Frazer connects its construction and the scattering of the giants with the Tower of Babel.

Another story, attributed by the native historian Fernando de Alva Cortés Ixtlilxóchitl (c. 1565–1648) to the ancient Toltecs, states that after men had multiplied following a great deluge, they erected a tall &quot;zacuali&quot; or tower, to preserve themselves in the event of a second deluge. However, their languages were confounded and they went to separate parts of the Earth.

===Arizona===
Still another story, attributed to the Tohono O&#x27;odham people, holds that Montezuma escaped a great flood, then became wicked and attempted to build a house reaching to heaven, but the Great Spirit destroyed it with thunderbolts.

===Nepal===
Traces of a somewhat similar story have also been reported among the Tharu of Nepal and northern India.

===Botswana===
According to David Livingstone, the people he met living near Lake Ngami in 1849 had such a tradition, but with the builders&#x27; heads getting &quot;cracked by the fall of the scaffolding&quot;.

===Other traditions===
In his 1918 book, &quot;Folklore in the Old Testament&quot;, Scottish social anthropologist Sir James George Frazer documented similarities between Old Testament stories, such as the Flood, and indigenous legends around the world. He identified Livingston&#x27;s account with a tale found in Lozi mythology, wherein the wicked men build a tower of masts to pursue the Creator-God, Nyambe, who has fled to Heaven on a spider-web, but the men perish when the masts collapse. He further relates similar tales of the Ashanti that substitute a pile of porridge pestles for the masts. Frazer moreover cites such legends found among the Kongo people, as well as in Tanzania, where the men stack poles or trees in a failed attempt to reach the Moon. He further cited the Karbi and Kuki people of Assam as having a similar story. The traditions of the Karen people of Myanmar, which Frazer considered to show clear &#x27;Abrahamic&#x27; influence, also relate that their ancestors migrated there following the abandonment of a great pagoda in the land of the Karenni 30 generations from Adam, when the languages were confused and the Karen separated from the Karenni. He notes yet another version current in the Admiralty Islands, where mankind&#x27;s languages are confused following a failed attempt to build houses reaching to heaven.

==In popular culture==
* The &quot;Babel fish&quot; is a fictional fish in Douglas Adams&#x27; novel The Hitchhiker&#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy, which can be placed in someone&#x27;s ear for them to instantly understand anything said to them in any form of language. Yahoo used this as a base for their &quot;Yahoo! Babel Fish&quot; online translation service.
* Pieter Brueghel&#x27;s influential portrayal is based on the Colosseum in Rome, while later conical depictions of the tower (as depicted in Doré&#x27;s illustration) resemble much later Muslim towers observed by 19th-century explorers in the area, notably the Minaret of Samarra. M.C. Escher depicts a more stylized geometrical structure in his woodcut representing the story.
* The composer Anton Rubinstein wrote an opera based on the story &quot;Der Thurm zu Babel&quot;.
* American choreographer Adam Darius staged a multilingual theatrical interpretation of &quot;The Tower of Babel&quot; in 1993 at the ICA in London.
* Fritz Lang&#x27;s 1927 film &quot;Metropolis&quot;, in a flashback, plays upon themes of lack of communication between the designers of the tower and the workers who are constructing it. The short scene states how the words used to glorify the tower&#x27;s construction by its designers took on totally different, oppressive meanings to the workers. This led to its destruction as they rose up against the designers because of the insufferable working conditions. The appearance of the tower was modeled after Brueghel&#x27;s 1563 painting.
*The Tower&#x27;s story is replicated in the 1966 epic film &quot;The Bible: In the Beginning...&quot;.
* The political philosopher Michael Oakeshott surveyed historic variations of the Tower of Babel in different cultures and produced a modern retelling of his own in his 1983 book, &quot;On History&quot;. In his retelling, Oakeshott expresses disdain for human willingness to sacrifice individuality, culture, and quality of life for grand collective projects. He attributes this behavior to fascination with novelty, persistent dissatisfaction, greed, and lack of self-reflection.
* A. S. Byatt&#x27;s novel &quot;Babel Tower&quot; (1996) is about the question &quot;whether language can be shared, or, if that turns out to be illusory, how individuals, in talking to each other, fail to understand each other&quot;.
* Science fiction writer Ted Chiang wrote a story called &quot;Tower of Babylon&quot; that imagined a miner&#x27;s climbing the tower all the way to the top where he meets the vault of heaven.
* This biblical episode is dramatized in the Indian television series &quot;Bible Ki Kahaniyan&quot;, which aired on DD National from 1992.
* Chris Huelsbeck has created an orchestral piece titled &quot;Tower of Babel&quot; which appears in &quot;Turrican II: The Final Fight&quot;.
* The Tower of Babel appears in the 47th episode of the anime series &quot;Arabian Nights: Sinbad&#x27;s Adventures&quot;.
* In the 1990 Japanese television anime &quot;&quot;, the Tower of Babel is used by the Atlanteans as an interstellar communication device. Later in the series, the Neo Atlanteans rebuild the Tower of Babel and use its communication beam as a weapon of mass destruction. Both the original and the rebuilt tower resembles the painting &quot;Tower of Babel&quot; by artist Pieter Bruegel the Elder.
* Argentinian novelist Jorge Luis Borges wrote a story called &quot;The Library of Babel&quot;.
* 2017 comic book &quot;La tour de Bab-El-Oued&quot; (&quot;The tower of Bab-El-Oued&quot;) from Sfar&#x27;s &quot;The Rabbi&#x27;s Cat&quot; series refers to the Tower of Babel in a context of intercultural conflict and cooperation (Jews and Muslims during the French colonization in Algeria).
* In the video game &quot;Doshin the Giant&quot;, the final monument the island inhabitants can create is called the Tower of Babel, which begins to sink the island. The titular Doshin the Giant then sacrifices himself to save the island.
* The 2023 video game &quot;Chants of Sennaar&quot; is largely inspired by the Tower of Babel.

== See also ==
* Babylonian astronomy
* Borsippa
* Enuma Anu Enlil
* Eridu
* Evolutionary linguistics
* List of tallest structures
* Minar (Firuzabad)
* Origin of speech
* Generations of Noah
==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* Ixtilxochitl, Don Ferdinand d&#x27;Alva, &quot;Historia Chichimeca&quot;, 1658
* Lord Kingsborough, &quot;Antiquities of Mexico, vol. 9&quot;
* H.H. Bancroft, &quot;Native Races of the Pacific States&quot; (New York, 1874)
* Klaus Seybold, &quot;Der Turmbau zu Babel: Zur Entstehung von Genesis XI 1–9,&quot; &quot;Vetus Testamentum&quot; (1976).
* Samuel Noah Kramer, &quot;The &quot;Babel of Tongues&quot;: A Sumerian Version&quot;, Journal of the American Oriental Society (1968).
* Kyle Dugdale: &quot;Babel&#x27;s Present.&quot; Ed. by Reto Geiser and Tilo Richter, Standpunkte, Basel 2016, (&quot;Standpunkte Dokumente&quot; No. 5).

== External links ==

* &quot;Tower of Babel.&quot; Encyclopædia Britannica Online.
* Babel In Biblia: The Tower in Ancient Literature by Jim Rovira
* &quot;The Tower of Babel and the Birth of Nationhood&quot; by Daniel Gordis at &quot;Azure: Ideas for the Jewish Nation&quot;
* SkyscraperPage – Tower of Babel, Tower of Babel – Baruch
* HERBARIUM Art Project. Anatomy of the Tower of Babel. 2010
* The International Standard Bible Encyclopedia (ISBE), James Orr, M.A., D.D., General Editor – 1915 (online)
* Easton&#x27;s Bible Dictionary, M.G. Easton M.A., D.D., published by Thomas Nelson, 1897. (online)
* Nave Topical Bible, Orville J. Nave, AM., D.D., LL.D. (online)
* Smith&#x27;s Bible Dictionary (1896) (online)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q41213" start="4" end="18" title="Tower of Babel" label="Tower of Babel"/>
<link wikidata="Q390248" start="25" end="36" title="origin myth" label="origin myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q208555" start="41" end="48" title="parable" label="parable"/>
<link wikidata="Q9184" start="56" end="71" title="Book of Genesis" label="Book of Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="106" end="125" title="Language" label="different languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="174" end="184" title="Human" label="human race"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404297" start="224" end="230" title="Shinar" label="Shinar"/>
<link wikidata="Q14223170" start="232" end="249" title="Lower Mesopotamia" label="Lower Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q766677" start="330" end="336" title="Yahweh" label="Yahweh"/>
<link wikidata="Q285788" start="733" end="743" title="Etemenanki" label="Etemenanki"/>
<link wikidata="Q170153" start="747" end="755" title="ziggurat" label="ziggurat"/>
<link wikidata="Q190123" start="777" end="783" title="Marduk" label="Marduk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="787" end="794" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="805" end="811" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="887" end="892" title="Sumer" label="Sumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q989784" start="910" end="941" title="Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta" label="Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta"/>
<link wikidata="Q9184" start="1085" end="1092" title="Book of Genesis" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="1114" end="1119" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="1271" end="1278" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35518" start="1305" end="1313" title="Akkadian language" label="Akkadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q109964" start="1483" end="1497" title="folk etymology" label="folk etymology"/>
<link wikidata="Q34049" start="1595" end="1602" title="Semitic languages" label="Semitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="1815" end="1838" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q998840" start="1860" end="1869" title="word play" label="word play"/>
<link wikidata="Q390248" start="2043" end="2051" title="Origin myth" label="etiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q200637" start="2710" end="2717" title="Japheth" label="Japheth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148172" start="2719" end="2724" title="Gomer" label="Gomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684266" start="2730" end="2735" title="Javan" label="Javan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="2782" end="2791" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q514434" start="3117" end="3132" title="Priestly source" label="Priestly source"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099313" start="3155" end="3162" title="Jahwist" label="Jahwist"/>
<link wikidata="Q58701" start="3357" end="3369" title="Adam and Eve" label="Adam and Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q19014" start="3377" end="3391" title="Garden of Eden" label="Garden of Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q134461" start="3442" end="3458" title="Flavius Josephus" label="Flavius Josephus"/>
<link wikidata="Q735766" start="3503" end="3509" title="hubris" label="hubris"/>
<link wikidata="Q201861" start="3572" end="3578" title="Nimrod" label="Nimrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338878" start="3886" end="3906" title="cultural differences" label="cultural differences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207629" start="3932" end="3954" title="cradle of civilization" label="cradle of civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q843946" start="4155" end="4171" title="Book of Jubilees" label="Book of Jubilees"/>
<link wikidata="Q12495" start="4277" end="4289" title="Burj Khalifa" label="Burj Khalifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092752" start="4331" end="4340" title="apocrypha" label="apocrypha"/>
<link wikidata="Q619703" start="4342" end="4368" title="3 Baruch" label="Third Apocalypse of Baruch"/>
<link wikidata="Q12234854" start="4484" end="4500" title="Timeline of three tallest structures in the world" label="in human history"/>
<link wikidata="Q243" start="4531" end="4543" title="Eiffel Tower" label="Eiffel Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q67841" start="4574" end="4590" title="Gregory of Tours" label="Gregory of Tours"/>
<link wikidata="Q311456" start="4630" end="4637" title="Paulus Orosius" label="Orosius"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502030" start="4774" end="4780" title="cubits" label="cubits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645966" start="4869" end="4875" title="stadia (length)" label="stades"/>
<link wikidata="Q843905" start="4904" end="4917" title="circumference" label="circumference"/>
<link wikidata="Q53060" start="5073" end="5077" title="gate" label="gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q704179" start="5418" end="5434" title="Giovanni Villani" label="Giovanni Villani"/>
<link wikidata="Q691543" start="5531" end="5536" title="paces" label="paces"/>
<link wikidata="Q24766" start="5637" end="5652" title="John Mandeville" label="John Mandeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q494083" start="5732" end="5739" title="furlong" label="furlong"/>
<link wikidata="Q656317" start="5811" end="5820" title="Verstegan" label="Verstegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995529" start="6226" end="6231" title="grain" label="grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680321" start="6378" end="6389" title="J.E. Gordon" label="J.E. Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545979" start="6489" end="6499" title="cubic foot" label="cubic foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="7151" end="7161" title="Pentateuch" label="Pentateuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q9077" start="7214" end="7219" title="Moses" label="Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q459194" start="7387" end="7409" title="documentary hypothesis" label="documentary hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q723899" start="7556" end="7579" title="Richard Elliot Friedman" label="Richard Elliot Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099313" start="7633" end="7660" title="Jahwist" label="J or Jahwist/Yahwist source"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829433" start="7663" end="7677" title="Michael Coogan" label="Michael Coogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809665" start="7902" end="7917" title="John Van Seters" label="John Van Seters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631377" start="8141" end="8151" title="Biblical minimalism" label="minimalist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8268" end="8286" title="Hellenistic period#Judea" label="Hellenistic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="8354" end="8366" title="Mythology" label="mythological"/>
<link wikidata="Q29334" start="8628" end="8631" title="LXX" label="LXX"/>
<link wikidata="Q201861" start="8657" end="8663" title="Nimrod (king)" label="Nimrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="8900" end="8906" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q36790" start="9269" end="9277" title="Sumerian language" label="Sumerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q273514" start="9485" end="9497" title="Nabopolassar" label="Nabopolassar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12591" start="9502" end="9519" title="Nebuchadnezzar II" label="Nebuchadnezzar II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="9566" end="9575" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q211488" start="9765" end="9780" title="Antiochus I Soter" label="Antiochus Soter"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="9798" end="9807" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q746583" start="9860" end="9881" title="Histories (Herodotus)" label="&amp;quot;Histories&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4884837" start="9919" end="9929" title="Belus (Babylonian)" label="Zeus Belus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609731" start="10046" end="10063" title="Stephen L. Harris" label="Stephen L. Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q175447" start="10098" end="10118" title="Babylonian captivity" label="Babylonian captivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q34981" start="10120" end="10132" title="Isaac Asimov" label="Isaac Asimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q21028568" start="10570" end="10583" title="Mesopotamian religion" label="Sumerian myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q989784" start="10590" end="10621" title="Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta" label="Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta"/>
<link wikidata="Q351543" start="10629" end="10637" title="Enmerkar" label="Enmerkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q168518" start="10641" end="10645" title="Uruk" label="Uruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q170153" start="10668" end="10676" title="ziggurat" label="ziggurat"/>
<link wikidata="Q210065" start="10680" end="10685" title="Eridu" label="Eridu"/>
<link wikidata="Q626512" start="10735" end="10741" title="Aratta" label="Aratta"/>
<link wikidata="Q189726" start="10819" end="10823" title="Enki" label="Enki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096441" start="10936" end="10942" title="Subartu" label="Shubur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330881" start="10944" end="10950" title="Hamazi" label="Hamazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4461035" start="10959" end="10965" title="Akkadian Empire" label="Uri-ki"/>
<link wikidata="Q203507" start="10983" end="10988" title="Amorites" label="Martu"/>
<link wikidata="Q10436112" start="11114" end="11127" title="Eridu Genesis" label="Eridu Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q134052" start="11149" end="11159" title="flood myth" label="flood myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q10914393" start="11251" end="11270" title="Neo-Assyrian period" label="Neo-Assyrian period"/>
<link wikidata="Q5680" start="11300" end="11307" title="Nineveh" label="Nineveh"/>
<link wikidata="Q856544" start="11318" end="11341" title="library of Ashurbanipal" label="library of Ashurbanipal"/>
<link wikidata="Q578076" start="11890" end="11896" title="Sennacherib&amp;#x27;s Annals" label="annals"/>
<link wikidata="Q207140" start="11922" end="11933" title="Sennacherib" label="Sennacherib"/>
<link wikidata="Q6646260" start="12075" end="12097" title="Siege of Babylon" label="destruction of Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q175447" start="12177" end="12207" title="Babylonian captivity" label="period of Babylonian captivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q843946" start="12369" end="12385" title="Book of Jubilees" label="Book of Jubilees"/>
<link wikidata="Q837700" start="12482" end="12494" title="Pseudo-Philo" label="Pseudo-Philo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191194" start="12585" end="12592" title="Hamites" label="Hamites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553059" start="12606" end="12612" title="Joktan" label="Joktan"/>
<link wikidata="Q62928" start="12631" end="12638" title="Semites" label="Semites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518112" start="12662" end="12669" title="Dodanim" label="Dodanim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425797" start="12688" end="12697" title="Japhetite" label="Japhetite"/>
<link wikidata="Q9181" start="12764" end="12771" title="Abraham" label="Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q40574" start="12773" end="12776" title="Lot (Bible)" label="Lot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6323112" start="12778" end="12783" title="Nahor, son of Terah" label="Nahor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232616" start="13013" end="13036" title="Antiquities of the Jews" label="Antiquities of the Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="13081" end="13093" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q180095" start="13766" end="13773" title="tyranny" label="tyranny"/>
<link wikidata="Q167510" start="14452" end="14459" title="bitumen" label="bitumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q273320" start="15060" end="15065" title="Sibyl" label="Sibyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q619703" start="15478" end="15504" title="Third Apocalypse of Baruch" label="Third Apocalypse of Baruch"/>
<link wikidata="Q827597" start="15547" end="15561" title="pseudepigrapha" label="pseudepigrapha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117603" start="15969" end="15988" title="Rabbinic literature" label="Rabbinic literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897028" start="16474" end="16481" title="Genesis Rabbah" label="Gen. R."/>
<link wikidata="Q970053" start="17310" end="17325" title="Sefer haYashar (midrash)" label="Sefer ha-Yashar"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="17850" end="17855" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q37110" start="17967" end="17974" title="Pharaoh" label="Pharaoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914993" start="17980" end="17985" title="Haman (Islam)" label="Haman"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="18074" end="18077" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q219675" start="18106" end="18112" title="Sura 2" label="Sura 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="18138" end="18143" title="Babil" label="Babil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587839" start="18178" end="18193" title="Harut and Marut" label="Harut and Marut"/>
<link wikidata="Q316364" start="18381" end="18386" title="Yaqut al-Hamawi" label="Yaqut"/>
<link wikidata="Q129048" start="18670" end="18703" title="History of the Prophets and Kings (book)" label="History of the Prophets and Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q192124" start="18747" end="18756" title="Muhammad ibn Jarir al-Tabari" label="al-Tabari"/>
<link wikidata="Q33538" start="18877" end="18883" title="Syriac language" label="Syriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q311462" start="18967" end="18978" title="Abu al-Fida" label="Abu al-Fida"/>
<link wikidata="Q502282" start="19029" end="19033" title="Eber" label="Eber"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="19100" end="19106" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q8046816" start="19389" end="19403" title="Yahiya Emerick" label="Yahiya Emerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q459842" start="19528" end="19542" title="Book of Mormon" label="Book of Mormon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3162698" start="19556" end="19561" title="Jared (Book of Mormon)" label="Jared"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022754" start="19744" end="19760" title="Valley of Nimrod" label="Valley of Nimrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="19920" end="19967" title="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476514" start="20135" end="20148" title="Book of Ether" label="Book of Ether"/>
<link wikidata="Q989784" start="20226" end="20257" title="Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta" label="Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta"/>
<link wikidata="Q272523" start="20273" end="20279" title="Innana" label="Innana"/>
<link wikidata="Q48420" start="20722" end="20729" title="Gnosticism" label="Gnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709629" start="20756" end="20774" title="Paraphrase of Shem" label="Paraphrase of Shem"/>
<link wikidata="Q134052" start="20856" end="20867" title="Flood myth" label="great flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q190375" start="20906" end="20928" title="historical linguistics" label="historical linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q501032" start="20957" end="20981" title="Origin of language" label="single original language"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="21240" end="21257" title="pseudoscience" label="pseudolinguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478235" start="21314" end="21321" title="History of linguistics" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="21325" end="21333" title="language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q41484" start="21909" end="21915" title="Hermes" label="Hermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="21948" end="21952" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q649624" start="21975" end="21984" title="Phoroneus" label="Phoroneus"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="22050" end="22055" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130145" start="22067" end="22078" title="Naga people" label="Naga people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340125" start="22108" end="22121" title="Encounter Bay" label="Encounter Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533493" start="22140" end="22145" title="Maidu" label="Maidu"/>
<link wikidata="Q536129" start="22165" end="22172" title="Tlingit people" label="Tlingit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137419" start="22192" end="22214" title="K&amp;#x27;iche&amp;#x27; people" label="K&amp;#x27;iche&amp;#x27; Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="22234" end="22241" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982248" start="22341" end="22356" title="Biblical Hebrew" label="Hebrew language"/>
<link wikidata="Q70899" start="22415" end="22419" title="Adam" label="Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363340" start="22423" end="22431" title="Paradise" label="Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q351633" start="22462" end="22477" title="Adamic language" label="Adamic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="22534" end="22549" title="Dante Alighieri" label="Dante Alighieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q18081" start="22583" end="22604" title="De vulgari eloquentia" label="De vulgari eloquentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40185" start="22721" end="22734" title="Divine Comedy" label="Divine Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316633" start="23187" end="23189" title="El (god)" label="El"/>
<link wikidata="Q320021" start="23276" end="23277" title="Close front unrounded vowel" label="I"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="23315" end="23328" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q25295" start="23329" end="23344" title="language family" label="language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425797" start="23390" end="23399" title="Japhetic" label="Japhetite"/>
<link wikidata="Q310958" start="23429" end="23440" title="Rasmus Rask" label="Rasmus Rask"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413128" start="23454" end="23475" title="Indo-European studies" label="Indo-European studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q56433" start="23779" end="23785" title="Goidelic languages" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q774407" start="23797" end="23816" title="Auraicept na n-Éces" label="Auraicept na n-Éces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990745" start="23825" end="23831" title="Tuscan language" label="Tuscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q518160" start="23833" end="23856" title="Giovanni Battista Gelli" label="Giovanni Battista Gelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754685" start="23864" end="23890" title="Pier Francesco Giambullari" label="Pier Francesco Giambullari"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="23899" end="23904" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862248" start="23906" end="23922" title="Goropius Becanus" label="Goropius Becanus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23930" end="23944" title="Abraham Mylius" label="Abraham Mylius"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="23953" end="23960" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q350198" start="23962" end="23975" title="Olaus Rudbeck" label="Olaus Rudbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="23984" end="23990" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q66605" start="23992" end="24017" title="Georg Philipp Harsdorffer" label="Georg Philipp Harsdörffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q71347" start="24025" end="24033" title="Justus Georg Schottel" label="Schottel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24064" end="24077" title="Andreas Kempe" label="Andreas Kempe"/>
<link wikidata="Q170539" start="24362" end="24368" title="parody" label="parody"/>
<link wikidata="Q9035" start="24386" end="24392" title="Danish language" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="24429" end="24435" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q7662603" start="24774" end="24804" title="Synopsis Universae Philologiae" label="Synopsis Universae Philologiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033715" start="25027" end="25046" title="sons of Noah" label="descendants of Noah"/>
<link wikidata="Q29334" start="25088" end="25091" title="Septuagint" label="LXX"/>
<link wikidata="Q188883" start="25655" end="25676" title="Clement of Alexandria" label="Clement of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992415" start="25684" end="25692" title="Stromata" label="Stromata"/>
<link wikidata="Q207113" start="25710" end="25728" title="Hippolytus of Rome" label="Hippolytus of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q33538" start="25782" end="25788" title="Syriac language" label="Syriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q656897" start="25800" end="25817" title="Cave of Treasures" label="Cave of Treasures"/>
<link wikidata="Q313922" start="25828" end="25849" title="Epiphanius of Salamis" label="Epiphanius of Salamis"/>
<link wikidata="Q731974" start="25862" end="25870" title="Panarion" label="Panarion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="25884" end="25897" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="St. Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q212318" start="25911" end="25926" title="City of God (book)" label="The City of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q166876" start="26101" end="26119" title="Isidore of Seville" label="Isidore of Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q665934" start="26133" end="26144" title="Etymologiae" label="Etymologiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q130900" start="26413" end="26423" title="Longobards" label="Longobards"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="26432" end="26438" title="Franks" label="Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q740004" start="26614" end="26632" title="Historia Brittonum" label="Historia Brittonum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247744" start="26649" end="26668" title="The Meadows of Gold" label="The Meadows of Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q168705" start="26678" end="26687" title="Abu al-Hasan &amp;#x27;Alī al-Mas&amp;#x27;ūdī" label="al Masudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785184" start="26701" end="26727" title="Book of Roads and Kingdoms (al-Bakrī)" label="Book of Roads and Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q337126" start="26737" end="26745" title="al-Bakri" label="al-Bakri"/>
<link wikidata="Q374129" start="26777" end="26795" title="Lebor Gabála Érenn" label="Lebor Gabála Érenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561132" start="26840" end="26848" title="Yosippon" label="Yosippon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114061" start="26865" end="26888" title="Chronicles of Jerahmeel" label="Chronicles of Jerahmeel"/>
<link wikidata="Q970053" start="26906" end="26920" title="Sefer haYashar (midrash)" label="Sefer haYashar"/>
<link wikidata="Q35308" start="27006" end="27015" title="Old Irish" label="Old Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6696417" start="27051" end="27072" title="Luccreth moccu Chiara" label="Luccreth moccu Chiara"/>
<link wikidata="Q774407" start="27107" end="27126" title="Auraicept na n-Éces" label="Auraicept na n-Éces"/>
<link wikidata="Q129048" start="27140" end="27173" title="History of the Prophets and Kings" label="History of the Prophets and Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q192124" start="27205" end="27233" title="Muhammad ibn Jarir al-Tabari" label="Muhammad ibn Jarir al-Tabari"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590987" start="27269" end="27287" title="Solomon and Saturn" label="Solomon and Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q192551" start="27313" end="27330" title="Primary Chronicle" label="Primary Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q123006" start="27352" end="27363" title="Kabbalah" label="Kabbalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q742750" start="27375" end="27380" title="Bahir" label="Bahir"/>
<link wikidata="Q205882" start="27405" end="27415" title="Prose Edda" label="Prose Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q102323" start="27425" end="27441" title="Snorri Sturluson" label="Snorri Sturluson"/>
<link wikidata="Q33538" start="27450" end="27456" title="Syriac language" label="Syriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257239" start="27463" end="27478" title="Book of the Bee" label="Book of the Bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104499" start="27499" end="27527" title="Gesta Hunnorum et Hungarorum" label="Gesta Hunnorum et Hungarorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q704179" start="27609" end="27616" title="Giovanni Villani" label="Villani"/>
<link wikidata="Q847953" start="27661" end="27677" title="Midrash ha-Gadol" label="Midrash ha-Gadol"/>
<link wikidata="Q555476" start="28147" end="28161" title="José de Acosta" label="José de Acosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q458650" start="28229" end="28243" title="António Vieira" label="António Vieira"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="28535" end="28550" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q122173" start="28585" end="28591" title="Roman mythology" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28628" end="28640" title="Giants (Greek mythology)#The Gigantomachy" label="Gigantomachy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="28733" end="28737" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649" start="28856" end="28863" title="Jupiter (mythology)" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q184742" start="28925" end="28938" title="Metamorphoses" label="Metamorphoses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417475" start="29087" end="29111" title="Great Pyramid of Cholula" label="Great Pyramid of Cholula"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="29139" end="29154" title="Dominican friar" label="Dominican friar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1220424" start="29155" end="29166" title="Diego Durán" label="Diego Durán"/>
<link wikidata="Q828435" start="29286" end="29314" title="conquest of the Aztec Empire" label="conquest of the Aztec Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396999" start="29852" end="29889" title="Fernando de Alva Cortés Ixtlilxóchitl" label="Fernando de Alva Cortés Ixtlilxóchitl"/>
<link wikidata="Q187897" start="29920" end="29927" title="Toltecs" label="Toltecs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937531" start="30239" end="30265" title="Tohono O&amp;#x27;odham people" label="Tohono O&amp;#x27;odham people"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317756" start="30278" end="30287" title="Montezuma (mythology)" label="Montezuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277626" start="30516" end="30521" title="Tharu people" label="Tharu"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="30525" end="30530" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="30544" end="30549" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q48373" start="30580" end="30597" title="David Livingstone" label="David Livingstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q849108" start="30629" end="30639" title="Lake Ngami" label="Lake Ngami"/>
<link wikidata="Q4491421" start="30812" end="30841" title="Folklore in the Old Testament Studies in Comparative Religion Legend and Law" label="Folklore in the Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q151936" start="30884" end="30903" title="James George Frazer" label="James George Frazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694668" start="31080" end="31094" title="Lozi mythology" label="Lozi mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q457341" start="31301" end="31308" title="Ashanti people" label="Ashanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q640090" start="31418" end="31430" title="Kongo people" label="Kongo people"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="31446" end="31454" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287301" start="31551" end="31556" title="Karbi people" label="Karbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6442484" start="31561" end="31572" title="Kuki people" label="Kuki people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="31576" end="31581" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q271790" start="31631" end="31643" title="Karen people" label="Karen people"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="31647" end="31654" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q199451" start="31812" end="31818" title="pagoda" label="pagoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267758" start="31838" end="31845" title="Karenni people" label="Karenni"/>
<link wikidata="Q119230" start="31991" end="32008" title="Admiralty Islands" label="Admiralty Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q42" start="32193" end="32206" title="Douglas Adams" label="Douglas Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107329" start="32219" end="32260" title="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy (novel)" label="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q37093" start="32384" end="32389" title="Yahoo!" label="Yahoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q546345" start="32426" end="32443" title="Babel Fish (website)" label="Yahoo! Babel Fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q43270" start="32480" end="32495" title="Pieter Brueghel the Elder" label="Pieter Brueghel"/>
<link wikidata="Q10285" start="32541" end="32550" title="Colosseum" label="Colosseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q593115" start="32740" end="32758" title="Great Mosque of Samarra" label="Minaret of Samarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470" start="32760" end="32771" title="M.C. Escher" label="M.C. Escher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899725" start="32821" end="32832" title="Tower of Babel (M. C. Escher)" label="his woodcut"/>
<link wikidata="Q87567" start="32872" end="32888" title="Anton Rubinstein" label="Anton Rubinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261226" start="32929" end="32947" title="Der Thurm zu Babel" label="Der Thurm zu Babel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982523" start="32980" end="32991" title="Adam Darius" label="Adam Darius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665153" start="33089" end="33092" title="Institute of Contemporary Arts" label="ICA"/>
<link wikidata="Q19504" start="33106" end="33116" title="Fritz Lang" label="Fritz Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q151599" start="33140" end="33150" title="Metropolis (1927 film)" label="Metropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q699091" start="33616" end="33645" title="The Tower of Babel (Brueghel)" label="Brueghel&amp;#x27;s 1563 painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q652256" start="33697" end="33706" title="epic film" label="epic film"/>
<link wikidata="" start="33713" end="33743" title="The Bible: In the Beginning..." label="The Bible: In the Beginning..."/>
<link wikidata="Q959541" start="33779" end="33796" title="Michael Oakeshott" label="Michael Oakeshott"/>
<link wikidata="Q232417" start="34234" end="34245" title="A. S. Byatt" label="A. S. Byatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q503095" start="34493" end="34503" title="Ted Chiang" label="Ted Chiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q4102150" start="34531" end="34547" title="Tower of Babylon (story)" label="Tower of Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903098" start="34737" end="34755" title="Bible Ki Kahaniyan" label="Bible Ki Kahaniyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023247" start="34778" end="34789" title="DD National" label="DD National"/>
<link wikidata="Q64712" start="34803" end="34818" title="Chris Huelsbeck" label="Chris Huelsbeck"/>
<link wikidata="" start="34908" end="34936" title="Turrican II: The Final Fight" label="Turrican II: The Final Fight"/>
<link wikidata="" start="35019" end="35059" title="Arabian Nights: Sinbad&amp;#x27;s Adventures" label="Arabian Nights: Sinbad&amp;#x27;s Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q43270" start="35438" end="35462" title="Pieter Bruegel the Elder" label="Pieter Bruegel the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q909" start="35487" end="35504" title="Jorge Luis Borges" label="Jorge Luis Borges"/>
<link wikidata="Q473" start="35532" end="35552" title="The Library of Babel" label="The Library of Babel"/>
<link wikidata="Q239897" start="35657" end="35661" title="Joann Sfar" label="Sfar"/>
<link wikidata="Q388747" start="35675" end="35695" title="The Rabbi&amp;#x27;s Cat (comics)" label="The Rabbi&amp;#x27;s Cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748216" start="35881" end="35897" title="Doshin the Giant" label="Doshin the Giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q122234668" start="36122" end="36139" title="Chants of Sennaar" label="Chants of Sennaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q787929" start="36207" end="36227" title="Babylonian astronomy" label="Babylonian astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q625134" start="36230" end="36238" title="Borsippa" label="Borsippa"/>
<link wikidata="Q301593" start="36241" end="36256" title="Enuma Anu Enlil" label="Enuma Anu Enlil"/>
<link wikidata="Q210065" start="36259" end="36264" title="Eridu" label="Eridu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313085" start="36267" end="36291" title="Evolutionary linguistics" label="Evolutionary linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11833101" start="36294" end="36320" title="List of tallest structures" label="List of tallest structures"/>
<link wikidata="Q29876740" start="36323" end="36340" title="Minar (Firuzabad)" label="Minar (Firuzabad)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102483" start="36343" end="36359" title="Origin of speech" label="Origin of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033715" start="36362" end="36381" title="Generations of Noah" label="Generations of Noah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923855" start="36750" end="36767" title="Vetus Testamentum" label="Vetus Testamentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293454" start="37354" end="37368" title="SkyscraperPage" label="SkyscraperPage"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31236" wikidata="Q314287" url="?curid=31236" title="Thomas Vinterberg">
<text>Thomas Vinterberg (; born 19 May 1969) is a Danish film director who, along with Lars von Trier, co-founded the Dogme 95 movement in filmmaking, which established rules for simplifying movie production. He is best known for the films &quot;The Celebration&quot; (1998), &quot;Submarino&quot; (2010), &quot;The Hunt&quot; (2012), &quot;Far from the Madding Crowd&quot; (2015), and &quot;Another Round&quot; (2020). For &quot;Another Round&quot; he was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Director, the first Danish filmmaker nominated in the Best Director category.

== Early life and education ==
Vinterberg was born in Frederiksberg, Denmark. In 1993, he graduated from the National Film School of Denmark with &quot;&quot; (&quot;Sidste omgang&quot;), which won the jury and producers&#x27; awards at the Internationales Festival der Filmhochschulen München, and First Prize at Tel Aviv.

== Career ==
In 1993 Vinterberg made his first TV drama for DR TV and his short fiction film &quot;&quot;, produced by at Nimbus Film. The film won awards at the 1994 Nordisk Panorama Film Festival, the International Short Film Festival in Clermont-Ferrand, and the Toronto International Film Festival. His first feature film was &quot;The Biggest Heroes&quot; (&quot;De Største Helte&quot;), a road movie that received acclaim in his native Denmark. In 1995, Vinterberg formed the Dogme 95 movement with Lars von Trier, Kristian Levring, and Søren Kragh-Jacobsen.

Following that dogma in 1998, he conceived, wrote and directed (and also had a small acting role in) the first of the Dogme movies, &quot;The Celebration&quot; (&quot;Festen&quot;). As per the rules of the Dogme manifesto, he did not take a directorial credit. However, he and the film won numerous nominations and awards, including the Jury Prize at the 1998 Cannes Film Festival. At the turn of the century, Vinterberg participated in the experimental broadcast &quot;D-dag&quot;, where he and three other filmmakers directed broadcasts on four different channels, with the viewer able to switch between them and create their own viewing experience. A final edit was released in 2001.

In 2003, he directed the apocalyptic science fiction romance-drama &quot;It&#x27;s All About Love&quot;, a film he wrote, directed and produced himself over a period of five years. The film was entirely in English and featured, among others, Joaquin Phoenix, Claire Danes, and Sean Penn. The movie did not do well, as critics and audiences found it idiosyncratic and somewhat incomprehensible. His next film, the English-language &quot;Dear Wendy&quot; (2005), scripted by Lars von Trier, had poor ticket sales in his native Denmark where it sold only 14,521 tickets. However he won the Silver George for Best Director at the 27th Moscow International Film Festival. Vinterberg then tried to retrace his roots with a smaller Danish-language production, &quot;En mand kommer hjem&quot; (2007), which also had poor ticket sales in his native Denmark, selling only 31,232 tickets.

On 1 August 2008, he directed the music video for &quot;The Day That Never Comes&quot;, the first single off Metallica&#x27;s album &quot;Death Magnetic&quot;. His 2010 film &quot;Submarino&quot; was nominated for the Golden Bear at the 60th Berlin International Film Festival. In 2012, his film &quot;The Hunt&quot; competed for the Palme d&#x27;Or at the 2012 Cannes Film Festival and was nominated for Best Foreign Language Film at the 86th Academy Awards.

In 2015, he directed &quot;Far from the Madding Crowd&quot;, an adaptation of the acclaimed Thomas Hardy novel, starring Carey Mulligan, Matthias Schoenaerts, Michael Sheen and Tom Sturridge. Vinterberg reunited with Matthias Schoenaerts in &quot;Kursk&quot;, a film about the Kursk submarine disaster that happened in 2000.

In 2019, Vinterberg lost his daughter Ida in a car accident while she was traveling home from Belgium with her mother. As such, he dedicated &quot;Another Round&quot; (&quot;Druk&quot;) to her, while filming much of the film in her school with her classmates. Vinterberg was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Director for the film, which also won the BAFTA Award for Best Film Not in the English Language and the Academy Award for Best International Feature Film; he dedicated the latter award to Ida. 

In 2024 Vinterberg&#x27;s first foray into directing for TV was broadcast in Denmark. The seven-episode series called &quot;Families like Ours&quot; explores a near-future Denmark when the country is gradually evacuated due to rising sea levels.

== Filmography ==
=== Short film ===
=== Feature film===
=== Television ===
== Awards and honours ==
In April 2016, the French government appointed Vinterberg a Chevalier of the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres. For his film &quot;Another Round&quot; he was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Director and won the BAFTA Award for Best Film Not in the English Language.

== References ==
== External links ==
* 
* CNN interview with Thomas Vinterberg
* Thomas Vinterberg: About a scene by Ingmar Bergman Video interview by Louisiana Channel, 2013</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q314287" start="0" end="17" title="Thomas Vinterberg" label="Thomas Vinterberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q133730" start="81" end="95" title="Lars von Trier" label="Lars von Trier"/>
<link wikidata="Q211481" start="112" end="120" title="Dogme 95" label="Dogme 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q841958" start="240" end="255" title="Festen" label="The Celebration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299929" start="276" end="285" title="Submarino" label="Submarino"/>
<link wikidata="Q32303" start="306" end="314" title="The Hunt (2012 film)" label="The Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q15527055" start="335" end="361" title="Far from the Madding Crowd (2015 film)" label="Far from the Madding Crowd"/>
<link wikidata="Q69303989" start="386" end="399" title="Another Round (film)" label="Another Round"/>
<link wikidata="Q103360" start="469" end="500" title="Academy Award for Best Director" label="Academy Award for Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q30096" start="625" end="638" title="Frederiksberg" label="Frederiksberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="640" end="647" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q936354" start="680" end="711" title="National Film School of Denmark" label="National Film School of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479823" start="812" end="864" title="Internationales Festival der Filmhochschulen München" label="Internationales Festival der Filmhochschulen München"/>
<link wikidata="Q33935" start="885" end="893" title="Tel Aviv" label="Tel Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164334" start="956" end="961" title="Danmarks Radio" label="DR TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q117555" start="1018" end="1029" title="Nimbus Film" label="Nimbus Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q20971242" start="1063" end="1093" title="Nordisk Panorama Film Festival" label="Nordisk Panorama Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q465682" start="1099" end="1132" title="Clermont-Ferrand International Short Film Festival" label="International Short Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q42168" start="1136" end="1152" title="Clermont-Ferrand" label="Clermont-Ferrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q390018" start="1162" end="1197" title="Toronto International Film Festival" label="Toronto International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q12307939" start="1232" end="1250" title="The Biggest Heroes" label="The Biggest Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="1338" end="1345" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q211481" start="1378" end="1386" title="Dogme 95" label="Dogme 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q133730" start="1401" end="1415" title="Lars von Trier" label="Lars von Trier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992193" start="1417" end="1433" title="Kristian Levring" label="Kristian Levring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244129" start="1439" end="1459" title="Søren Kragh-Jacobsen" label="Søren Kragh-Jacobsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q841958" start="1600" end="1615" title="Festen" label="The Celebration"/>
<link wikidata="Q933940" start="1817" end="1842" title="1998 Cannes Film Festival" label="1998 Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q197949" start="2175" end="2202" title="apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction" label="apocalyptic science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q469708" start="2223" end="2247" title="It&amp;#x27;s All About Love" label="It&amp;#x27;s All About Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q185140" start="2392" end="2407" title="Joaquin Phoenix" label="Joaquin Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q867813" start="2409" end="2421" title="Claire Danes" label="Claire Danes"/>
<link wikidata="Q44221" start="2427" end="2436" title="Sean Penn" label="Sean Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q682695" start="2586" end="2596" title="Dear Wendy" label="Dear Wendy"/>
<link wikidata="Q133730" start="2623" end="2637" title="Lars von Trier" label="Lars von Trier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4053352" start="2776" end="2815" title="27th Moscow International Film Festival" label="27th Moscow International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q10483390" start="2909" end="2928" title="A Man Comes Home" label="En mand kommer hjem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139102" start="3085" end="3109" title="The Day That Never Comes" label="The Day That Never Comes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920" start="3138" end="3147" title="Metallica" label="Metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q151657" start="3167" end="3181" title="Death Magnetic" label="Death Magnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299929" start="3209" end="3218" title="Submarino" label="Submarino"/>
<link wikidata="Q154590" start="3247" end="3258" title="Golden Bear" label="Golden Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q574075" start="3266" end="3305" title="60th Berlin International Film Festival" label="60th Berlin International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q32303" start="3331" end="3339" title="The Hunt (2012 film)" label="The Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q179808" start="3363" end="3378" title="Palme d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Palme d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q841363" start="3386" end="3411" title="2012 Cannes Film Festival" label="2012 Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q105304" start="3434" end="3460" title="Academy Award for Best International Feature Film" label="Best Foreign Language Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q13419956" start="3468" end="3487" title="86th Academy Awards" label="86th Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q15527055" start="3517" end="3543" title="Far from the Madding Crowd (2015 film)" label="Far from the Madding Crowd"/>
<link wikidata="Q132805" start="3582" end="3594" title="Thomas Hardy" label="Thomas Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642996" start="3595" end="3600" title="Far from the Madding Crowd" label="novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q219655" start="3611" end="3625" title="Carey Mulligan" label="Carey Mulligan"/>
<link wikidata="Q427019" start="3627" end="3647" title="Matthias Schoenaerts" label="Matthias Schoenaerts"/>
<link wikidata="Q298276" start="3649" end="3662" title="Michael Sheen" label="Michael Sheen"/>
<link wikidata="Q703278" start="3667" end="3680" title="Tom Sturridge" label="Tom Sturridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q427019" start="3707" end="3727" title="Matthias Schoenaerts" label="Matthias Schoenaerts"/>
<link wikidata="Q28974564" start="3737" end="3742" title="Kursk (film)" label="Kursk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136114" start="3767" end="3791" title="Kursk submarine disaster" label="Kursk submarine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q69303989" start="3963" end="3976" title="Another Round (film)" label="Another Round"/>
<link wikidata="Q103360" start="4109" end="4140" title="Academy Award for Best Director" label="Academy Award for Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925687" start="4174" end="4227" title="BAFTA Award for Best Film Not in the English Language" label="BAFTA Award for Best Film Not in the English Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q105304" start="4236" end="4285" title="Academy Award for Best International Feature Film" label="Academy Award for Best International Feature Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q124376652" start="4451" end="4469" title="Families like Ours" label="Families like Ours"/>
<link wikidata="Q841083" start="4554" end="4571" title="sea level rise" label="rising sea levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q716909" start="4735" end="4781" title="Ordre des Arts et des Lettres" label="Chevalier of the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres"/>
<link wikidata="Q103360" start="4847" end="4878" title="Academy Award for Best Director" label="Academy Award for Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925687" start="4891" end="4944" title="BAFTA Award for Best Foreign Film" label="BAFTA Award for Best Film Not in the English Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689082" start="5099" end="5116" title="Louisiana Channel" label="Louisiana Channel"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31238" wikidata="Q150115" url="?curid=31238" title="Tomahawk (missile family)">
<text>The BGM-109 Tomahawk () Land Attack Missile (TLAM) is an American long-range, all-weather, jet-powered, subsonic cruise missile that is primarily used by the United States Navy and Royal Navy in ship and submarine-based land-attack operations.

Developed at the Applied Physics Laboratory of Johns Hopkins University under James H. Walker near Laurel, Maryland, the Tomahawk emerged in the 1970s as a modular cruise missile first manufactured by General Dynamics. The Tomahawk aimed to fulfill the need for a medium- to long-range, low-altitude missile with diverse capabilities. Its modular design allows for compatibility with a range of warheads, including high-explosive, submunitions, and bunker-busters. The Tomahawk can use a variety of guidance systems, including GPS, inertial navigation, and terrain contour matching. Over a dozen variants and upgraded versions have been developed since the original design, including air-, sub-, and ground-launched configurations with both conventional and nuclear armaments. The Tomahawk&#x27;s manufacturing history has seen several transitions. General Dynamics served as the sole supplier in the 1970s. From 1992 until 1994, McDonnell Douglas was the sole supplier of Tomahawks, producing Block II and Block III versions and remanufacturing many Tomahawks to Block III specifications. In 1994, Hughes Aircraft, having purchased General Dynamics&#x27; missile division in 1992, outbid McDonnell Douglas to become the sole supplier of Tomahawks. A joint venture between Hughes and Raytheon manufactured the missile from 1995 until Raytheon&#x27;s acquisition of Hughes in 1997, solidifying their position as the sole supplier. In 2016, the US Department of Defense purchased 149 Tomahawk Block IV missiles for $202.3 million. , Raytheon remains the sole manufacturer of non-nuclear, sea-launched Tomahawk variants.

==Variants==
The variants and multiple upgrades to the missile include:
* BGM-109A Tomahawk Land Attack Missile – Nuclear (TLAM-N) with a W80 nuclear warhead. Retired from service sometime between 2010 and 2013. Reports from early 2018 state that the US Navy is considering reintroducing a (yet unknown type of) nuclear-armed cruise missile into service.
* RGM/UGM-109B Tomahawk Anti-Ship Missile (TASM) – Anti-ship variant with active radar homing; withdrawn from service in 1994 and converted to Block IV version.
* BGM-109C Tomahawk Land Attack Missile – Conventional (TLAM-C) with a unitary warhead. This was initially a modified Bullpup warhead.
* BGM-109D Tomahawk Land Attack Missile – Dispenser (TLAM-D) with cluster munitions.
** &quot;Kit 2&quot; Tomahawk Land Attack Missile – with a unique warhead used to disable electrical grids. First used in the Gulf War.
* RGM/UGM-109E Tomahawk Land Attack Missile (TLAM-E Block IV) – improved version of the TLAM-C. Also called &quot;Tactical Tomahawk&quot;.
* BGM-109G Gryphon Ground Launched Cruise Missile (GLCM) – with a W84 nuclear warhead; withdrawn from service in 1991 to comply with the INF Treaty.
* AGM-109H/L Medium Range Air-to-Surface Missile (MRASM) – a shorter-range, turbojet powered air-launched cruise missile with cluster munitions; never entered service, cost 569,000 (1999).

BGM-109G Gryphon Ground Launched Cruise Missiles (GLCM) and their truck-like launch vehicles were employed at bases in Europe; they were withdrawn from service to comply with the 1987 Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty. Many of the anti-ship versions were converted into TLAMs at the end of the Cold War. The Block III TLAMs that entered service in 1993 can fly farther using their new turbofan engines and use Global Positioning System (GPS) receivers to strike more precisely. Block III TLAM-Cs retain the Digital Scene Matching Area Correlation (DSMAC) II navigation system, allowing three kinds of navigation: GPS-only, which allow for rapid mission planning, with some reduced accuracy, DSMAC-only, which take longer to plan but terminal accuracy is somewhat better; and GPS-aided missions that combine DSMAC II and GPS navigation for greatest accuracy. Block IV TLAMs have an improved turbofan engine that allows them to get better fuel economy and change speeds in flight. The Block IV TLAMs can loiter better and have electro-optical sensors that allow real-time battle damage assessment. The Block IVs can be given a new target in flight and can transmit an image, via satcom, immediately before impact to help determine whether the missile is on target and the likely damage from the attack.

==Upgrades==

A major improvement to the Tomahawk is network-centric warfare-capabilities, using data from multiple sensors (aircraft, UAVs, satellites, foot soldiers, tanks, ships) to find its target. It will also be able to send data from its sensors to these platforms.

&quot;Tomahawk Block II&quot; variants were all tested during January 1981 to October 1983. Deployed in 1984, some of the improvements included: an improved booster rocket, cruise missile radar altimeter, and navigation through the Digital Scene Matching Area Corellator (DSMAC). DSMAC was a highly accurate rudimentary AI which allowed early low power computers to navigate and precisely target objectives using cameras on board the missile. With its ability to visually identify and aim directly at a target, it was more accurate than weapons using estimated GPS coordinates. Due to the very limited computer power of the day, DSMAC did not directly evaluate the maps, but instead would compute contrast maps and then combine multiple maps into a buffer, then compare the average of those combined images to determine if it was similar to the data in its small memory system. The data for the flight path was very low resolution in order to free up memory to be used for high resolution data about the target area. The guidance data was computed by a mainframe computer which took spy satellite photos and estimated what the terrain would appear like during low level flight. Since this data would not match the real terrain exactly, and since terrain changes seasonally and with changes in light quality, DSMAC would filter out differences between maps and use the remaining similar sections in order to find its location regardless of changes in how the ground appeared. It also had an extremely bright strobe light it could use to illuminate the ground for fractions of a second in order to find its position at night, and was able to take the difference in ground appearance into account.

&quot;Tomahawk Block III&quot; introduced in 1993 added time-of-arrival control and improved accuracy for Digital Scene Matching Area Correlator (DSMAC) and jam-resistant GPS, smaller, lighter WDU-36 warhead, engine improvements and extended missile&#x27;s range.

&quot;Tactical Tomahawk Weapons Control System (TTWCS)&quot; takes advantage of a loitering feature in the missile&#x27;s flight path and allows commanders to redirect the missile to an alternative target, if required. It can be reprogrammed in-flight to attack predesignated targets with GPS coordinates stored in its memory or to any other GPS coordinates. Also, the missile can send data about its status back to the commander. It entered service with the US Navy in late 2004. The Tactical Tomahawk Weapons Control System (TTWCS) added the capability for limited mission planning on board the firing unit (FRU).

&quot;Tomahawk Block IV&quot; introduced in 2006 adds the strike controller which can change the missile in flight to one of 15 preprogrammed alternate targets or redirect it to a new target. This targeting flexibility includes the capability to loiter over the battlefield awaiting a more critical target. The missile can also transmit battle damage indication imagery and missile health and status messages via the two-way satellite data link. Firing platforms now have the capability to plan and execute GPS-only missions. Block IV also has an improved anti-jam GPS receiver for enhanced mission performance.
Block IV includes Tomahawk Weapons Control System (TTWCS), and Tomahawk Command and Control System (TC2S).

On 16 August 2010, the Navy completed the first live test of the Joint Multi-Effects Warhead System (JMEWS), a new warhead designed to give the Tomahawk the same blast-fragmentation capabilities while introducing enhanced penetration capabilities in a single warhead. In the static test, the warhead detonated and created a hole large enough for the follow-through element to completely penetrate the concrete target. In February 2014, US Central Command sponsored development and testing of the JMEWS, analyzing the ability of the programmable warhead to integrate onto the Block IV Tomahawk, giving the missile bunker buster effects to better penetrate hardened structures.

In 2012, the USN studied applying Advanced Anti-Radiation Guided Missile (AARGM) technology into the Tactical Tomahawk.

In 2014, Raytheon began testing Block IV improvements to attack sea and moving land targets. The new passive radar seeker will pick up the electromagnetic radar signature of a target and follow it, and actively send out a signal to bounce off potential targets before impact to discriminate its legitimacy before impact. Mounting the multi-mode sensor on the missile&#x27;s nose would remove fuel space, but company officials believe the Navy would be willing to give up space for the sensor&#x27;s new technologies. The previous Tomahawk Anti-Ship Missile, retired over a decade earlier, was equipped with inertial guidance and the seeker of the Harpoon missile and there was concern with its ability to clearly discriminate between targets from a long distance, since at the time Navy sensors did not have as much range as the missile itself, which would be more reliable with the new seeker&#x27;s passive detection and millimeter-wave active radar homing. Raytheon estimates adding the new seeker would cost $250,000 per missile. Other upgrades include a sea-skimming flight path. The first Block IV TLAMs modified with a maritime attack capability will enter service in 2021.

A supersonic version of the Tomahawk is under consideration for development with a ramjet to increase its speed to Mach 3. A limiting factor to this is the dimensions of shipboard launch tubes. Instead of modifying every ship able to carry cruise missiles, the ramjet-powered Tomahawk would still have to fit within a diameter and long tube.

In October 2015, Raytheon announced the Tomahawk had demonstrated new capabilities in a test launch, using its onboard camera to take a reconnaissance photo and transmit it to fleet headquarters. It then entered a loitering pattern until given new targeting coordinates to strike.

By January 2016, Los Alamos National Laboratory was working on a project to turn unburned fuel left over when a Tomahawk reaches its target into an additional explosive force. To do this, the missile&#x27;s JP-10 fuel is turned into a fuel air explosive to combine with oxygen in the air and burn rapidly. The thermobaric explosion of the burning fuel acts, in effect, as an additional warhead and can even be more powerful than the main warhead itself when there is sufficient fuel left in the case of a short-range target.
Tomahawk Block V was introduced in 2021 with improvements to navigation and in-flight targeting. Block Va, the Maritime Strike Tomahawk (MST) which allows the missile to engage a moving target at sea, and Block Vb outfitted with the JMEWS warhead for hard-target penetration, will be released after the initial batch of Block V is delivered in March 2021. All Block IV Tomahawks will be converted to Block V standard, while the remaining Block III missiles will be retired and demilitarized.

Tomahawk Block V have longer range and dynamic targeting with the capability to hit vessels at sea (maritime strike role). Raytheon is recertifying and modernizing the missile, extending its service life by 15 years, and resulting in the new Tomahawk Block V series:
* Block V: A modernized TACTOM with upgraded navigation and communication
* Block VA: Block V anti-ship version, capable of hitting moving targets at sea. Block VA&#x27;s range is shorter than the Block V it&#x27;s based upon, due to the extra space for the new navigation/sensor/passive radar needs. Estimate the Block VA&#x27;s range is 
* Block VB: Block V, with a joint multi-effects warhead that can hit more diverse land targets.

In 2020, Los Alamos National Laboratory reported that it would use corn ethanol to produce domestic fuel for Tomahawk missiles, which also does not require harsh acids to manufacture, compared to petroleum-based JP-10.

==Launch systems==
Each missile is stored and launched from a pressurized canister that protects it during transportation and storage, and also serves as a launch tube. These canisters were racked in Armored Box Launchers (ABL), which were installed on the four reactivated &quot;Iowa&quot;-class battleships , , , and . The ABLs were also installed on eight s, the four s, and the nuclear cruiser . These canisters are also in vertical launching systems (VLS) in other surface ships, capsule launch systems (CLS) in the later and s, and in submarines&#x27; torpedo tubes.
All ABL equipped ships have been decommissioned.

For submarine-launched missiles (called UGM-109s), after being ejected by gas pressure (vertically via the VLS) or by water impulse (horizontally via the torpedo tube), a solid-fuel booster is ignited to propel the missile and guide it out of the water.

After achieving flight, the missile&#x27;s wings are unfolded for lift, the airscoop is exposed and the turbofan engine is employed for cruise flight. Over water, the Tomahawk uses inertial guidance or GPS to follow a preset course; once over land, the missile&#x27;s guidance system is aided by terrain contour matching (TERCOM). Terminal guidance is provided by the Digital Scene Matching Area Correlation (DSMAC) system or GPS, producing a claimed circular error probable of about .

The Tomahawk Weapon System consists of the missile, Theater Mission Planning Center (TMPC)/Afloat Planning System, and either the Tomahawk Weapon Control System (on surface ships) or Combat Control System (for submarines).

Several versions of control systems have been used, including:
* v2 TWCS – Tomahawk Weapon Control System (1983), also known as &quot;green screens&quot;, was based on an old tank computing system.
* v3 ATWCS – Advanced Tomahawk Weapon Control System (1994), first Commercial Off the Shelf, uses HP-UX.
* v4 TTWCS – Tactical Tomahawk Weapon Control System, (2003).
* v5 TTWCS – Next Generation Tactical Tomahawk Weapon Control System. (2006)

On 18 August 2019, the United States Navy conducted a test flight of a Tomahawk missile launched from a ground-based version of the Mark 41 Vertical Launch System. It was the United States&#x27; first acknowledged launch of a missile that would have violated the 1987 Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty, from which the Trump administration withdrew on 2 August after Russia broke it.

The United States Army has successfully launched a Tomahawk from the Typhon missile launcher.

==Munitions==
The TLAM-D contains 166 sub-munitions in 24 canisters: 22 canisters of seven each, and two canisters of six each to conform to the dimensions of the airframe. The sub-munitions are the same type of Combined Effects Munition bomblet used in large quantities by the US Air Force with the CBU-87 Combined Effects Munition. The sub-munitions canisters are dispensed two at a time, one per side. The missile can perform up to five separate target segments which enables it to attack multiple targets. However, in order to achieve a sufficient density of coverage typically all 24 canisters are dispensed sequentially from back to front.

==Navigation==
TERCOM – Terrain Contour Matching. A digital representation of an area of terrain is mapped based on digital terrain elevation data or stereo imagery. This map is then inserted into a TLAM mission which is then loaded onto the missile. When the missile is in flight it compares the stored map data with radar altimeter data collected as the missile overflies the map. Based on comparison results the missile&#x27;s inertial navigation system is updated and the missile corrects its course. TERCOM was based on, and was a significant improvement on, &quot;Fingerprint,&quot; a technology developed in 1964 for the SLAM.

DSMAC – Digital Scene Matching Area Correlation. A digitized image of an area is mapped and then inserted into a TLAM mission. During the flight the missile will verify that the images that it has stored correlates with the image it sees below itself. Based on comparison results the missile&#x27;s inertial navigation system is updated and the missile corrects its course.

GPS – The Tomahawk relies on the Global Positioning Recognition System as a guidance mechanism.

==Operational history==
===United States===
====Air Force====

The Air Force is a former operator of the nuclear-armed version of the Tomahawk, the BGM-109G Gryphon.

====Army====
In November 2020, the United States Army selected the Tomahawk to fulfill its Mid-Range Capability (MRC), giving it a land-based long-range missile capable of striking ground and sea targets. The Army plans to use the Tomahawk alongside a ground-based SM-6 and field them by late 2023.

====Navy====
* In the 1991 Gulf War, 288 Tomahawks were launched, 12 from submarines and 276 from surface ships. The first salvo was fired by the destroyer on 17 January 1991. The attack submarines and followed.
* 17 January 1993: 46 Tomahawks were fired at the Zafraniyah Nuclear Fabrication Facility outside Baghdad, in response to Iraq&#x27;s refusal to cooperate with UN disarmament inspectors. One missile crashed into the side of the Al Rasheed Hotel, killing two civilians.
* 26 June 1993: 23 Tomahawks were fired at the Iraqi Intelligence Service&#x27;s command and control center.
* 10 September 1995: launched 13 Tomahawk missiles from the central Adriatic Sea against a key air defense radio relay tower in Bosnian Serb territory during Operation Deliberate Force.
* 3 September 1996: 44 ship-launched UGM-109 and B-52-launched AGM-86 cruise missiles were fired at air defense targets in southern Iraq.
* 20 August 1998: 79 Tomahawk missiles were fired simultaneously at two targets in Afghanistan and Sudan in retaliation for the bombings of American embassies by Al-Qaeda.
* 16 December 1998: 325 Tomahawk missiles were fired at key Iraqi targets during Operation Desert Fox.
* In early 1999, 218 Tomahawk missiles were fired by US ships and a British submarine during the 1999 NATO bombing of Yugoslavia against targets in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
* October 2001: about 50 Tomahawk missiles struck targets in Afghanistan in the opening hours of Operation Enduring Freedom.
* During the 2003 invasion of Iraq, more than 802 Tomahawk missiles were fired at key Iraqi targets.
* 3 March 2008: two Tomahawk missiles were fired at a target in Somalia by a US vessel during the Dobley airstrike, reportedly in an attempt to kill Saleh Ali Saleh Nabhan, an al Qaeda militant.
* 17 December 2009: two Tomahawk missiles were fired at targets in Yemen. One TLAM-D struck an alleged Al-Qaeda training camp in al-Ma&#x27;jalah in al-Mahfad, a region of the Abyan governorate of Yemen. Amnesty International reported that 55 people were killed in the attack, including 41 civilians (21 children, 14 women, and six men). The US and Yemen governments refused to confirm or deny involvement, but diplomatic cables released as part of United States diplomatic cables leak later confirmed the missile was fired by a US Navy ship.
* 19 March 2011: 124 Tomahawk missiles were fired by US and British forces (112 US, 12 British) against at least 20 Libyan targets around Tripoli and Misrata. As of 22 March 2011, 159 UGM-109 were fired by US and UK ships against Libyan targets.
* 23 September 2014: 47 Tomahawk missiles were fired by the United States from and , which were operating from international waters in the Red Sea and Persian Gulf, against ISIL targets in Syria in the vicinity of Raqqa, Deir ez-Zor, Al-Hasakah and Abu Kamal, and against Khorasan group targets in Syria west of Aleppo.
* 13 October 2016: five Tomahawk cruise missiles were launched by at three radar sites in Yemen held by Houthi rebels in response to anti-ship missiles fired at US Navy ships the day before.
* on 6 April 2017, 59 Tomahawk missiles were launched from and , targeting Shayrat Airbase near Homs, in Syria. The strike was in response to Khan Shaykhun chemical attack, an act carried out by Syrian President Bashar al-Assad. US Central Command stated in a press release that Tomahawk missiles hit &quot;aircraft, hardened aircraft shelters, petroleum and logistical storage, ammunition supply bunkers, defense systems, and radars&quot;. Initial US reports claimed &quot;approximately 20 planes&quot; were destroyed, and that 58 out of the 59 cruise missiles launched had &quot;severely degraded or destroyed&quot; their intended target. 
* On 14 April 2018, the US launched 66 Tomahawk cruise missiles at Syrian targets near Damascus and Homs, as part of the April 2018 missile strikes against Syria. These strikes were done in retaliation for Douma chemical attack. The United States Department of Defense said Syria fired 40 defensive missiles at the allied weapons but did not hit any targets. The Russian military said that Syrian air defenses shot down 71 of the 103 missiles launched by the US and its allies, but it was not possible to verify the claims.
* On 11 January 2024, US officials stated that over 80 Tomahawk cruise missile were launched by USS Philippine Sea (CG-58), USS Dwight D. Eisenhower, USS Gravely, USS Mason (DDG-87), and USS Florida (SSGN-728) According to US officials these strikes targeted Houthi assets including command and control nodes, munitions, depots, launching systems, production facilities, and air defense radar systems these were then followed up by attacks from aircraft launched from the carrier USS Dwight D. Eisenhower. These strikes came in response to Houthi attacks on civilian vessels transiting the Red Sea and failure to abide by repeated warnings from western officials. With strikes continuing in the following months, this number had increased to 135 missiles by 24 July 2024.
===Royal Navy===

In 1995, the US agreed to sell 65 Tomahawks to the UK for torpedo-launch from their nuclear attack submarines. The first missiles were acquired and test-fired in November 1998; all Royal Navy fleet submarines are now Tomahawk capable, including the &quot;Astute&quot;-class. The Kosovo War in 1999 saw the Swiftsure-class HMS &quot;Splendid&quot; become the first British submarine to fire the Tomahawk in combat. The UK subsequently bought 20 more Block III to replenish stocks. The Royal Navy has since fired Tomahawks during the 2000s Afghanistan War, in Operation Telic as the British contribution to the 2003 Iraq War, and during Operation Ellamy in Libya in 2011.

In April 2004, the UK and US governments reached an agreement for the British to buy 64 of the new generation of Tomahawk missile—the Block IV or TacTom missile. It entered service with the Royal Navy on 27 March 2008, three months ahead of schedule. In July 2014 the US approved the sale to the UK of a further 65 submarine-launched Block IV&#x27;s at a cost of US$140m including spares and support; the Block III missiles were on British books at £1.1m and the Block IV at £0.87m including VAT.

The Sylver Vertical Launching System on the new Type 45 destroyer is claimed by its manufacturers to have the capability to fire the Tomahawk, although the A50 launcher carried by the Type 45 is too short for the weapon (the longer A70 silo would be required). Nevertheless, the Type 45 has been designed with weight and space margin for a strike-length Mk41 or Sylver A70 silo to be retrofitted, allowing Type 45 to use the TLAM Block IV if required. Both the new Type 26 frigates and the Type 31 frigate will be filled with strike-length Mk41 VLS.

In June 2022, the UK announced it would be upgrading its Tomahawk cruise missiles to Block V standard through a £265 million contract with the US government. The missiles will be upgraded from 2024.

===Royal Australian Navy===
In September 2021, Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison announced that Australia would acquire Tomahawks for the Royal Australian Navy&#x27;s (RAN) &quot;Hobart&quot;-class air warfare destroyers. In March 2023, the US State Department approved a Foreign Military Sale to Australia of up 200 Block V and up to 20 Block IV missiles worth an estimated US$895 million. In January 2024, the US State Department approved the sale of support equipment worth US$250 million.

In December 2024, Australia&#x27;s Minister for Defence said the RAN had successfully fired its first ever Tomahawk missile. The missile was fired from , a &quot;Hobart&quot;-class air warfare destroyer, making Australia the third nation, after the United States and UK, to acquire and fire the weapon.

===Japan===
The Japanese government is negotiating with the US government to purchase US-made Tomahawk cruise missiles for attacking enemy bases and counterattack purposes. The Japanese government decided to purchase the Tomahawk cruise missile before their domestic improved range &quot;Type 12 surface-to-ship missile&quot; start full-scale operation. Prime Minister Fumio Kishida announced Japan will be buying 400 Tomahawk missiles. They which will be deployed in fiscal year 2026-27 and will serve as a bridge until the deployment of indigenous missiles like the extended range Type 12 surface-to-ship missile and the Hyper Velocity Gliding Projectile.

The United States Defense Security and Cooperation Agency announced on 17 November 2023 that the US State Department had approved a possible sale of up to 200 RGM-109E &quot;Tomahawk&quot; Block IV and up to 200 RGM-109E &quot;Tomahawk&quot; Block V LACMs to Japan for an estimated US$2.35 billion.

===The Royal Netherlands Navy===
After initial interest and planning (2005), the Dutch Ministry of Defence in 2023 confirmed ordering the ship launched- and submarine launched versions of the Tomahawk to be installed on both existing as well as future frigates &amp; submarines.

In 2022 plans for acquiring long-range and precision-guided weapon systems for the frigates and submarines of The Royal Netherlands Navy were announced as part of the Strategic Defence Review 2022, Tomahawk was identified. In March 2023, the commander of the Royal Netherlands Navy announced in a column that the project to acquire maritime strike capability had been approved by the Ministry of Defence, and would include both the De Zeven Provinciën-class frigates and the Walrus-class submarines. While initially no announcement on missile type was made, the Tomahawk was confirmed as the frigates and submarines are equipped with US-standard Mark 41 Vertical Launching System, and torpedo tubes suited for launching UGM-109 Tomahawk respectively. In April 2023, the Netherlands Ministry of Defence announced the procurement of Tomahawk missiles.

==Potential operators==
===Canada===
According to infographics released by Royal Canadian Navy, the new s will be equipped with the missile.

=== Germany ===
To comply with the 1987 Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty (INF Treaty), all nuclear and conventional ground-launched ballistic missiles, cruise missiles, and missile launchers with ranges of (short to medium-range) and (intermediate-range) were dismantled or withdrawn from Europe by the treaty&#x27;s deadline of 1 June 1991.

On 10 July 2024, a joint statement of the US and Germany was released, announcing the beginning of episodic deployments of long-range fires units with conventional warheads. Deployment will start from 2026, including Typhon missile launchers with SM-6 and Tomahawk missiles. This is considered as a direct response to Russia&#x27;s President Vladimir Putin&#x27;s call to resume production and global deployment of intermediate range missiles, two weeks prior. Putin accused the United States of already producing these missiles and pointed to the development and testing of the Typhon missile launcher. On 28 July 2024, Putin warned of a Cold War-style missile crisis and threatened to deploy long-range missiles within striking distance of the West after the United States announced its intention to deploy long-range missiles in Germany. Critics say the United States&#x27; move would trigger a new arms race.

===Other users===
Spain (2002 and 2005) was interested in acquiring the Tomahawk system, but the order was later cancelled in 2009.

In 2009, the Congressional Commission on the Strategic Posture of the United States stated that Japan would be concerned if the TLAM-N were retired, but the government of Japan has denied that it had expressed any such view.

The SLCM version of the Popeye was developed by Israel after the US government under the Clinton administration refused an Israeli request in 2000 to purchase Tomahawk SLCMs because of international Missile Technology Control Regime proliferation rules.

, Poland has expressed interest in purchasing long-range Tomahawk missiles for its future submarines.

In July 2024, according to a spealized military source, the Brazil&#x27;s newest &quot;Tamandaré-class frigates&quot; are fitted to launch the TLAM variant, nonetheless the vessels are not yet equipped with the missile.

==Operators==
===Current operators===
;* 
* 
* 
* 
===Future operators===
* 
* 
* 

==See also==
* AV-TM 300
* Babur
* CJ-10
* Hoveyzeh
* Hsiung Feng IIE
* Hyunmoo-3
* Kalibr
* Kh-55
* Missile de Croisière Naval (MdCN)
* Nirbhay
* RK-55
* R-360 Neptune

==References==
== External links ==

* Raytheon official site for the Tomahawk missile
* CSIS Missile Threat – Tomahawk Cruise Missile</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q150115" start="4" end="20" title="Tomahawk (missile family)" label="BGM-109 Tomahawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q150115" start="24" end="43" title="Tomahawk (missile family)" label="Land Attack Missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q150115" start="45" end="49" title="Tomahawk (missile family)" label="TLAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q8424" start="104" end="112" title="Subsonic flight" label="subsonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q181860" start="113" end="127" title="cruise missile" label="cruise missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="158" end="176" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="181" end="191" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q249373" start="262" end="288" title="Applied Physics Laboratory" label="Applied Physics Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q193727" start="292" end="316" title="Johns Hopkins University" label="Johns Hopkins University"/>
<link wikidata="Q502940" start="446" end="462" title="General Dynamics" label="General Dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="772" end="775" title="Global Positioning System" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q570607" start="777" end="796" title="Inertial navigation system" label="inertial navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137596" start="802" end="826" title="TERCOM" label="terrain contour matching"/>
<link wikidata="Q201815" start="1175" end="1192" title="McDonnell Douglas" label="McDonnell Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q196253" start="1344" end="1359" title="Hughes Aircraft Corporation" label="Hughes Aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q89368734" start="1529" end="1537" title="RTX Corporation" label="Raytheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189039" start="2002" end="2005" title="W80 (nuclear warhead)" label="W80"/>
<link wikidata="Q643532" start="2270" end="2279" title="Anti-ship missile" label="Anti-ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133809" start="2293" end="2312" title="active radar homing" label="active radar homing"/>
<link wikidata="Q292420" start="2498" end="2505" title="AGM-12 Bullpup" label="Bullpup"/>
<link wikidata="Q184158" start="2581" end="2597" title="cluster munition" label="cluster munition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478132" start="2659" end="2673" title="graphite bomb" label="unique warhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096907" start="2690" end="2705" title="electrical grid" label="electrical grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="2726" end="2734" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877027" start="2877" end="2893" title="BGM-109G Gryphon" label="BGM-109G Gryphon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108820" start="2941" end="2944" title="W84" label="W84"/>
<link wikidata="Q169401" start="3012" end="3022" title="INF Treaty" label="INF Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q723916" start="3100" end="3108" title="turbojet" label="turbojet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697624" start="3117" end="3144" title="air-launched cruise missile" label="air-launched cruise missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q184158" start="3150" end="3166" title="cluster munition" label="cluster munition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877027" start="3214" end="3230" title="BGM-109G Gryphon" label="BGM-109G Gryphon"/>
<link wikidata="Q169401" start="3398" end="3438" title="Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty" label="Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="3515" end="3523" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q654051" start="3606" end="3614" title="turbofan" label="turbofan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="3631" end="3656" title="Global Positioning System" label="Global Positioning System"/>
<link wikidata="Q149918" start="4398" end="4404" title="Satellite Communications" label="satcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140666" start="4576" end="4599" title="network-centric warfare" label="network-centric warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="4658" end="4662" title="Unmanned aerial vehicle" label="UAVs"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="6664" end="6667" title="GPS" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476046" start="8531" end="8549" title="US Central Command" label="US Central Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009623" start="8708" end="8721" title="bunker buster" label="bunker buster"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8806" end="8852" title="AGM-88 HARM#AGM-88E AARGM" label="Advanced Anti-Radiation Guided Missile (AARGM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143008" start="8994" end="9007" title="passive radar" label="passive radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q560430" start="9048" end="9063" title="radar signature" label="radar signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q331436" start="9540" end="9555" title="Harpoon missile" label="Harpoon missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q570342" start="9816" end="9831" title="millimeter-wave" label="millimeter-wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133809" start="9832" end="9851" title="active radar homing" label="active radar homing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272142" start="9952" end="9964" title="sea-skimming" label="sea-skimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q60602" start="10158" end="10164" title="ramjet" label="ramjet"/>
<link wikidata="Q379848" start="10717" end="10747" title="Los Alamos National Laboratory" label="Los Alamos National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q124338934" start="10907" end="10912" title="JP-10 (fuel)" label="JP-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q381741" start="10935" end="10953" title="fuel air explosive" label="fuel air explosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q381741" start="11010" end="11021" title="thermobaric" label="thermobaric"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171052" start="12489" end="12501" title="corn ethanol" label="corn ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q688862" start="12842" end="12862" title="Armored Box Launcher" label="Armored Box Launcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140509" start="13070" end="13095" title="vertical launching system" label="vertical launching system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330003" start="13200" end="13212" title="torpedo tube" label="torpedo tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q280602" start="13436" end="13454" title="solid-fuel rocket" label="solid-fuel booster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063640" start="13656" end="13669" title="cruise flight" label="cruise flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q570607" start="13701" end="13718" title="inertial guidance" label="inertial guidance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137596" start="13816" end="13840" title="TERCOM" label="terrain contour matching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137596" start="13929" end="13934" title="DSMAC" label="DSMAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q843368" start="13971" end="13994" title="circular error probable" label="circular error probable"/>
<link wikidata="Q847593" start="14527" end="14532" title="HP-UX" label="HP-UX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617767" start="14806" end="14836" title="Mark 41 Vertical Launching System" label="Mark 41 Vertical Launch System"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="15069" end="15087" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q125511404" start="15134" end="15157" title="Typhon missile launcher" label="Typhon missile launcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q184158" start="15198" end="15211" title="cluster munition" label="sub-munitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q834860" start="15460" end="15492" title="CBU-87 Combined Effects Munition" label="CBU-87 Combined Effects Munition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644162" start="16435" end="16439" title="Supersonic Low Altitude Missile" label="SLAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="16850" end="16887" title="Global Positioning System" label="Global Positioning Recognition System"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="17116" end="17134" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q125511404" start="17172" end="17198" title="Typhon missile launcher" label="Mid-Range Capability (MRC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051738" start="17346" end="17350" title="RIM-174 Standard ERAM" label="SM-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="17408" end="17416" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q105773263" start="17612" end="17635" title="January 1993 airstrikes on Iraq" label="46 Tomahawks were fired"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="17691" end="17698" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126346" start="17821" end="17837" title="Al Rasheed Hotel" label="Al Rasheed Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189962" start="17878" end="17901" title="Cruise missile strikes on Iraq (1993)" label="23 Tomahawks were fired"/>
<link wikidata="Q160774" start="18129" end="18155" title="Operation Deliberate Force" label="Operation Deliberate Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781133" start="18243" end="18253" title="Cruise missile strikes on Iraq (1996)" label="were fired"/>
<link wikidata="Q837887" start="18313" end="18344" title="Operation Infinite Reach" label="79 Tomahawk missiles were fired"/>
<link wikidata="Q876206" start="18423" end="18453" title="1998 United States embassy bombings" label="bombings of American embassies"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="18457" end="18465" title="Al-Qaeda" label="Al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327861" start="18548" end="18568" title="Bombing of Iraq (1998)" label="Operation Desert Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q155723" start="18667" end="18698" title="1999 NATO bombing of Yugoslavia" label="1999 NATO bombing of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37024" start="18722" end="18752" title="Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Federal Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q182865" start="18851" end="18877" title="War in Afghanistan (2001–2021)" label="Operation Enduring Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="18892" end="18913" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="2003 invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q55603824" start="19078" end="19094" title="Dobley airstrike" label="Dobley airstrike"/>
<link wikidata="Q449952" start="19129" end="19151" title="Saleh Ali Saleh Nabhan" label="Saleh Ali Saleh Nabhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4702750" start="19304" end="19320" title="Al-Majalah camp attack" label="al-Ma&amp;#x27;jalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q805" start="19372" end="19377" title="Yemen" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q276441" start="19624" end="19660" title="United States diplomatic cables leak" label="United States diplomatic cables leak"/>
<link wikidata="Q210714" start="19757" end="19767" title="2011 military intervention in Libya" label="were fired"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="19834" end="19839" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="19856" end="19863" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q131323" start="19868" end="19875" title="Misrata" label="Misrata"/>
<link wikidata="Q17507684" start="20006" end="20016" title="2014 military intervention against ISIS" label="were fired"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="20137" end="20141" title="ISIL" label="ISIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q283368" start="20178" end="20183" title="Raqqa" label="Raqqa"/>
<link wikidata="Q18112628" start="20236" end="20250" title="Khorasan (Islamist group)" label="Khorasan group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042087" start="20388" end="20394" title="Houthi" label="Houthi"/>
<link wikidata="Q643532" start="20417" end="20434" title="anti-ship missile" label="anti-ship missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q29197866" start="20515" end="20528" title="2017 Shayrat missile strike" label="were launched"/>
<link wikidata="Q12694984" start="20550" end="20565" title="Shayrat Airbase" label="Shayrat Airbase"/>
<link wikidata="Q131301" start="20571" end="20575" title="Homs" label="Homs"/>
<link wikidata="Q29154471" start="20617" end="20646" title="Khan Shaykhun chemical attack" label="Khan Shaykhun chemical attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q44329" start="20687" end="20702" title="Bashar al-Assad" label="Bashar al-Assad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476046" start="20704" end="20722" title="United States Central Command" label="US Central Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q51844684" start="21238" end="21278" title="April 2018 missile strikes against Syria" label="April 2018 missile strikes against Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q51629486" start="21323" end="21344" title="Douma chemical attack" label="Douma chemical attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="21350" end="21385" title="United States Department of Defense" label="United States Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q124254493" start="21720" end="21733" title="2024 missile strikes in Yemen" label="were launched"/>
<link wikidata="Q604211" start="21737" end="21763" title="USS Philippine Sea (CG-58)" label="USS Philippine Sea (CG-58)"/>
<link wikidata="Q653860" start="21765" end="21789" title="USS Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="USS Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815683" start="21791" end="21802" title="USS Gravely" label="USS Gravely"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782848" start="21804" end="21822" title="USS Mason (DDG-87)" label="USS Mason (DDG-87)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755178" start="21828" end="21850" title="USS Florida (SSGN-728)" label="USS Florida (SSGN-728)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="22231" end="22238" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="22612" end="22622" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q121982" start="22680" end="22704" title="Astute-class submarine" label="&amp;quot;Astute&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q190029" start="22710" end="22720" title="Kosovo War" label="Kosovo War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352296" start="22753" end="22777" title="HMS Splendid (S106)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Splendid&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097619" start="22989" end="23004" title="Operation Telic" label="Operation Telic"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="23045" end="23053" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316065" start="23066" end="23082" title="Operation Ellamy" label="Operation Ellamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528599" start="23604" end="23636" title="Sylver Vertical Launching System" label="Sylver Vertical Launching System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073186" start="23648" end="23665" title="Type 45 destroyer" label="Type 45 destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475619" start="24065" end="24080" title="Type 26 frigate" label="Type 26 frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q26883455" start="24090" end="24105" title="Type 31 frigate" label="Type 31 frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="24398" end="24407" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436908" start="24424" end="24438" title="Scott Morrison" label="Scott Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q741691" start="24496" end="24517" title="Royal Australian Navy" label="Royal Australian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621548" start="24531" end="24555" title="Hobart-class destroyer" label="&amp;quot;Hobart&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="24602" end="24618" title="United States Department of State" label="State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q842161" start="24630" end="24651" title="Foreign Military Sales" label="Foreign Military Sale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315112" start="24887" end="24907" title="Minister for Defence (Australia)" label="Minister for Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190574" start="25172" end="25191" title="Government of Japan" label="Japanese government"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="25216" end="25229" title="Federal government of the United States" label="US government"/>
<link wikidata="Q359480" start="25525" end="25538" title="Fumio Kishida" label="Fumio Kishida"/>
<link wikidata="Q11185260" start="25739" end="25770" title="Type 12 surface-to-ship missile" label="Type 12 surface-to-ship missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q115734744" start="25779" end="25812" title="Hyper Velocity Gliding Projectile" label="Hyper Velocity Gliding Projectile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3704710" start="25819" end="25872" title="Defense Security Cooperation Agency" label="United States Defense Security and Cooperation Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q931281" start="26505" end="26531" title="The Royal Netherlands Navy" label="The Royal Netherlands Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179475" start="26827" end="26860" title="De Zeven Provinciën-class frigate" label="De Zeven Provinciën-class frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516486" start="26870" end="26892" title="Walrus-class submarine" label="Walrus-class submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q25387" start="27321" end="27340" title="Royal Canadian Navy" label="Royal Canadian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q169401" start="27428" end="27468" title="Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty" label="Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q179348" start="27528" end="27545" title="ballistic missile" label="ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216918" start="27569" end="27586" title="Rocket launcher" label="missile launchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="27788" end="27795" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051738" start="27986" end="27990" title="RIM-174 Standard ERAM" label="SM-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="28081" end="28095" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q125511404" start="28318" end="28341" title="Typhon missile launcher" label="Typhon missile launcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="28378" end="28386" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q322348" start="28641" end="28650" title="arms race" label="arms race"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631562" start="29016" end="29020" title="Submarine-launched cruise missile" label="SLCM"/>
<link wikidata="Q292452" start="29036" end="29042" title="Popeye (missile)" label="Popeye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072120" start="29211" end="29244" title="Missile Technology Control Regime" label="Missile Technology Control Regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q86738121" start="29457" end="29480" title="Tamandaré-class frigate" label="Tamandaré-class frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4655057" start="29690" end="29699" title="AV-TM 300" label="AV-TM 300"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195217" start="29702" end="29707" title="Babur (cruise missile)" label="Babur"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011986" start="29710" end="29715" title="CJ-10" label="CJ-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q64415898" start="29718" end="29726" title="Hoveyzeh (cruise missile)" label="Hoveyzeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4448530" start="29729" end="29744" title="Hsiung Feng IIE" label="Hsiung Feng IIE"/>
<link wikidata="Q624697" start="29747" end="29756" title="Hyunmoo-3" label="Hyunmoo-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333260" start="29759" end="29765" title="Kalibr" label="Kalibr"/>
<link wikidata="Q297026" start="29768" end="29773" title="Kh-55" label="Kh-55"/>
<link wikidata="Q16664754" start="29776" end="29809" title="MdCN (missile)" label="Missile de Croisière Naval (MdCN)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348056" start="29812" end="29819" title="Nirbhay" label="Nirbhay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358725" start="29822" end="29827" title="RK-55" label="RK-55"/>
<link wikidata="Q28706540" start="29830" end="29843" title="R-360 Neptune" label="R-360 Neptune"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31241" wikidata="Q128301" url="?curid=31241" title="Trigun">
<text>is a Japanese manga series written and illustrated by Yasuhiro Nightow. It was first serialized in Tokuma Shoten&#x27;s manga magazine &quot;Monthly Shōnen Captain&quot; from March 1995 to December 1996, until the magazine ceased its publication; its chapters were collected in three volumes. The series continued its publication in Shōnen Gahosha&#x27;s manga magazine &quot;Young King OURs&quot;, under the title Trigun Maximum, from October 1997 to March 2007. Shōnen Gahosha republished the &quot;Trigun&quot; chapters in two volumes, and collected the &quot;Trigun Maximum&quot; chapters in 14 volumes.

Set on the fictional planet known as No Man&#x27;s Land, the plot follows Vash the Stampede, a famous gunman who is constantly fighting bounty hunters seeking to obtain the immense bounty on his head. As the narrative progresses, Vash&#x27;s past is explored. &quot;Trigun&quot; originated from Nightow&#x27;s fascination with Western movies. Nightow wanted Vash to be different from cowboys in Western movies by avoiding killing enemies and instead exploring the characters involved in each story arc.

&quot;Trigun&quot; was adapted into a 26-episode anime television series by Madhouse; it aired on TV Tokyo from April to September 1998. An anime feature film, &quot;&quot;, premiered in Japan in April 2010. A second anime television series adaptation produced by Orange, titled &quot;Trigun Stampede&quot;, premiered in January 2023. In North America, both manga series have been licensed by Dark Horse Comics. The anime series was first licensed by Geneon Entertainment and started broadcast in the United States, as part of Cartoon Network&#x27;s Adult Swim programming block, in 2003; the series was later licensed by Funimation.

In 2009, &quot;Trigun Maximum&quot; won the Best Comic category at the 40th Seiun Awards. Critical response to the manga has been generally positive based on Vash and his friends&#x27; actions and relationships, as well as the handling of action scenes. However, critics disliked Vash&#x27;s predicament in regards to his pacifism and the plot being hard to understand. The anime series was similarly positively received.

==Plot==

In the 32nd century, a man known as &quot;Vash the Stampede&quot; has earned a bounty of $$60 billion (&quot;double dollar&quot;) on his head and the nickname after accidentally destroying a city with his supernatural powers. However, whenever he is attacked, Vash displays a pacifist personality as noted by two Bernardelli Insurance Society employees, Meryl Stryfe and Milly Thompson, who follow him around in order to minimize the damages inevitably caused by his appearance. Most of the damage attributed to Vash is actually caused by bounty hunters in pursuit of the sixty billion double-dollar bounty on Vash&#x27;s head for the destruction of the city of July. However, he cannot remember the incident due to retrograde amnesia, being able to recall only fragments of the destroyed city and memories of his childhood. Throughout his travels, Vash tries to save lives using non-lethal force. He is occasionally joined by a priest, Nicholas D. Wolfwood, who, like Vash, is a superb gunfighter with a mysterious past. As the series progresses, more about Vash&#x27;s past and the history of human civilization on the planet is revealed.

Vash and his twin brother Knives were originally two children with a slow aging process found in a spaceship that escaped from the planet Earth after mankind had exhausted all its resources. Rem raised them, but Knives became nihilistic and had most of the people in the ship disposed of. As a result, Vash lives to find his twin and have revenge. Vash is targeted by Legato Bluesummers from the Gung-ho Guns assassins who are followers of Knives. Wolfwood himself is a Gung-Ho Gun but was hired to make sure Vash does not die and instead suffer. Vash and Knives both possess the Angel Arm, which Knives forced Vash to use in the series&#x27; beginning to destroy the town.

Vash eventually fights Knives, but is defeated. Wolfwood betrays Knives and saves Vash. In the aftermath, Wolfwood dies fighting one of the Gung-Hos; his friend, Livio, joins Vash&#x27;s cause while grieving for his friend&#x27;s death. As Knives approaches the city with the &quot;Ark&quot;, a floating ship designed to leave humans without any resources and end life on the planet, Knives begins dueling with Vash. Throughout his past battles that required him to use the Angel&#x27;s Arm, Vash has transformed into a regular human signified by his blond hair now turned black. Knives also starts losing the powers he stored with the Ark through Vash&#x27;s actions. Vash then saves his brother from the vengeful ships from Earth. Following his defeat, Knives uses his last powers to help his weakened brother by creating a small fruit tree to feed him. After his brother&#x27;s death, Vash continues his travels on the planet with Meryl and Milly.

==Production==

After leaving college, Yasuhiro Nightow had gone to work selling apartments for the housing corporation Sekisui House, but struggled to keep up with his manga drawing hobby. Reassured by some successes, including a serialized manga based on the popular video game franchise &quot;Samurai Spirits&quot; for &quot;Family Computer Magazine&quot;, he quit his job to draw full-time. The series was conceptualized as a mix between Western and science fiction as Nightow found it not seen in Japan by the time he started writing &quot;Trigun&quot;. To contrast Vash from the typical heroes in action films, Nightow portrayed him as a pacifist since he did not want his lead character to be a murderer. Throughout the story, Vash avoids killing enemies by disarming them and avoids inflicting mortal wounds during combat. His cheerful personality was used to highlight this trait with his catchphrase being: &quot;Hey, sorry. Love and peace?&quot; Other elements of the manga were based on real life. Wolfwood&#x27;s name was taken from the lead singer as his image for the priest. He is also modeled on Tortoise Matsumoto from the band Ulfuls. In order to create &quot;warm&quot; environments, Nightow drew several eating scenes.

In the making of the manga, Nightow attempts to draw the fight scenes carefully as he has &quot;all these images running through my head of characters moving this way and that, and contorting into all sort sorts of amazing action poses, but thinking about it and putting it to paper are always two different things&quot;. In regards to the narrative, Nightow uses a &quot;logical and intuitive manner&quot; as his in order to make readers being capable of following it. While Vash is the manga&#x27;s protagonist, anime director Satoshi Nishimura used Meryl Stryfe as the main character. In the anime, she searches for the Humanoid Typhoon and initially does not believe it is Vash due to his childish behavior. To create suspense, writer Yōsuke Kuroda suggested that Vash would not shoot a bullet until the fifth episode, which causes Meryl to realize he is the famous gunman.

==Media==

===Manga===
With the help of a publisher friend, Yasuhiro Nightow,
first published a one-shot of &quot;Trigun&quot; in Tokuma Shoten&#x27;s manga magazine &quot;&quot; on January 26, 1995; it began its regular serialization in the same magazine two months later on March 25. &quot;Monthly Shōnen Captain&quot; ceased publication on December 26, 1996, and the series was put on hiatus. Tokuma Shoten collected the &quot;Trigun&quot; chapters in three volumes, released from April 25, 1996, to January 20, 1999; Shōnen Gahōsha republished the &quot;Trigun&quot; chapters in two volumes, released on June 2, 2000.

When Nightow was approached by Shōnen Gahōsha&#x27;s manga magazine &quot;Young King OURs&quot;, they were interested in him beginning a new work. Nightow, however, was troubled by the idea of leaving &quot;Trigun&quot; incomplete, and requested to be allowed to finish the series. The manga resumed its publication in the magazine, under the title , in the October 1997 issue. Nightow said that there was no difference in the story between the two titles, and that the only reason for the change was because of the switch of publishing house. &quot;Trigun Maximum&quot; finished in March 2007. Shōnen Gahōsha collected its chapters in fourteen volumes, released from May 23, 1998, to February 27, 2008.

In North America, the manga was licensed by Dark Horse Comics, who announced its publication in June 2003; they released the two volumes of &quot;Trigun&quot;, based on the Shōnen Gahosha&#x27;s edition, on October 15, 2003, and January 7, 2004. In March 2004, Dark Horse Comics announced that they would also publish &quot;Trigun Maximum&quot;; the fourteen volumes were released from May 26, 2004, to April 8, 2009. In September 2012, &quot;Dark Horse Comics&quot; announced that they would release the series in an omnibus edition; &quot;Trigun&quot; was released in a single volume on October 9, 2013; &quot;Trigun Maximum&quot; was released in five volumes from November 21, 2012, to November 5, 2014.

An anthology manga titled &quot;Trigun: Multiple Bullets&quot;, featuring short stories written by several manga artists such as Boichi, Masakazu Ishiguru, Satoshi Mizukami, Ark Performance, Yusuke Takeyama, Yuga Takauchi, and Akira Sagami, was released by Shōnen Gahosha in Japan on December 28, 2011. The volume was released by Dark Horse Comics on March 6, 2013.

In May 2023, Dark Horse Comics announced deluxe hardcover editions of &quot;Trigun&quot; and &quot;Trigun Maximum&quot;. The volume collecting both volumes of &quot;Trigun&quot; was released on September 10, 2024, while the first volume of &quot;Trigun Maximum&quot; was released on October 8 of the same year.

===Anime===
====1998 series====

&quot;Trigun&quot; was adapted into an anime television series. It was animated by Madhouse and directed by Satoshi Nishimura, written by Yōsuke Kuroda, and produced by Shigeru Kitayama. The music was composed by Tsuneo Imahori. Twenty-six episodes aired on TV Tokyo from April 1 to September 30, 1998. The episodes were collected in thirteen VHS cassettes, labeled as &quot;Stages&quot;, from August 5, 1998, to August 4, 1999.

In North America, the series was first licensed by Pioneer Entertainment (later Geneon USA) in 1999. Eight DVDs were released from March 28, 2000, to May 29, 2001. A box set containing all the episodes was released on November 20, 2001. The series premiered on Cartoon Network&#x27;s Adult Swim programming block on March 31, 2003. The series also premiered in Canada on G4techTV&#x27;s Anime Current programming block in 2007. In the same year, Geneon announced that they would cease their in-house distribution, In 2008, Funimation announced that they signed a deal with Geneon to distribute &quot;select&quot; titles from the company; in 2010, they announced that they had licensed &quot;Trigun&quot; for a DVD and Blu-ray Disc home video release, and launched it on October 26, 2010. Following the announcement that Funimation would be unified under the Crunchyroll brand, the series began streaming on the platform in May 2022.

====&quot;Trigun Stampede&quot;====

A second anime television series adaptation by Orange, titled &quot;Trigun Stampede&quot;, premiered on January 7, 2023, on TV Tokyo and other networks.

===Film===

A &quot;Trigun&quot; film was originally announced in February 2008 to be released in 2009. The film titled &quot;Trigun: Badlands Rumble&quot; opened in theaters in Japan on April 24, 2010, and was first shown to an American audience at the Sakura-Con 2010 in Seattle, Washington on, April 2, 2010. At Anime Expo 2010, Funimation announced that they had licensed the film as they had with the TV series and planned to release it into theaters. The film made its US television premiere on Saturday, December 28, 2013, on Adult Swim&#x27;s Toonami block.

==Reception==
===Manga===
&quot;Trigun Maximum&quot; won the Best Comic at the 40th Seiun Award in the 48th Japan Science Fiction Convention in 2009. The second volume concluded the original series early the next year, and went on to be the top earning manga release of 2004. Critical response to the manga has been positive. &quot;Manga Life&quot; enjoyed the setting, comparing it to the American Midwest in the 1800s. They called the lead&#x27;s characterization &quot;fantastic&quot; based on the personality he displays when facing enemies as he refuses to murder anybody. &quot;Anime News Network&quot; compared the series to &quot;Rurouni Kenshin&quot;, based on both&#x27;s pacifist messages to the audience and how challenging is this message explored in a similar fashion to comic book hero Batman. He also praised the fight scenes&#x27; handling as well as villains&#x27; designs. The clash between him and his antagonist was also praised for his execution and artwork. However, &quot;Mania Entertainment&quot; said some events that happened to Vash might come across as repetitive because his pacifism keeps backfiring and no proper solution has yet been given. As Vash&#x27;s philosophy was tested in the finale, &quot;Fandom Post&quot; praised the consequences of his actions. While Vash and Knives&#x27; was popular, to the point &quot;Mania&quot; referred to their final fight as &quot;the stuff of legend.&quot; On the other hand, the book &quot;&quot; provided criticism to some parts of the narrative, finding it difficult to follow but still enjoyable. The artwork was also praised in the character designs with Wolfwood being called as one of the most stylish manga and anime characters.

===Anime===
The anime series is frequently listed as one of the best anime series; in 2001, &quot;Wizard&#x27;s Anime&quot; Magazine listed &quot;Trigun&quot; as the 38th best series on their &quot;Top 50 Anime released in North America&quot;, and in 2010 &quot;The Los Angeles Times&quot; journalist Charles Solomon placed the series as the seventh best anime on his &quot;Top 10&quot;. The success of the animated series increased the popularity of the original manga source material with the US release&#x27;s first volume run of 35,000 sold out shortly after release. In regards to the anime adaptation, Theron Martin of &quot;Anime News Network&quot; gave the anime adaptation a B+ praising the writing stating, &quot;The series never wallows in the inherent to this format simply because the surprisingly high quality of its writing never allows that to happen.&quot; However he continued to criticize the visuals stating, &quot;Character rendering regularly looks more like rough drafts than refined final products, with the artists often struggling just to stay on model.&quot; Mike Toole of &quot;Anime News Network&quot; named &quot;Trigun&quot; as one of the most important anime of the 1990s.

Escapist Magazine columnist H.D. Russell reviewed the anime adaptation of the series in early 2016, as part of the &quot;Good Old Anime Review&quot; section focusing on popular anime of the 1990s to early 2000s. Though, noting the series hasn&#x27;t aged well in terms of animation and English voice acting quality, Russell states the depth of the characters and moral themes of the series more than compensate for its faults. Russell concluded his review giving &quot;Trigun&quot; a rank of four out of a five stars stating, &quot;&quot;Trigun&quot; is very often overshadowed by its close cousin &quot;Cowboy Bebop&quot;, which is sad, because it truly is a delight to watch. Despite having only decent voice acting (with a few exceptions), average music, and relatively static visuals, &quot;Trigun&quot; is an absolute blast that had me laughing and thinking the whole way. While it&#x27;s not perfect, it is fun and it does ask the questions that will make viewers ponder for years to come without ever offering them an answer. &quot;Trigun&quot; is one that went straight from my backlog to my heart and is truly greater than the sum of its parts.&quot; Despite its relative popularity in the West, &quot;Trigun&quot; never gained widespread appeal to Japanese audiences. Suggested factors include the &quot;old west&quot; setting, European style character names and a lack of Japanese cultural elements. This would make &quot;Trigun&quot; one of the rare examples of an anime that is far more successful in the West than it was within its country of origin. The show failed to garner a large audience in Japan during its original showing in 1998, but gained a substantial fan base following its United States premiere on Adult Swim in 2003.

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="14" end="19" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335515" start="54" end="70" title="Yasuhiro Nightow" label="Yasuhiro Nightow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372258" start="99" end="112" title="Tokuma Shoten" label="Tokuma Shoten"/>
<link wikidata="Q231302" start="120" end="125" title="Shōnen manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546118" start="333" end="347" title="Shōnen Gahosha" label="Shōnen Gahosha"/>
<link wikidata="Q237338" start="355" end="360" title="Seinen manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644395" start="376" end="391" title="Young King OURs" label="Young King OURs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434371" start="683" end="700" title="Vash the Stampede" label="Vash the Stampede"/>
<link wikidata="Q621613" start="745" end="758" title="bounty hunter" label="bounty hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620972" start="1101" end="1110" title="story arc" label="story arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="1162" end="1167" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q650867" start="1189" end="1197" title="Madhouse (company)" label="Madhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q734663" start="1211" end="1219" title="TV Tokyo" label="TV Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11292922" start="1377" end="1383" title="Orange (animation studio)" label="Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q115614814" start="1398" end="1413" title="Trigun Stampede" label="Trigun Stampede"/>
<link wikidata="Q373933" start="1506" end="1523" title="Dark Horse Comics" label="Dark Horse Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205595" start="1564" end="1584" title="Geneon Entertainment" label="Geneon Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q708290" start="1640" end="1662" title="Cartoon Network" label="Cartoon Network&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q379052" start="1663" end="1673" title="Adult Swim" label="Adult Swim"/>
<link wikidata="Q169325" start="1735" end="1745" title="Funimation" label="Funimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q145234" start="1824" end="1835" title="Seiun Award" label="Seiun Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q58848" start="2070" end="2078" title="pacifism" label="pacifism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434371" start="2223" end="2240" title="Vash the Stampede" label="Vash the Stampede"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622170" start="2270" end="2272" title="Fictional currency" label="$$"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193891" start="2897" end="2915" title="retrograde amnesia" label="retrograde amnesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374583" start="3118" end="3138" title="Nicholas D. Wolfwood" label="Nicholas D. Wolfwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q80968" start="3549" end="3559" title="Nihilism" label="nihilistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3779791" start="3691" end="3709" title="Legato Bluesummers" label="Legato Bluesummers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3719" end="3731" title="List of Trigun characters#Gung-Ho Guns" label="Gung-ho Guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335515" start="4989" end="5005" title="Yasuhiro Nightow" label="Yasuhiro Nightow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539141" start="5070" end="5083" title="Sekisui House" label="Sekisui House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498489" start="5246" end="5261" title="Samurai Shodown" label="Samurai Spirits"/>
<link wikidata="Q188473" start="5553" end="5564" title="action film" label="action film"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550850" start="6063" end="6081" title="Tortoise Matsumoto" label="Tortoise Matsumoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037401" start="6096" end="6102" title="Ulfuls" label="Ulfuls"/>
<link wikidata="Q3779791" start="6743" end="6755" title="Meryl Stryfe" label="Meryl Stryfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273101" start="6930" end="6943" title="Yōsuke Kuroda" label="Yōsuke Kuroda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335515" start="7130" end="7146" title="Yasuhiro Nightow" label="Yasuhiro Nightow"/>
<link wikidata="Q933530" start="7166" end="7174" title="One-shot (comics)" label="one-shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372258" start="7200" end="7213" title="Tokuma Shoten" label="Tokuma Shoten"/>
<link wikidata="Q231302" start="7221" end="7226" title="shōnen manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546118" start="7591" end="7605" title="Shōnen Gahōsha" label="Shōnen Gahōsha"/>
<link wikidata="Q237338" start="7746" end="7751" title="Seinen manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644395" start="7767" end="7782" title="Young King OURs" label="Young King OURs"/>
<link wikidata="Q373933" start="8442" end="8459" title="Dark Horse Comics" label="Dark Horse Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q13137339" start="8916" end="8931" title="omnibus edition" label="omnibus edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q624839" start="9235" end="9241" title="Boichi" label="Boichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="9857" end="9862" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q650867" start="9901" end="9909" title="Madhouse (company)" label="Madhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273101" start="9956" end="9969" title="Yōsuke Kuroda" label="Yōsuke Kuroda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7496379" start="9987" end="10003" title="Shigeru Kitayama" label="Shigeru Kitayama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115526" start="10031" end="10045" title="Tsuneo Imahori" label="Tsuneo Imahori"/>
<link wikidata="Q734663" start="10076" end="10084" title="TV Tokyo" label="TV Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q124571619" start="10299" end="10320" title="Pioneer Entertainment" label="Pioneer Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q394970" start="10414" end="10421" title="box set" label="box set"/>
<link wikidata="Q708290" start="10509" end="10524" title="Cartoon Network" label="Cartoon Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q379052" start="10532" end="10542" title="Adult Swim" label="Adult Swim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093084" start="10619" end="10627" title="G4techTV (Canada)" label="G4techTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4765137" start="10635" end="10648" title="Anime Current" label="Anime Current"/>
<link wikidata="Q169325" start="10771" end="10781" title="Funimation" label="Funimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="10966" end="10978" title="Blu-ray Disc" label="Blu-ray Disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142035" start="11106" end="11117" title="Crunchyroll" label="Crunchyroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q11292922" start="11266" end="11272" title="Orange (animation studio)" label="Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584209" start="11688" end="11698" title="Anime Expo" label="Anime Expo"/>
<link wikidata="Q379052" start="11906" end="11916" title="Adult Swim" label="Adult Swim"/>
<link wikidata="Q938658" start="11924" end="11931" title="Toonami" label="Toonami"/>
<link wikidata="Q145234" start="12024" end="12035" title="Seiun Award" label="Seiun Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650249" start="12048" end="12080" title="Japan Science Fiction Convention" label="Japan Science Fiction Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="12330" end="12346" title="Midwestern United States" label="American Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q220509" start="12524" end="12542" title="Anime News Network" label="Anime News Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q216439" start="12578" end="12593" title="Rurouni Kenshin" label="Rurouni Kenshin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695156" start="12741" end="12747" title="Batman" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="13912" end="13933" title="The Los Angeles Times" label="The Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520773" start="14856" end="14873" title="Escapist Magazine" label="Escapist Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q232246" start="15460" end="15472" title="Cowboy Bebop" label="Cowboy Bebop"/>
<link wikidata="Q379052" start="16584" end="16594" title="Adult Swim" label="Adult Swim"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31242" wikidata="Q599309" url="?curid=31242" title="Tenchi Muyo!">
<text>is a Japanese anime, light novel and manga franchise. The original series began with a six-episode OVA called . This original series was created by Masaki Kajishima and directed by Hiroki Hayashi, and it was released in Japan on September 25, 1992. The series was released by Pioneer LDC in the United Kingdom in 1994.

As its popularity grew, it spurred a seventh episode titled &quot;Tenchi Muyo! Special: The Night Before the Carnival&quot; (also known as the &quot;Tenchi Special&quot;) and a stand-alone &quot;Tenchi Muyo! Mihoshi Special&quot;. A second OVA series was directed by Kenichi Yatagai and was released in 1994. A third OVA series, which was also directed by Yatagai, was released in 2003. A fourth OVA series was produced in Japan, with the first collection released on November 30, 2016. The following episodes were planned to be released with an interval of three months each, and the final part of the series arrived August 30, 2017. On July 12, 2019, it was announced that a fifth OVA series is currently in development, with Masaki Kajishima again serving as chief director and Hideki Shirane writing and overseeing scripts.

A twenty-six-episode anime television series called was released in 1995, and it was focused on retelling and expanding upon the original six-episode story. was created in 1997, and it is another alternate version of the original story. The latest version of the series called &quot;Ai Tenchi Muyo!&quot;, was broadcast on Tokyo MX in 2014.

Spin-off series of &quot;Tenchi Muyo!&quot; were also created. &quot;Magical Girl Pretty Sammy&quot; is an example that was adapted into a manga series. The franchise has also spawned soundtrack CDs and other merchandise released both in Japan and in the United States.

==Concept==
Masaki Kajishima and Hiroki Hayashi cite the &quot;Bubblegum Crisis&quot; OVAs, which they both worked on, as being the inspiration for &quot;Tenchi Muyo! Ryo-Ohki&quot;. In an interview with AIC, Hayashi described &quot;Bubblegum Crisis&quot; as &quot;a pretty gloomy anime. Serious fighting, complicated human relationships and dark Mega Tokyo.&quot; They thought it would be fun to create some comedy episodes with ideas like the girls going to the hot springs, but it was rejected by the sponsors. He also said that there was a trend to have a bunch of characters of one gender and a single one of the other gender, and asked what if Mackey (Sylia&#x27;s brother) was a main character, reversing the &quot;Bubblegum&quot; scenario. This became the basis for &quot;Tenchi Muyo!&quot;.

In designing Ryoko, Kajishima and Hayashi were inspired by the American sitcom &quot;I Dream of Jeannie&quot; and wanted to use her in their works. In the first episode, Tenchi would open the sealed cave, which was a reference to the Jeannie&#x27;s bottle, and a &quot;cute witch&quot; would jump out. Hayashi said that Tenchi is &quot;sort of&quot; based on Mackey, and that after Tenchi and Ryoko, the other girls were designed to be characters to balance the picture in the very early concepts of the series, and that they are original characters.

==Media==

===OVA===
The first OVA was titled &quot;Tenchi Muyo! Ryo-Ohki&quot; and was created by Masaki Kajishima. &quot;Ryo-Ohki&quot; comprises 5 OVA series to date. The fifth OVA released its last episode on May 28, 2021.

===Manga===
Hitoshi Okuda wrote two manga series based on the OVA series. The first manga is titled and was published by Kadokawa Shoten and serialized in Dragon Comic Jr. magazine from December 16, 1994, to June 9, 2000. The series was collected into 12 tankōbon volumes.

&quot;No Need for Tenchi&quot; was released in English in the United States by Viz Communications, and in Singapore by Chuang Yi.

The second series titled was also published by Kadokawa Shoten and serialized in Dragon Comic Age magazine from July 26, 2000, to December 9, 2005.

The series was collected into 10 tankōbon volumes.

===TV series===
After the first OVA series aired, AIC began looking into TV adaptations beyond the &quot;Mihoshi Special&quot;. In 1995 , a 26-episode anime television series was created by Hiroshi Negishi, animated by AIC and produced by Pioneer. It was loosely based on the first six episodes of the OVA series and the &quot;Mihoshi Special&quot;. Two years later, another AIC production followed suit called , which aired through 1997 and also ran 26 episodes. It borrowed characters and some plot devices from the previous incarnations, but with a noticeable art shift and very different concepts, such as centering on Tenchi&#x27;s high school and being a priest in Tokyo. The most recent series aired in October 2014. The series commemorated the 20th anniversary of the franchise and was sponsored by the city of Takahashi, Okayama.

===Films===
An anime film titled &quot;Tenchi the Movie: Tenchi Muyo in Love&quot;, created by Hiroshi Negishi, is a continuation of the &quot;Tenchi Universe&quot; TV series. A second film, &quot;Tenchi the Movie 2: The Daughter of Darkness&quot;, was adapted from a novel written by Naoko Hasegawa. The third film, titled &quot;Tenchi Forever! The Movie&quot;, is the sequel to &quot;Tenchi Muyo in Love&quot; and was adapted into a manga titled &quot;Tenchi Muyo! In Love 2: Eternal Memory&quot;.

===Novels===
Kajishima has written several books based on the franchise, including the ongoing &quot;Tenchi Muyo! GXP: Galaxy Police Transporter&quot; novel series, the novels &quot;Shin Tenchi Muyo! Jurai&quot;, &quot;Shin Tenchi Muyo! Yosho&quot;, and &quot;Shin Tenchi Muyo! Washu&quot;, and recently, the &quot;Paradise Wars&quot; spinoff. There are also a number of dōjinshi by and interviews with Kajishima, as well as a companion book, &quot;101 Questions and Answers of Tenchi Muyo! Ryo-Oh-Ki&quot;. Naoko Hasegawa wrote a series of thirteen light novels continuing from the first OVA series, starting with &quot;One Visitor After Another: Hexagram Of Love&quot; in 1993.

Seven Seas Entertainment has licensed the light novels &quot;Shin Tenchi Muyo! Jurai&quot;, &quot;Shin Tenchi Muyo! Yosho&quot;, &quot;Shin Tenchi Muyo! Washu&quot; for a North American release in 2017, and released them as &quot;True Tenchi Muyo!&#x27; in 2018 and 2019.

===Video games===
Numerous video games have been released based on the franchise, such as &quot;Tenchi Muyo! Game Hen&quot; for the Super Famicom.

===Radio===
A radio drama was released titled &quot;Tenchi Muyo! Ryo-ohki Manatsu no Carnival&quot;.

===Stage play===
On AnimeJapan 2019, it was announced on AIC Rights&#x27; booth that a stage play based on the first season of Ryo-Ohki was in development, scheduled to premiere in 2019. On May 17, the cast and staff was announced, with Kazuhiro Igarashi writing the script and Kazuma Sato starring as Tenchi Masaki. It ran from July 17 to the 21st on the Shinjukumura Live venue, in Tokyo.

==Spin-offs==
The first &quot;Tenchi&quot; spinoff is the &quot;Magical Girl Pretty Sammy&quot; series, a magical girl series where Sasami is the lead character. The first use of Pretty Sammy was in the &quot;Tenchi Muyo! Sound File&quot;, a Japanese-only music video release. The same animation was used in the ending of the &quot;Tenchi Muyo! Mihoshi Special&quot;. In 1995, a three episode &quot;Pretty Sammy&quot; OVA series began, where Sasami, who is known as Sasami Kawai, magically becomes Pretty Sammy. The second &quot;Pretty Sammy&quot; series is a TV series, which came out in 1996, also known as &quot;Magical Project S&quot;. This series is in a separate continuity from the OVA series. Pretty Sammy also appears in the &quot;Mihoshi Special&quot; toward the end of Mihoshi&#x27;s story, and in an alternate reality sequence in the &quot;Tenchi Universe&quot; series.

Also created by Masaki Kajishima, the 1997 OVA series &quot;&quot; is related to the &quot;Tenchi Muyo! Ryo-Ohki&quot; universe. &quot;Tenchi Muyo! War on Geminar&quot; from 2009 uses a number of elements from &quot;Photon&quot;, such as Koros, Aho energy, having a princess named Lashara, and a young hero with such strong superhuman abilities he&#x27;s practically invincible.

Also by Masaki Kajishima, the 1998 OVA series &quot;Spaceship Agga Ruter&quot; and its 1999 visual novel continuation &quot;Space Ofera Agga Ruter ~Kyoufu no Uchuu Majo~&quot; take place in &quot;Tenchi Muyo!&quot; universe.

The 1999 series &quot;Dual! Parallel Trouble Adventure&quot; is related to the &quot;Tenchi Muyo! Ryo-ohki&quot; universe, due to the blatant use of the &quot;Lighthawk Wings&quot; associated with the Jurai dynasty in &quot;Tenchi Muyo&quot;. The creator of both &quot;Dual!&quot; and &quot;Tenchi Muyo!&quot;, Masaki Kajishima, confirmed that &quot;Dual!&quot; does relate to &quot;Tenchi Muyo!&quot;, and is in fact an alternate version of the &quot;Tenchi Muyo!&quot; universe.

Guardians of Order published a line of English-language &quot;Tenchi Muyo&quot; role-playing game books based on the various series in the Tenchi franchise starting in 2000.

&quot;Tenchi Muyo! GXP&quot; was released in Japan in 2001. The series takes place during the Kajishima version of the OVA continuity, and is set a year after the events of the third OVA series (despite being released first chronologically). The main character is Seina Yamada, a friend of Tenchi Masaki who accidentally joined the Galaxy Police. Many characters from &quot;Tenchi Muyo! Ryo-ohki&quot; make appearances in this series, including the use of Seiryo Tennan as a major character and a full-fledged &quot;Tenchi Muyo!&quot; crossover in episode 17.

&quot;Battle Programmer Shirase&quot; is a 2003 spin-off of the &quot;Pretty Sammy&quot; OVA and TV series, keeping the character Misao Amano from &quot;Pretty Sammy&quot;, and with the main character Akira Shirase, Misao&#x27;s great-uncle; however, it bears little in common with either &quot;Pretty Sammy&quot; series because it has neither magic, nor Sasami, nor Misao&#x27;s alter ego Pixy Misa.

&quot;&quot; aired in Japan in 2006. The third spin-off featuring Sasami (known here as Sasami Iwakura) as the main character.

The most recent &quot;Tenchi&quot; spin-off series is called &quot;Tenchi Muyo! War on Geminar&quot; (aka &quot;Isekai no Seikishi Monogatari&quot;) which follows the tale of Tenchi&#x27;s half-brother Kenshi Masaki as he finds himself in a foreign world that uses humanoid machines to fight their wars.

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==
* at VIZ Communications
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="14" end="19" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q747381" start="21" end="32" title="light novel" label="light novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="37" end="42" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q220898" start="99" end="102" title="Original video animation" label="OVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295316" start="148" end="164" title="Masaki Kajishima" label="Masaki Kajishima"/>
<link wikidata="Q16729839" start="181" end="195" title="Hiroki Hayashi" label="Hiroki Hayashi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="515" end="543" title="Tenchi Muyo! Ryo-Ohki#Tenchi Muyo! Mihoshi Special" label="Tenchi Muyo! Mihoshi Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q18161731" start="1432" end="1447" title="Ai Tenchi Muyo!" label="Ai Tenchi Muyo!"/>
<link wikidata="Q115146" start="1472" end="1480" title="Tokyo MX" label="Tokyo MX"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730997" start="1560" end="1585" title="Magical Girl Pretty Sammy" label="Magical Girl Pretty Sammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1746" end="1759" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295316" start="1774" end="1790" title="Masaki Kajishima" label="Masaki Kajishima"/>
<link wikidata="Q16729839" start="1795" end="1809" title="Hiroki Hayashi" label="Hiroki Hayashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q997465" start="1825" end="1841" title="Bubblegum Crisis" label="Bubblegum Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3900409" start="2576" end="2581" title="Ryoko (Tenchi Muyo)" label="Ryoko"/>
<link wikidata="Q127337" start="2648" end="2666" title="I Dream of Jeannie" label="I Dream of Jeannie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295316" start="3214" end="3230" title="Masaki Kajishima" label="Masaki Kajishima"/>
<link wikidata="Q660288" start="3696" end="3714" title="Viz Media" label="Viz Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418447" start="3736" end="3745" title="Chuang Yi" label="Chuang Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q548166" start="3999" end="4002" title="Anime International Company" label="AIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q548166" start="4168" end="4171" title="Anime International Company" label="AIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205595" start="4188" end="4195" title="Geneon Entertainment" label="Pioneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q851675" start="4768" end="4786" title="Takahashi, Okayama" label="Takahashi, Okayama"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4828" end="4865" title="Tenchi the Movie: Tenchi Muyo in Love" label="Tenchi the Movie: Tenchi Muyo in Love"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4986" end="5030" title="Tenchi the Movie 2: The Daughter of Darkness" label="Tenchi the Movie 2: The Daughter of Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3667354" start="5119" end="5144" title="Tenchi Forever! The Movie" label="Tenchi Forever! The Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293448" start="5391" end="5434" title="Tenchi Muyo! GXP" label="Tenchi Muyo! GXP: Galaxy Police Transporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q668711" start="5661" end="5669" title="dōjinshi" label="dōjinshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073284" start="5971" end="5995" title="Seven Seas Entertainment" label="Seven Seas Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3983399" start="6340" end="6361" title="Tenchi Muyo! Game Hen" label="Tenchi Muyo! Game Hen"/>
<link wikidata="Q183259" start="6376" end="6389" title="Super Famicom" label="Super Famicom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730997" start="6950" end="6975" title="Magical Girl Pretty Sammy" label="Magical Girl Pretty Sammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q752321" start="6992" end="7004" title="magical girl" label="magical girl"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7218" end="7246" title="Tenchi Muyo! Ryo-Ohki#Tenchi Muyo! Mihoshi Special" label="Tenchi Muyo! Mihoshi Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q712730" start="7501" end="7518" title="Magical Project S" label="Magical Project S"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130626" start="7904" end="7931" title="Tenchi Muyo! War on Geminar" label="Tenchi Muyo! War on Geminar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171190" start="8397" end="8429" title="Dual! Parallel Trouble Adventure" label="Dual! Parallel Trouble Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5614104" start="8857" end="8875" title="Guardians of Order" label="Guardians of Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q21233657" start="8919" end="8930" title="Tenchi Muyo! (role-playing game)" label="Tenchi Muyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q160738" start="8937" end="8954" title="role-playing game" label="role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293448" start="9038" end="9054" title="Tenchi Muyo! GXP" label="Tenchi Muyo! GXP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3900409" start="9488" end="9501" title="Seiryo Tennan" label="Seiryo Tennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q811002" start="9599" end="9624" title="Battle Programmer Shirase" label="Battle Programmer Shirase"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130626" start="10190" end="10217" title="Tenchi Muyo! War on Geminar" label="Tenchi Muyo! War on Geminar"/>
<link wikidata="Q858784" start="10388" end="10405" title="mecha" label="humanoid machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q660288" start="10488" end="10506" title="VIZ Communications" label="VIZ Communications"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31247" wikidata="Q66196" url="?curid=31247" title="Teleprinter">
<text>A teleprinter (teletypewriter, teletype or TTY) is an electromechanical device that can be used to send and receive typed messages through various communications channels, in both point-to-point and point-to-multipoint configurations. 

Initially, from 1887 at the earliest, teleprinters were used in telegraphy. Electrical telegraphy had been developed decades earlier in the late 1830s and 1840s, then using simpler Morse key equipment and telegraph operators. The introduction of teleprinters automated much of this work and eventually largely replaced skilled operators versed in Morse code with typists and machines communicating faster via Baudot code.

With the development of early computers in the 1950s, teleprinters were adapted to allow typed data to be sent to a computer, and responses printed. Some teleprinter models could also be used to create punched tape for data storage (either from typed input or from data received from a remote source) and to read back such tape for local printing or transmission. A teleprinter attached to a modem could also communicate through telephone lines. This latter configuration was often used to connect teleprinters to remote computers, particularly in time-sharing environments.

Teleprinters have largely been replaced by fully electronic computer terminals which typically have a computer monitor instead of a printer (though the term &quot;TTY&quot; is still occasionally used to refer to them, such as in Unix systems). Teleprinters are still widely used in the aviation industry (see AFTN and airline teletype system), and variants called Telecommunications Devices for the Deaf (TDDs) are used by the hearing impaired for typed communications over ordinary telephone lines.

==History==

The teleprinter evolved through a series of inventions by a number of engineers, including Samuel Morse, Alexander Bain, Royal Earl House, David Edward Hughes, Emile Baudot, Donald Murray, Charles L. Krum, Edward Kleinschmidt and Frederick G. Creed. Teleprinters were invented in order to send and receive messages without the need for operators trained in the use of Morse code. A system of two teleprinters, with one operator trained to use a keyboard, replaced two trained Morse code operators. The teleprinter system improved message speed and delivery time, making it possible for messages to be flashed across a country with little manual intervention.

There were a number of parallel developments on both sides of the Atlantic Ocean. In 1835 Samuel Morse devised a recording telegraph, and Morse code was born. Morse&#x27;s instrument used a current to displace the armature of an electromagnet, which moved a marker, therefore recording the breaks in the current. Cooke &amp; Wheatstone received a British patent covering telegraphy in 1837 and a second one in 1840 which described a type-printing telegraph with steel type fixed at the tips of petals of a rotating brass daisy-wheel, struck by an &quot;electric hammer&quot; to print Roman letters through carbon paper onto a moving paper tape. In 1841 Alexander Bain devised an electromagnetic printing telegraph machine. It used pulses of electricity created by rotating a dial over contact points to release and stop a type-wheel turned by weight-driven clockwork; a second clockwork mechanism rotated a drum covered with a sheet of paper and moved it slowly upwards so that the type-wheel printed its signals in a spiral. The critical issue was to have the sending and receiving elements working synchronously. Bain attempted to achieve this using centrifugal governors to closely regulate the speed of the clockwork. It was patented, along with other devices, on April 21, 1841.

By 1846, the Morse telegraph service was operational between Washington, D.C., and New York. Royal Earl House patented his printing telegraph that same year. He linked two 28-key piano-style keyboards by wire. Each piano key represented a letter of the alphabet and when pressed caused the corresponding letter to print at the receiving end. A &quot;shift&quot; key gave each main key two optional values. A 56-character typewheel at the sending end was synchronised to coincide with a similar wheel at the receiving end. If the key corresponding to a particular character was pressed at the home station, it actuated the typewheel at the distant station just as the same character moved into the printing position, in a way similar to the (much later) daisy wheel printer. It was thus an example of a synchronous data transmission system. House&#x27;s equipment could transmit around 40 instantly readable words per minute, but was difficult to manufacture in bulk. The printer could copy and print out up to 2,000 words per hour. This invention was first put in operation and exhibited at the Mechanics Institute in New York in 1844.

Landline teleprinter operations began in 1849, when a circuit was put in service between Philadelphia and New York City.
In 1855, David Edward Hughes introduced an improved machine built on the work of Royal Earl House. In less than two years, a number of small telegraph companies, including Western Union in early stages of development, united to form one large corporation – Western Union Telegraph Co. – to carry on the business of telegraphy on the Hughes system.

In France, Émile Baudot designed in 1874 a system using a five-unit code, which began to be used extensively in that country from 1877. The British Post Office adopted the Baudot system for use on a simplex circuit between London and Paris in 1897, and subsequently made considerable use of duplex Baudot systems on their Inland Telegraph Services.

During 1901, Baudot&#x27;s code was modified by Donald Murray (1865–1945, originally from New Zealand), prompted by his development of a typewriter-like keyboard. The Murray system employed an intermediate step, a keyboard perforator, which allowed an operator to punch a paper tape, and a tape transmitter for sending the message from the punched tape. At the receiving end of the line, a printing mechanism would print on a paper tape, and/or a reperforator could be used to make a perforated copy of the message. As there was no longer a direct correlation between the operator&#x27;s hand movement and the bits transmitted, there was no concern about arranging the code to minimize operator fatigue, and instead Murray designed the code to minimize wear on the machinery, assigning the code combinations with the fewest punched holes to the most frequently used characters. The Murray code also introduced what became known as &quot;format effectors&quot; or &quot;control characters&quot; – the CR (Carriage Return) and LF (Line Feed) codes. A few of Baudot&#x27;s codes moved to the positions where they have stayed ever since: the NULL or BLANK and the DEL code. NULL/BLANK was used as an idle code for when no messages were being sent.

In the United States in 1902, electrical engineer Frank Pearne approached Joy Morton, head of Morton Salt, seeking a sponsor for research into the practicalities of developing a printing telegraph system. Joy Morton needed to determine whether this was worthwhile and so consulted mechanical engineer Charles L. Krum, who was vice president of the Western Cold Storage Company. Krum was interested in helping Pearne, so space was set up in a laboratory in the attic of Western Cold Storage. Frank Pearne lost interest in the project after a year and left to get involved in teaching. Krum was prepared to continue Pearne’s work, and in August, 1903 a patent was filed for a &#x27;typebar page printer&#x27;. In 1904, Krum filed a patent for a &#x27;type wheel printing telegraph machine&#x27; which was issued in August, 1907. In 1906 Charles Krum&#x27;s son, Howard Krum, joined his father in this work. It was Howard who developed and patented the start-stop synchronizing method for code telegraph systems, which made possible the practical teleprinter.

In 1908, a working teleprinter was produced by the Morkrum Company (formed between Joy Morton and Charles Krum), called the Morkrum Printing Telegraph, which was field tested with the Alton Railroad. In 1910, the Morkrum Company designed and installed the first commercial teletypewriter system on Postal Telegraph Company lines between Boston and New York City using the &quot;Blue Code Version&quot; of the Morkrum Printing Telegraph.

In 1916, Edward Kleinschmidt filed a patent application for a typebar page printer. In 1919, shortly after the Morkrum company obtained their patent for a start-stop synchronizing method for code telegraph systems, which made possible the practical teleprinter, Kleinschmidt filed an application titled &quot;Method of and Apparatus for Operating Printing Telegraphs&quot; which included an improved start-stop method. The basic start-stop procedure, however, is much older than the Kleinschmidt and Morkrum inventions. It was already proposed by D&#x27;Arlincourt in 1870.
Instead of wasting time and money in patent disputes on the start-stop method, Kleinschmidt and the Morkrum Company decided to merge and form the Morkrum-Kleinschmidt Company in 1924. The new company combined the best features of both their machines into a new typewheel printer for which Kleinschmidt, Howard Krum, and Sterling Morton jointly obtained a patent.

In 1924 Britain&#x27;s Creed &amp; Company, founded by Frederick G. Creed, entered the teleprinter field with their Model 1P, a page printer, which was soon superseded by the improved Model 2P. In 1925 Creed acquired the patents for Donald Murray&#x27;s Murray code, a rationalised Baudot code. The Model 3 tape printer, Creed’s first combined start-stop machine, was introduced in 1927 for the Post Office telegram service. This machine printed received messages directly on to gummed paper tape at a rate of 65 words per minute. Creed created his first keyboard perforator, which used compressed air to punch the holes. He also created a reperforator (receiving perforator) and a printer. The reperforator punched incoming Morse signals on to paper tape and the printer decoded this tape to produce alphanumeric characters on plain paper. This was the origin of the Creed High Speed Automatic Printing System, which could run at an unprecedented 200 words per minute. His system was adopted by the Daily Mail for daily transmission of the newspaper&#x27;s contents. The Creed Model 7 page printing teleprinter was introduced in 1931 and was used for the inland Telex service. It worked at a speed of 50 baud, about 66 words a minute, using a code based on the Murray code.

A teleprinter system was installed in the Bureau of Lighthouses, Airways Division, Flight Service Station Airway Radio Stations system in 1928, carrying administrative messages, flight information and weather reports. By 1938, the teleprinter network, handling weather traffic, extended over 20,000 miles, covering all 48 states except Maine, New Hampshire, and South Dakota.

==Ways in which teleprinters were used==
Teleprinters could use a variety of different communication channels. These included a simple pair of wires, public switched telephone networks, dedicated non-switched telephone circuits (leased lines), switched networks that operated similarly to the public telephone network (telex), and radio and microwave links (telex-on-radio, or TOR). 

There were at least five major types of teleprinter networks:
* Exchange systems such as Telex and TWX created a real-time circuit between two machines, so that anything typed on one machine appeared at the other end immediately. US and UK systems had telephone dials, and prior to 1981 five North American Numbering Plan (NANPA) area codes were reserved for teleprinter use. German systems did &quot;dialing&quot; via the keyboard. Typed &quot;chat&quot; was possible, but because billing was by connect time, it was common to prepare messages in advance on paper tape and transmit them without pauses for typing.
* Leased line and radioteletype networks arranged in point-to-point and / or multipoint configurations supported data processing applications for government and industry, such as integrating the accounting, billing, management, production, purchasing, sales, shipping and receiving departments within an organization to speed internal communications.
* Message switching systems were an early form of E-mail, using electromechanical equipment. See Telegram, Western Union, Plan 55-A. Military organizations had similar but separate systems, such as Autodin.
* Broadcast systems such as weather information distribution and &quot;news wires&quot;, which were received on &quot;wire machines&quot;. Examples were operated by Associated Press, National Weather Service, Reuters, and United Press (later UPI). Information was printed on receive-only teleprinters, without keyboards or dials.
* &quot;Loop&quot; systems, where anything typed on any machine on the loop printed on all the machines. American police departments used such systems to interconnect precincts.

Before the computer revolution (and information processing performance improvements thanks to Moore&#x27;s law) made it possible to securely encrypt voice and video calls, teleprinters were long used in combination with electromechanical or electronic cryptographic devices to provide secure communication channels. Being limited to text only was an acceptable trade-off for security.

==Teleprinter operation==

Most teleprinters used the 5-bit International Telegraph Alphabet No. 2 (ITA2). This was limited to 32 codes (25 = 32), which was insufficient to encode all the alphabet as well as numbers and other characters. Therefore, the keyboard used the &quot;FIGS&quot; (for &quot;figures&quot;) and &quot;LTRS&quot; (for &quot;letters&quot;) keys to allow two encoding states, with a total of 60 codes by sending one of two reserved characters to indicate the state of the following encoded stream (the letters were single case only). Special versions of teleprinters had FIGS characters for specific applications, such as weather symbols for weather reports. The ITA2 code was used asynchronously with start and stop bits: the asynchronous code design was intimately linked with the start-stop electro-mechanical design of teleprinters. (Early systems had used synchronous codes, but were hard to synchronize mechanically). Other codes, such as FIELDATA and Flexowriter, were introduced but never became as popular as ITA2.

&quot;Mark&quot; and &quot;space&quot; are terms describing logic levels in teleprinter circuits. The native mode of communication for a teleprinter is a simple series DC circuit that is interrupted, much as a rotary dial interrupts a telephone signal. The marking condition is when the circuit is closed (current is flowing), the spacing condition is when the circuit is open (no current is flowing). The &quot;idle&quot; condition of the circuit is a continuous marking state, with the start of a character signalled by a &quot;start bit&quot;, which is always a space. Following the start bit, the character is represented by a fixed number of bits, such as 5 bits in the ITA2 code, each either a mark or a space to denote the specific character or machine function. After the character&#x27;s bits, the sending machine sends one or more stop bits. The stop bits are marking, so as to be distinct from the subsequent start bit. If the sender has nothing more to send, the line simply remains in the marking state (as if a continuing series of stop bits) until a later space denotes the start of the next character. The time between characters need not be an integral multiple of a bit time, but it must be at least the minimum number of stop bits required by the receiving machine.

When the line is broken, the continuous spacing (open circuit, no current flowing) causes a receiving teleprinter to cycle continuously, even in the absence of stop bits. It prints nothing because the characters received are all zeros, the ITA2 blank (or ASCII) null character.

Teleprinter circuits were generally leased from a communications common carrier and consisted of ordinary telephone cables that extended from the teleprinter located at the customer location to the common carrier central office. These teleprinter circuits were connected to switching equipment at the central office for Telex and TWX service. Private line teleprinter circuits were not directly connected to switching equipment. Instead, these private line circuits were connected to network hubs and repeaters configured to provide point to point or point to multipoint service. More than two teleprinters could be connected to the same wire circuit by means of a current loop.

Earlier teleprinters had three rows of keys and only supported upper case letters. They used the 5 bit ITA2 code and generally worked at 60 to 100 words per minute. Later teleprinters, specifically the Teletype Model 33, used ASCII code, an innovation that came into widespread use in the 1960s as computers became more widely available.

&quot;Speed&quot;, intended to be roughly comparable to words per minute, is the standard term introduced by Western Union for a mechanical teleprinter data transmission rate using the 5-bit ITA2 code that was popular in the 1940s and several decades thereafter. Such a machine would send 1 start bit, 5 data bits, and 1.42 stop bits. This unusual stop bit time is actually a rest period to allow the mechanical printing mechanism to synchronize in the event that a garbled signal is received. This is true especially on high frequency radio circuits, where selective fading is present. Selective fading causes the mark signal amplitude to be randomly different from the space signal amplitude. Selective fading, or Rayleigh fading can cause two carriers to randomly and independently fade to different depths. Since modern computer equipment cannot easily generate 1.42 bits for the stop period, common practice is to either approximate this with 1.5 bits, or to send 2.0 bits while accepting 1.0 bits receiving.

For example, a &quot;60 speed&quot; machine is geared at 45.5 baud (22.0 ms per bit), a &quot;66 speed&quot; machine is geared at 50.0 baud (20.0 ms per bit), a &quot;75 speed&quot; machine is geared at 56.9 baud (17.5 ms per bit), a &quot;100 speed&quot; machine is geared at 74.2 baud (13.5 ms per bit), and a &quot;133 speed&quot; machine is geared at 100.0 baud (10.0 ms per bit). 60 speed became the &quot;de facto&quot; standard for amateur radio RTTY operation because of the widespread availability of equipment at that speed and the U.S. Federal Communications Commission (FCC) restrictions to only 60 speed from 1953 to 1972. Telex, news agency wires and similar services commonly used 66 speed services. There was some migration to 75 and 100 speed as more reliable devices were introduced. However, the limitations of HF transmission such as excessive error rates due to multipath distortion and the nature of ionospheric propagation kept many users at 60 and 66 speed. Most audio recordings in existence today are of teleprinters operating at 60 words per minute, and mostly of the Teletype Model 15.

Another measure of the speed of a teletypewriter was in total &quot;operations per minute (OPM)&quot;. For example, 60 speed was usually 368 OPM, 66 speed was 404 OPM, 75 speed was 460 OPM, and 100 speed was 600 OPM. Western Union Telexes were usually set at 390 OPM, with 7.0 total bits instead of the customary 7.42 bits.

Both wire-service and private teleprinters had bells to signal important incoming messages and could ring 24/7 while the power was turned on. For example, ringing 4 bells on UPI wire-service machines meant an &quot;Urgent&quot; message; 5 bells was a &quot;Bulletin&quot;; and 10 bells was a FLASH, used only for very important news.

The teleprinter circuit was often linked to a 5-bit paper tape punch (or &quot;reperforator&quot;) and reader, allowing messages received to be resent on another circuit. Complex military and commercial communications networks were built using this technology. Message centers had rows of teleprinters and large racks for paper tapes awaiting transmission. Skilled operators could read the priority code from the hole pattern and might even feed a &quot;FLASH PRIORITY&quot; tape into a reader while it was still coming out of the punch. Routine traffic often had to wait hours for relay. Many teleprinters had built-in paper tape readers and punches, allowing messages to be saved in machine-readable form and edited off-line.

Communication by radio, known as &quot;radioteletype&quot; or &quot;RTTY&quot; (pronounced &quot;ritty&quot;), was also common, especially among military users. Ships, command posts (mobile, stationary, and even airborne) and logistics units took advantage of the ability of operators to send reliable and accurate information with a minimum of training. Amateur radio operators continue to use this mode of communication today, though most use computer-interface sound generators, rather than legacy hardware teleprinter equipment. Numerous modes are in use within the &quot;ham radio&quot; community, from the original ITA2 format to more modern, faster modes, which include error-checking of characters.

===Control characters===

A typewriter or electromechanical printer can print characters on paper, and execute operations such as move the carriage back to the left margin of the same line (carriage return), advance to the same column of the next line (line feed), and so on. Commands to control non-printing operations were transmitted in exactly the same way as printable characters by sending control characters with defined functions (e.g., the &quot;line feed&quot; character forced the carriage to move to the same position on the next line) to teleprinters. In modern computing and communications a few control characters, such as carriage return and line feed, have retained their original functions (although they are often implemented in software rather than activating electromechanical mechanisms to move a physical printer carriage) but many others are no longer required and are used for other purposes.

===Answer back mechanism===
Some teleprinters had a &quot;Here is&quot; key, which transmitted a fixed sequence of 20 or 22 characters, programmable by breaking tabs off a drum. This sequence could also be transmitted automatically upon receipt of an ENQ (control E) signal, if enabled. This was commonly used to identify a station; the operator could press the key to send the station identifier to the other end, or the remote station could trigger its transmission by sending the ENQ character, essentially asking &quot;who are you?&quot;

==Manufacturers==

===Creed &amp; Company===

British Creed &amp; Company built teleprinters for the GPO&#x27;s teleprinter service.
* Creed model 7 (page printing teleprinter introduced in 1931)
* Creed model 7B (50 baud page printing teleprinter) 
* Creed model 7E (page printing teleprinter with overlap cam and range finder)
* Creed model 7/TR (non-printing teleprinter reperforator)
* Creed model 54 (page printing teleprinter introduced in 1954)
* Creed model 75 (page printing teleprinter introduced in 1958)
* Creed model 85 (printing reperforator introduced in 1948)
* Creed model 86 (printing reperforator using 7/8&quot; wide tape)
* Creed model 444 (page printing teleprinter introduced in 1966, GPO type 15)

=== Gretag ===

The Gretag ETK-47 teleprinter developed in Switzerland by Edgar Gretener in 1947 uses a 14-bit start-stop transmission method similar to the 5-bit code used by other teleprinters. However, instead of a more-or-less arbitrary mapping between 5-bit codes and letters in the Latin alphabet, all characters (letters, digits, and punctuation) printed by the ETK are built from 14 basic elements on a print head, very similar to the 14 elements on a modern fourteen-segment display, each one selected independently by one of the 14 bits during transmission. Because it does not use a fixed character set, but instead builds up characters from smaller elements, the ETK printing element does not require modification to switch between Latin, Cyrillic, and Greek characters.

===Kleinschmidt Labs===
In 1931, American inventor Edward Kleinschmidt formed Kleinschmidt Labs to pursue a different design of teleprinter. In 1944 Kleinschmidt demonstrated their lightweight unit to the Signal Corps and in 1949 their design was adopted for the Army&#x27;s portable needs. In 1956, Kleinschmidt Labs merged with Smith-Corona, which then merged with the Marchant Calculating Machine Co., forming the SCM Corporation. By 1979, the Kleinschmidt division was turning to Electronic Data Interchange and away from mechanical products.

Kleinschmidt machines, with the military as their primary customer, used standard military designations for their machines. The teleprinter was identified with designations such as a TT-4/FG, while communication &quot;sets&quot; to which a teleprinter might be a part generally used the standard Army/Navy designation system such as AN/FGC-25. This includes Kleinschmidt teleprinter TT-117/FG and tape reperforator TT-179/FG.

===Morkrum===
Morkrum made their first commercial installation of a printing telegraph with the Postal Telegraph Company in Boston and New York in 1910. It became popular with railroads, and the Associated Press adopted it in 1914 for their wire service. Morkrum merged with their competitor Kleinschmidt Electric Company to become Morkrum-Kleinschmidt Corporation shortly before being renamed the Teletype Corporation.

===Olivetti===

Italian office equipment maker Olivetti (est. 1908) started to manufacture teleprinters in order to provide Italian post offices with modern equipment to send and receive telegrams. The first models typed on a paper ribbon, which was then cut and glued into telegram forms.
* Olivetti T1 (1938–1948)
* Olivetti T2 (1948–1968)
* Olivetti Te300 (1968–1975)
* Olivetti Te400 (1975–1991)

===Siemens &amp; Halske===

Siemens &amp; Halske, later Siemens, a German company, founded in 1847.
* Teleprinter Model 100 Ser 1 (end of the 1950s) – Used for Telex service
* Teleprinter Model 100 Ser. 11 – Later version with minor changes
* Teleprinter Model T100 ND (single current) NDL (double current) models
* Teleprinter Model T 150 (electromechanical)
* Offline tape punch for creating messages
* Teleprinter T 1000 electronic teleprinter (processor based) 50-75-100 Bd. Tape punch and reader attachments ND/NDL/SEU V21modem model
* Teleprinter T 1000 Receive only units as used by newsrooms for unedited SAPA/Reuters/AP feeds etc.
* Teleprinter T 1200 electronic teleprinter (processor based) 50-75-100-200 Bd.Green LED text display, 1.44M 3.5&quot; floppy disk (&quot;stiffy&quot;) attachment
* PC-Telex Teleprinter with dedicated dot matrix printer Connected to IBM compatible PC (as used by Telkom South Africa)
* T4200 Teletex Teleprinter With two floppy disc drives and black and white monitor/daisy wheel typewriter (DOS2)

===Teletype Corporation===
The Teletype Corporation, a part of American Telephone and Telegraph Company&#x27;s Western Electric manufacturing arm since 1930, was founded in 1906 as the Morkrum Company. In 1925, a merger between Morkrum and Kleinschmidt Electric Company created the Morkrum-Kleinschmidt Company. The name was changed in December 1928 to Teletype Corporation. In 1930, Teletype Corporation was purchased by the American Telephone and Telegraph Company and became a subsidiary of Western Electric. In 1984, the divestiture of the Bell System resulted in the Teletype name and logo being replaced by the AT&amp;T name and logo, eventually resulting in the brand being extinguished. The last vestiges of what had been the Teletype Corporation ceased in 1990, bringing to a close the dedicated teleprinter business. Despite its long-lasting trademark status, the word &quot;Teletype&quot; went into common generic usage in the news and telecommunications industries. Records of the United States Patent and Trademark Office indicate the trademark has expired and is considered dead.

Teletype machines tended to be large, heavy, and extremely robust, capable of running non-stop for months at a time if properly lubricated. The Model 15 stands out as one of a few machines that remained in production for many years. It was introduced in 1930 and remained in production until 1963, a total of 33 years of continuous production. Very few complex machines can match that record. The production run was stretched somewhat by World War II—the Model 28 was scheduled to replace the Model 15 in the mid-1940s, but Teletype built so many factories to produce the Model 15 during World War II, it was more economical to continue mass production of the Model 15. The Model 15, in its receive only, no keyboard, version was the classic &quot;news Teletype&quot; for decades.
* Model 15 = Baudot version, 45 Baud; optional tape punch and reader
* Model 28 = Baudot version, 45-50-56-75 Baud; optional tape punch and reader
* Model 32 = small lightweight machine (cheap production) 45-50-56-75 Baud; optional tape punch and reader
* Model 33 = same as Model 32 but for 8 level ASCII-plus-parity-bit, 72 char./line, used as computer terminal; optional tape punch and reader.
* Model 35 = same as Model 28 but for 8 level ASCII-plus-parity-bit, used as heavy-duty computer terminal; optional tape punch and reader
* Model 37 = improved version of the Model 35, higher speeds up to 150 Baud; optional tape punch and reader
* Model 38 = similar to Model 33, but for 132 char./line paper (14 inches wide), upper and lower case, and red/black printing; optional tape punch and reader
* Model 40 = new system processor based, w/ monitor screen, but mechanical &quot;chain printer&quot;
* Model 42 = new cheap production Baudot machine to replace Model 28 and Model 32, paper tape acc.
* Model 43 = same but for 8 level ASCII-plus-parity-bit, to replace Model 33 and Model 35, paper tape acc.

Several different high-speed printers like the &quot;Ink-tronic&quot; etc.

===Texas Instruments===

Texas Instruments developed its own line of teletypes in 1971, the Silent 700. Their name came from the use of a thermal printer head to emit copy, making them substantially quieter than contemporary teletypes using impact printing, and some such as the 1975 Model 745 and 1983 Model 707 were even small enough to be sold as portable units. Certain models came with acoustic couplers and some had internal storage, initially cassette tape in the 1973 Models 732/733 ASR and later bubble memory in the 1977 Models 763/765, the first and one of the few commercial products to use the technology. In these units their storage capability essentially acted as a form of punched tape. The last Silent 700 was the 1987 700/1200 BPS, which was sold into the early 1990s.

==Telex==

A global teleprinter network called &quot;Telex&quot; was developed in the late 1920s, and was used through most of the 20th century for business communications. The main difference from a standard teleprinter is that Telex includes a switched routing network, originally based on pulse-telephone dialing, which in the United States was provided by Western Union. AT&amp;T developed a competing network called &quot;TWX&quot; which initially also used rotary dialing and Baudot code, carried to the customer premises as pulses of DC on a metallic copper pair. TWX later added a second ASCII-based service using Bell 103 type modems served over lines whose physical interface was identical to regular telephone lines. In many cases, the TWX service was provided by the same telephone central office that handled voice calls, using class of service to prevent POTS customers from connecting to TWX customers. Telex is still in use in some countries for certain applications such as shipping, news, weather reporting and military command. Many business applications have moved to the Internet as most countries have discontinued telex/TWX services.

==Teletypesetter==
In addition to the 5-bit Baudot code and the much later seven-bit ASCII code, there was a six-bit code known as the Teletypesetter code (TTS) used by news wire services. It was first demonstrated in 1928 and began to see widespread use in the 1950s. Through the use of &quot;shift in&quot; and &quot;shift out&quot; codes, this six-bit code could represent a full set of upper and lower case characters, digits, symbols commonly used in newspapers, and typesetting instructions such as &quot;flush left&quot; or &quot;center&quot;, and even &quot;auxiliary font&quot;, to switch to italics or bold type, and back to roman (&quot;upper rail&quot;).

The TTS produces aligned text, taking into consideration character widths and column width, or line length.

A Model 20 Teletype machine with a paper tape punch (&quot;reperforator&quot;) was installed at subscriber newspaper sites. Originally these machines would simply punch paper tapes and these tapes could be read by a tape reader attached to a &quot;Teletypesetter operating unit&quot; installed on a Linotype machine. The &quot;operating unit&quot; was essentially a tape reader which actuated a mechanical box, which in turn operated the Linotype&#x27;s keyboard and other controls, in response to the codes read from the tape, thus creating type for printing in newspapers and magazines.

This allowed higher production rates for the Linotype, and was used both locally, where the tape was first punched and then fed to the machine, as well as remotely, using tape transmitters and receivers.

Remote use played an essential role for distributing identical content, such as syndicated columns, news agency news, classified advertising, and more, to different publications across wide geographical areas.

In later years the incoming 6-bit current loop signal carrying the TTS code was connected to a minicomputer or mainframe for storage, editing, and eventual feed to a phototypesetting machine.

==Teleprinters in computing==

Computers used teleprinters for input and output from the early days of computing. Punched card readers and fast printers replaced teleprinters for most purposes, but teleprinters continued to be used as interactive time-sharing terminals until video displays became widely available in the late 1970s.

Users typed commands after a prompt character was printed. Printing was unidirectional; if the user wanted to delete what had been typed, further characters were printed to indicate that previous text had been cancelled. When video displays first became available the user interface was initially exactly the same as for an electromechanical printer; expensive and scarce video terminals could be used interchangeably with teleprinters. This was the origin of the text terminal and the command-line interface.

Paper tape was sometimes used to prepare input for the computer session off line and to capture computer output. The popular Teletype Model 33 used 7-bit ASCII code (with an eighth parity bit) instead of Baudot. The common modem communications settings, &quot;Start/Stop Bits&quot; and &quot;Parity,&quot; stem from the Teletype era.

In early operating systems such as Digital&#x27;s RT-11, serial communication lines were often connected to teleprinters and were given device names starting with . This and similar conventions were adopted by many other operating systems. Unix and Unix-like operating systems use the prefix , for example , or (for pseudo-tty), such as , but some of them (e.g. Solaris &amp; recent Linux) have replaced pty files by a pts folder (where &quot;pt&quot; stands for &quot;pseudoterminal&quot; instead). In many computing contexts, &quot;TTY&quot; has become the name for any text terminal, such as an external console device, a user dialing into the system on a modem on a serial port device, a printing or graphical computer terminal on a computer&#x27;s serial port or the RS-232 port on a USB-to-RS-232 converter attached to a computer&#x27;s USB port, or even a terminal emulator application in the window system using a pseudoterminal device.

Teleprinters were also used to record fault printout and other information in some TXE telephone exchanges.

==Obsolescence of teleprinters==

Although printing news, messages, and other text at a distance is still universal, the dedicated teleprinter tied to a pair of leased copper wires was made functionally obsolete by the fax, personal computer, inkjet printer, email, and the Internet.

In the 1980s, packet radio became the most common form of digital communications used in amateur radio. Soon, advanced multimode electronic interfaces such as the AEA PK-232 were developed, which could send and receive not only packet, but various other modulation types including Baudot. This made it possible for a home or laptop computer to replace teleprinters, saving money, complexity, space and the massive amount of paper which mechanical machines used.

==See also==
* Letter-quality printer
* Plan 55-A, a message switching system for telegrams
* Radioteletype
* Siemens and Halske T52 – the &quot;Geheimfernschreiber&quot; (&quot;secrets teleprinter&quot;)
* Universal asynchronous receiver-transmitter, which made it easy to connect teleprinters and terminals emulating teleprinters to computers

== References ==

== Further reading ==
* On the role of the teleprinter code in WWII
* 

== External links ==

* A first-hand report of Teletype Corporation&#x27;s early years 
* A Gallery of Teletype Images
* History of Teletypewriter Development by R.A. Nelson
* &quot;Some Notes on Teletype Corporation&quot;
* Mass.gov: TTY explanation and government best practices for TTY use

=== Patents ===
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q66196" start="2" end="13" title="Teleprinter" label="teleprinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q66196" start="15" end="29" title="Teleprinter" label="teletypewriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q66196" start="31" end="39" title="Teleprinter" label="teletype"/>
<link wikidata="Q66196" start="43" end="46" title="Teleprinter" label="TTY"/>
<link wikidata="Q533188" start="54" end="71" title="electromechanical" label="electromechanical"/>
<link wikidata="Q681349" start="180" end="194" title="point-to-point (telecommunications)" label="point-to-point"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554265" start="199" end="218" title="point-to-multipoint communication" label="point-to-multipoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="301" end="311" title="telegraphy" label="telegraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501061" start="313" end="334" title="Electrical telegraphy" label="Electrical telegraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156388" start="418" end="427" title="Morse key" label="Morse key"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024200" start="442" end="460" title="telegraph operator" label="telegraph operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535186" start="556" end="563" title="skilled labour" label="skilled"/>
<link wikidata="Q79897" start="584" end="594" title="Morse code" label="Morse code"/>
<link wikidata="Q918751" start="600" end="606" title="Data entry clerk" label="typist"/>
<link wikidata="Q753170" start="646" end="657" title="Baudot code" label="Baudot code"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="690" end="699" title="computers" label="computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q66241" start="862" end="874" title="punched tape" label="punched tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q66221" start="879" end="891" title="Computer data storage" label="data storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607" start="1052" end="1057" title="modem" label="modem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373572" start="1089" end="1103" title="telephone line" label="telephone line"/>
<link wikidata="Q913876" start="1208" end="1220" title="time-sharing" label="time-sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q216640" start="1296" end="1313" title="computer terminal" label="computer terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290" start="1338" end="1354" title="computer monitor" label="computer monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="1465" end="1469" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564112" start="1545" end="1549" title="Aeronautical Fixed Telecommunication Network" label="AFTN"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698793" start="1554" end="1577" title="airline teletype system" label="airline teletype system"/>
<link wikidata="Q354147" start="1600" end="1639" title="Telecommunications device for the deaf" label="Telecommunications Devices for the Deaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q16035842" start="1663" end="1679" title="hearing loss" label="hearing impaired"/>
<link wikidata="Q75698" start="1841" end="1853" title="Samuel Morse" label="Samuel Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q524036" start="1855" end="1869" title="Alexander Bain (inventor)" label="Alexander Bain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817120" start="1871" end="1887" title="Royal Earl House" label="Royal Earl House"/>
<link wikidata="Q366078" start="1889" end="1908" title="David Edward Hughes" label="David Edward Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q550192" start="1910" end="1922" title="Emile Baudot" label="Emile Baudot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294914" start="1924" end="1937" title="Donald Murray (inventor)" label="Donald Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5079884" start="1939" end="1954" title="Charles L. Krum" label="Charles L. Krum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292107" start="1956" end="1975" title="Edward Kleinschmidt" label="Edward Kleinschmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q666485" start="1980" end="1998" title="Frederick G. Creed" label="Frederick G. Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q75698" start="2500" end="2512" title="Samuel Morse" label="Samuel Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q79897" start="2548" end="2558" title="Morse code" label="Morse code"/>
<link wikidata="Q524036" start="3063" end="3077" title="Alexander Bain (inventor)" label="Alexander Bain"/>
<link wikidata="Q375647" start="3562" end="3582" title="centrifugal governor" label="centrifugal governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q75698" start="3708" end="3713" title="Samuel Morse" label="Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817120" start="3788" end="3804" title="Royal Earl House" label="Royal Earl House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245321" start="3818" end="3836" title="printing telegraph" label="printing telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196607" start="4448" end="4467" title="daisy wheel printer" label="daisy wheel printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804572" start="4790" end="4809" title="Mechanics Institute" label="Mechanics Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q366078" start="4962" end="4981" title="David Edward Hughes" label="David Edward Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q861042" start="5125" end="5138" title="Western Union" label="Western Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q550192" start="5313" end="5325" title="Émile Baudot" label="Émile Baudot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294914" start="5700" end="5713" title="Donald Murray (inventor)" label="Donald Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q66241" start="5924" end="5934" title="paper tape" label="paper tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q520562" start="6502" end="6528" title="letter frequencies" label="frequently used characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q617945" start="6621" end="6638" title="control character" label="control character"/>
<link wikidata="Q283976" start="6652" end="6654" title="Carriage return" label="CR"/>
<link wikidata="Q184914" start="6677" end="6679" title="Newline" label="LF"/>
<link wikidata="Q6297199" start="6971" end="6981" title="Joy Morton" label="Joy Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6914945" start="6991" end="7002" title="Morton Salt" label="Morton Salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245321" start="7075" end="7093" title="printing telegraph" label="printing telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q5079884" start="7198" end="7213" title="Charles L. Krum" label="Charles L. Krum"/>
<link wikidata="Q46335" start="7577" end="7584" title="typebar" label="typebar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292107" start="8402" end="8421" title="Edward Kleinschmidt" label="Edward Kleinschmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6297199" start="8504" end="8511" title="Morkrum" label="Morkrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696897" start="9113" end="9133" title="Morkrum-Kleinschmidt" label="Morkrum-Kleinschmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183834" start="9354" end="9373" title="Creed &amp;amp; Company" label="Creed &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q666485" start="9386" end="9404" title="Frederick G. Creed" label="Frederick G. Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q210534" start="10331" end="10341" title="Daily Mail" label="Daily Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q66175" start="10494" end="10499" title="Telex" label="Telex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2241355" start="10649" end="10670" title="Bureau of Lighthouses" label="Bureau of Lighthouses"/>
<link wikidata="Q243961" start="11134" end="11167" title="public switched telephone network" label="public switched telephone network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659100" start="11228" end="11245" title="switched communication network" label="switched networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q66175" start="11303" end="11308" title="telex" label="telex"/>
<link wikidata="Q127995" start="11325" end="11334" title="microwave" label="microwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q66175" start="11458" end="11463" title="Telex" label="Telex"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11468" end="11471" title="Telex#Teletypewriter eXchange" label="TWX"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562566" start="11661" end="11690" title="North American Numbering Plan" label="North American Numbering Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390458" start="11699" end="11709" title="area codes" label="area codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q66241" start="11928" end="11938" title="Punched tape" label="paper tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071196" start="11986" end="11997" title="Leased line" label="Leased line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474408" start="12002" end="12015" title="radioteletype" label="radioteletype"/>
<link wikidata="Q6661985" start="12097" end="12112" title="data processing" label="data processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393411" start="12337" end="12354" title="Message switching" label="Message switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="12432" end="12440" title="Telegram" label="Telegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q861042" start="12442" end="12455" title="Western Union" label="Western Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200868" start="12457" end="12466" title="Plan 55-A" label="Plan 55-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826517" start="12533" end="12540" title="Autodin" label="Autodin"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="12707" end="12723" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066823" start="12725" end="12749" title="National Weather Service" label="National Weather Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="12751" end="12758" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q493845" start="12784" end="12787" title="UPI" label="UPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q956129" start="13062" end="13081" title="computer revolution" label="computer revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6661985" start="13087" end="13109" title="data processing" label="information processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q178655" start="13145" end="13161" title="Moore&amp;#x27;s law" label="Moore&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q854954" start="13210" end="13220" title="video call" label="video call"/>
<link wikidata="Q8789" start="13303" end="13316" title="cryptographic" label="cryptographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q733553" start="13343" end="13364" title="communication channel" label="communication channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="13493" end="13496" title="bit" label="bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q753170" start="13497" end="13535" title="International Telegraph Alphabet No. 2" label="International Telegraph Alphabet No. 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q599031" start="13825" end="13830" title="state (computer science)" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316326" start="14139" end="14178" title="asynchronous start-stop" label="asynchronously with start and stop bits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411578" start="14402" end="14410" title="FIELDATA" label="FIELDATA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249638" start="14415" end="14426" title="Flexowriter" label="Flexowriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q97349450" start="14482" end="14520" title="Mark and space" label="&amp;quot;Mark&amp;quot; and &amp;quot;space&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q173378" start="14542" end="14553" title="logic level" label="logic level"/>
<link wikidata="Q159241" start="14650" end="14660" title="direct current circuit" label="DC circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q668733" start="14692" end="14703" title="rotary dial" label="rotary dial"/>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="16023" end="16028" title="ASCII" label="ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q861529" start="16030" end="16044" title="null character" label="null character"/>
<link wikidata="Q561457" start="16112" end="16126" title="common carrier" label="common carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373572" start="16153" end="16168" title="telephone cable" label="telephone cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q256132" start="16260" end="16274" title="telephone exchange" label="central office"/>
<link wikidata="Q66175" start="16367" end="16372" title="Telex" label="Telex"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16377" end="16380" title="Telegraphy#TWX" label="TWX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246218" start="16390" end="16402" title="Private line" label="Private line"/>
<link wikidata="Q21073034" start="16531" end="16542" title="network hub" label="network hub"/>
<link wikidata="Q273693" start="16548" end="16556" title="repeater" label="repeater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422221" start="16712" end="16724" title="current loop" label="current loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q297987" start="16929" end="16946" title="Teletype Model 33" label="Teletype Model 33"/>
<link wikidata="Q569389" start="17122" end="17138" title="words per minute" label="words per minute"/>
<link wikidata="Q861042" start="17175" end="17188" title="Western Union" label="Western Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q15115271" start="17587" end="17601" title="high frequency" label="high frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q854039" start="17782" end="17797" title="Rayleigh fading" label="Rayleigh fading"/>
<link wikidata="Q192027" start="18143" end="18147" title="baud" label="baud"/>
<link wikidata="Q723733" start="18154" end="18156" title="millisecond" label="ms"/>
<link wikidata="Q192027" start="18216" end="18220" title="baud" label="baud"/>
<link wikidata="Q185727" start="18520" end="18533" title="amateur radio" label="amateur radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474408" start="18534" end="18538" title="radioteletype" label="RTTY"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="18628" end="18661" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="Federal Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q192283" start="18724" end="18735" title="news agency" label="news agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q66241" start="19908" end="19918" title="punched tape" label="paper tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q10928179" start="20574" end="20582" title="off-line" label="off-line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474408" start="20624" end="20637" title="radioteletype" label="radioteletype"/>
<link wikidata="Q185727" start="20940" end="20953" title="Amateur radio" label="Amateur radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q283976" start="21483" end="21498" title="carriage return" label="carriage return"/>
<link wikidata="Q184914" start="21546" end="21555" title="line feed" label="line feed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379494" start="22463" end="22466" title="Enquiry character" label="ENQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183834" start="22809" end="22828" title="Creed &amp;amp; Company" label="Creed &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325334" start="22856" end="22859" title="General Post Office" label="GPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q121705" start="23551" end="23565" title="Edgar Gretener" label="Edgar Gretener"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316326" start="23588" end="23611" title="start-stop transmission" label="start-stop transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="23765" end="23779" title="Latin alphabet" label="Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826068" start="23944" end="23968" title="fourteen-segment display" label="fourteen-segment display"/>
<link wikidata="Q6420349" start="24339" end="24356" title="Kleinschmidt Inc" label="Kleinschmidt Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545104" start="24591" end="24603" title="Smith-Corona" label="Smith-Corona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3845746" start="24632" end="24664" title="Marchant Calculator" label="Marchant Calculating Machine Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q6297199" start="25250" end="25257" title="Morkrum" label="Morkrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="25431" end="25447" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q192283" start="25477" end="25489" title="wire service" label="wire service"/>
<link wikidata="Q673267" start="25704" end="25712" title="Olivetti" label="Olivetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290583" start="26086" end="26106" title="Siemens &amp;amp; Halske" label="Siemens &amp;amp; Halske"/>
<link wikidata="Q81230" start="26114" end="26121" title="Siemens" label="Siemens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26807" end="26828" title="Floppy disk#3.5-inch floppy disk" label="3.5&amp;quot; floppy disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843047" start="27160" end="27200" title="AT&amp;amp;T Corporation" label="American Telephone and Telegraph Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031258" start="27208" end="27224" title="Western Electric" label="Western Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843047" start="27523" end="27563" title="American Telephone and Telegraph Company" label="American Telephone and Telegraph Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031258" start="27591" end="27607" title="Western Electric" label="Western Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696899" start="29044" end="29052" title="Teletype Model 28" label="Model 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q297987" start="29229" end="29237" title="Teletype Model 33" label="Model 33"/>
<link wikidata="Q193412" start="30183" end="30200" title="Texas Instruments" label="Texas Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483826" start="30250" end="30260" title="Silent 700" label="Silent 700"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166429" start="30296" end="30311" title="Thermal printing" label="thermal printer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30399" end="30414" title="Printer (computing)#Impact printers" label="impact printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361224" start="30549" end="30565" title="acoustic coupler" label="acoustic coupler"/>
<link wikidata="Q149757" start="30608" end="30621" title="cassette tape" label="cassette tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752093" start="30663" end="30676" title="bubble memory" label="bubble memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q66241" start="30848" end="30860" title="punched tape" label="punched tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q66175" start="31000" end="31005" title="Telex" label="Telex"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31374" end="31377" title="Telegraphy#TWX" label="TWX"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883102" start="31569" end="31577" title="Bell 103 modem" label="Bell 103"/>
<link wikidata="Q909216" start="31788" end="31804" title="class of service" label="class of service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462168" start="31816" end="31820" title="Plain old telephone service" label="POTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="32039" end="32047" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485669" start="32214" end="32226" title="six-bit character code" label="six-bit code"/>
<link wikidata="Q694899" start="33181" end="33197" title="Linotype machine" label="Linotype machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086863" start="33757" end="33775" title="Syndicated columnist" label="syndicated columns"/>
<link wikidata="Q192283" start="33777" end="33793" title="News agency" label="news agency news"/>
<link wikidata="Q614278" start="33795" end="33817" title="classified advertising" label="classified advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q185131" start="33983" end="33995" title="minicomputer" label="minicomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q177234" start="33999" end="34008" title="mainframe" label="mainframe"/>
<link wikidata="Q183414" start="34195" end="34207" title="Punched card" label="Punched card"/>
<link wikidata="Q913876" start="34328" end="34340" title="time-sharing" label="time-sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q216640" start="34341" end="34350" title="computer terminal" label="terminals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290" start="34363" end="34371" title="computer display" label="displays"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34445" end="34451" title="Command-line interface#Command prompt" label="prompt"/>
<link wikidata="Q216640" start="34880" end="34893" title="text terminal" label="text terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q189053" start="34902" end="34924" title="command-line interface" label="command-line interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q66241" start="34927" end="34937" title="Punched tape" label="Paper tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q297987" start="35052" end="35069" title="Teletype Model 33" label="Teletype Model 33"/>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="35081" end="35086" title="ASCII" label="ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q625502" start="35108" end="35118" title="parity bit" label="parity bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607" start="35150" end="35155" title="modem" label="modem"/>
<link wikidata="Q690079" start="35297" end="35311" title="Digital Equipment Corporation" label="Digital&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q305216" start="35312" end="35317" title="RT-11" label="RT-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="35502" end="35506" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q14656" start="35511" end="35520" title="Unix-like" label="Unix-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="35521" end="35537" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q134830" start="35547" end="35553" title="prefix" label="prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q216640" start="35869" end="35876" title="system console" label="console"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607" start="35921" end="35926" title="modem" label="modem"/>
<link wikidata="Q385390" start="35932" end="35943" title="serial port" label="serial port"/>
<link wikidata="Q216640" start="35976" end="35993" title="computer terminal" label="computer terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q191895" start="36034" end="36040" title="RS-232" label="RS-232"/>
<link wikidata="Q42378" start="36051" end="36054" title="USB" label="USB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071233" start="36125" end="36142" title="terminal emulator" label="terminal emulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q360364" start="36184" end="36198" title="pseudoterminal" label="pseudoterminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166065" start="36291" end="36294" title="TXE" label="TXE"/>
<link wikidata="Q132744" start="36536" end="36539" title="fax" label="fax"/>
<link wikidata="Q95474715" start="36560" end="36574" title="inkjet printer" label="inkjet printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="36576" end="36581" title="email" label="email"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336005" start="36616" end="36628" title="packet radio" label="packet radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q753170" start="36883" end="36889" title="baudot code" label="Baudot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533525" start="37080" end="37102" title="Letter-quality printer" label="Letter-quality printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200868" start="37105" end="37114" title="Plan 55-A" label="Plan 55-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393411" start="37118" end="37135" title="message switching" label="message switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474408" start="37159" end="37172" title="Radioteletype" label="Radioteletype"/>
<link wikidata="Q380244" start="37175" end="37197" title="Siemens and Halske T52" label="Siemens and Halske T52"/>
<link wikidata="Q280409" start="37272" end="37315" title="Universal asynchronous receiver-transmitter" label="Universal asynchronous receiver-transmitter"/>
</links>
</doc>
