<doc id="29810" wikidata="Q1439" url="?curid=29810" title="Texas">
<text>Texas ( , ; or , ) is the most populous state in the South Central region of the United States. It borders Louisiana to the east, Arkansas to the northeast, Oklahoma to the north, New Mexico to the west, and has an international border with the Mexican states of Chihuahua, Coahuila, Nuevo León, and Tamaulipas to the south and southwest. Texas has a coastline on the Gulf of Mexico to the southeast. Covering , it had over 31 million residents as of 2024, and it is the second-largest state by both area and population. Texas is nicknamed the Lone Star State for its former status as an independent republic, the Republic of Texas.

Spain was the first European country to claim and control Texas. Following a short-lived colony controlled by France, Mexico controlled the land until 1836 when Texas won its independence, becoming the Republic of Texas. In 1845, Texas joined the United States of America as the 28th state. The state&#x27;s annexation set off a chain of events that led to the Mexican–American War in 1846. Following victory by the United States, Texas remained a slave state until the American Civil War, when it declared its secession from the Union in early 1861 before officially joining the Confederate States of America on March2. After the Civil War and the restoration of its representation in the federal government, Texas entered a long period of economic stagnation.

Historically, five major industries shaped the Texas economy prior to World War II: cattle, bison, cotton, timber, and oil. Before and after the Civil War, the cattle industry—which Texas came to dominate—was a major economic driver and created the traditional image of the Texas cowboy. In the later 19th century, cotton and lumber grew to be major industries as the cattle industry became less lucrative. Ultimately, the discovery of major petroleum deposits (Spindletop in particular) initiated an economic boom that became the driving force behind the economy for much of the 20th century. Texas developed a diversified economy and high tech industry during the mid-20th century. , it has the second-highest number (52) of &quot;Fortune&quot; 500 companies headquartered in the United States. With a growing base of industry, the state leads in many industries, including tourism, agriculture, petrochemicals, energy, computers and electronics, aerospace, and biomedical sciences. Texas has led the U.S. in state export revenue since 2002 and has the second-highest gross state product.

The Dallas–Fort Worth metroplex and Greater Houston areas are the nation&#x27;s fourth and fifth-most populous urban regions respectively. Its capital city is Austin. Due to its size and geologic features such as the Balcones Fault, Texas contains diverse landscapes common to both the U.S. Southern and the Southwestern regions. Most population centers are in areas of former prairies, grasslands, forests, and the coastline. Traveling from east to west, terrain ranges from coastal swamps and piney woods, to rolling plains and rugged hills, to the desert and mountains of the Big Bend.

==Etymology==
The name &quot;Texas&quot;, based on the Caddo word () &#x27;friend&#x27;, was applied, in the spelling or , by the Spanish to the Caddo themselves, specifically the Hasinai Confederacy.

During Spanish colonial rule, in the 18th century, the area was known as (&#x27;New Philippines&#x27;) and (&#x27;New Kingdom of the Philippines&#x27;), or as (&#x27;province of the &#x27;), later also (or ), (&#x27;province of Texas&#x27;). It was incorporated as into the Mexican Empire in 1821, and declared a republic in 1836. The Royal Spanish Academy recognizes both spellings, and , as Spanish-language forms of the name.

The English pronunciation with is unetymological, contrary to the historical value of the letter x () in Spanish orthography. Alternative etymologies of the name advanced in the late 19th century connected the name &quot;Texas&quot; with the Spanish word , meaning &#x27;roof tile&#x27;, the plural being used to designate Indigenous Pueblo settlements. A 1760s map by Jacques-Nicolas Bellin shows a village named &quot;Teijas&quot; on the Trinity River, close to the site of modern Crockett.

==History==
===Precontact era===


Texas lies between two major cultural spheres of Pre-Columbian North America: the Southwestern and the Plains areas. Archaeologists have found that three major Indigenous cultures lived in this territory, and reached their developmental peak before the first European contact. These were: the Ancestral Puebloans from the upper Rio Grande region, centered west of Texas; the Mississippian culture, also known as Mound Builders, which extended along the Mississippi River Valley east of Texas; and the civilizations of Mesoamerica, which were centered south of Texas. Influence of Teotihuacan in northern Mexico peaked around AD 500 and declined between the 8th and 10th centuries.

When Europeans arrived in the Texas region, the language families present in the state were Caddoan, Atakapan, Athabaskan, Coahuiltecan, and Uto-Aztecan, in addition to several language isolates such as Tonkawa. Uto-Aztecan Puebloan and Jumano peoples lived neared the Rio Grande in the western portion of the state and the Athabaskan-speaking Apache tribes lived throughout the interior. The agricultural, mound-building Caddo controlled much of the northeastern part of the state, along the Red, Sabine, and Neches River basins. Atakapan peoples such as the Akokisa and Bidai lived along the northeastern Gulf Coast; the Karankawa lived along the central coast. At least one tribe of Coahuiltecans, the Aranama, lived in southern Texas. This entire culture group, primarily centered in northeastern Mexico, is now extinct.

No culture was dominant across all of present-day Texas, and many peoples inhabited the area. Native American tribes who have lived inside the boundaries of present-day Texas include the Alabama, Apache, Atakapan, Bidai, Caddo, Aranama, Comanche, Choctaw, Coushatta, Hasinai, Jumano, Karankawa, Kickapoo, Kiowa, Tonkawa, and Wichita. Many of these peoples migrated from the north or east during the colonial period, such as the Choctaw, Alabama-Coushatta, and Delaware.

The region was primarily controlled by the Spanish until the Texas Revolution. They were most interested in relationships with the Caddo, who were—like the Spanish—a settled, agricultural people. Several Spanish missions were opened in Caddo territory, but a lack of interest in Christianity among the Caddo meant that few were converted. Positioned between French Louisiana and Spanish Texas, the Caddo maintained relations with both, but were closer with the French. After Spain took control of Louisiana, most of the missions in eastern Texas were closed and abandoned. The United States obtained Louisiana following the 1803 Louisiana Purchase and began convincing tribes to self-segregate from whites by moving west; facing an overflow of native peoples in Missouri and Arkansas, they were able to negotiate with the Caddo to allow several displaced peoples to settle on unused lands in eastern Texas. These included the Muscogee, Houma Choctaw, Lenape and Mingo Seneca, among others, who came to view the Caddoans as saviors.

The temperament of Native American tribes affected the fates of European explorers and settlers in that land. Friendly tribes taught newcomers how to grow local crops, prepare foods, and hunt wild game. Warlike tribes resisted the settlers. Prior treaties with the Spanish forbade either side from militarizing its native population in any potential conflict between the two nations. Several outbreaks of violence between Native Americans and Texans started to spread in the prelude to the Texas Revolution. Texans accused tribes of stealing livestock. While no proof was found, those in charge of Texas at the time attempted to publicly blame and punish the Caddo, with the U.S. government trying to keep them in check. The Caddo never turned to violence because of the situation, except in cases of self-defense.

By the 1830s, the U.S. had drafted the Indian Removal Act, which was used to facilitate the Trail of Tears. Fearing retribution, Indian Agents all over the eastern U.S. tried to convince all Indigenous peoples to uproot and move west. This included the Caddo of Louisiana and Arkansas. Following the Texas Revolution, the Texans chose to make peace with the Indigenous people, but did not honor former land claims or agreements. The first president of Texas, Sam Houston, aimed to cooperate and make peace with Native tribes, but his successor, Mirabeau B. Lamar, took a much more hostile stance. Hostility towards Natives by white Texans prompted the movement of most Native populations north into what would become Indian Territory (modern Oklahoma). Only the Alabama-Coushatta would remain in the parts of Texas subject to white settlement, though the Comanche would continue to control most of the western half of the state until their defeat in the 1870s and 1880s.

===Colonization===

The first historical document related to Texas was a map of the Gulf Coast, created in 1519 by Spanish explorer Alonso Álvarez de Pineda. Nine years later, shipwrecked Spanish explorer Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca and his cohort became the first Europeans in what is now Texas. Cabeza de Vaca reported that in 1528, when the Spanish landed in the area, &quot;half the natives died from a disease of the bowels and blamed us.&quot; Cabeza de Vaca also made observations about the way of life of the Ignaces Natives of Texas. Francisco Vázquez de Coronado described another encounter with native people in 1541.

The expedition of Hernando de Soto entered into Texas from the east, seeking a route to Mexico. They passed through the Caddo lands but turned back after reaching the River of Daycao (possibly the Brazos or Colorado), beyond which point the Native peoples were nomadic and did not have the agricultural stores to feed the expedition.

European powers ignored the area until accidentally settling there in 1685. Miscalculations by René-Robert Cavelier de La Salle resulted in his establishing the colony of Fort Saint Louis at Matagorda Bay rather than along the Mississippi River. The colony lasted only four years before succumbing to harsh conditions and hostile natives. A small band of survivors traveled eastward into the lands of the Caddo, but La Salle was killed by disgruntled expedition members.

In 1690 Spanish authorities, concerned that France posed a competitive threat, constructed several missions in East Texas among the Caddo. After Caddo resistance, the Spanish missionaries returned to Mexico. When France began settling Louisiana, in 1716 Spanish authorities responded by founding a new series of missions in East Texas. Two years later, they created San Antonio as the first Spanish civilian settlement in the area.
Hostile native tribes and distance from nearby Spanish colonies discouraged settlers from moving to the area. It was one of New Spain&#x27;s least populated provinces. In 1749, the Spanish peace treaty with the Lipan Apache angered many tribes, including the Comanche, Tonkawa, and Hasinai. The Comanche signed a treaty with Spain in 1785 and later helped to defeat the Lipan Apache and Karankawa tribes. With numerous missions being established, priests led a peaceful conversion of most tribes. By the end of the 18th century only a few nomadic tribes had not converted.

When the United States purchased Louisiana from France in 1803, American authorities insisted the agreement also included Texas. The boundary between New Spain and the United States was finally set in 1819 at the Sabine River, the modern border between Texas and Louisiana. Eager for new land, many U.S. settlers refused to recognize the agreement. Several filibusters raised armies to invade the area west of the Sabine River. Marked by the War of 1812, some men who had escaped from the Spanish, held (Old) Philippines had immigrated to and also passed through Texas (New Philippines) and reached Louisiana where Philippine exiles aided the United States in the defense of New Orleans against a British invasion, with Filipinos in the Saint Malo settlement assisting Jean Lafitte in the Battle of New Orleans.

In 1821, the Mexican War of Independence included the Texas territory, which became part of Mexico. Due to its low population, the territory was assigned to other states and territories of Mexico; the core territory was part of the state of Coahuila y Tejas, but other parts of today&#x27;s Texas were part of Tamaulipas, Chihuahua, or the Mexican Territory of Santa Fe de Nuevo México.

Hoping more settlers would reduce the near-constant Comanche raids, Mexican Texas liberalized its immigration policies to permit immigrants from outside Mexico and Spain. Large swathes of land were allotted to &quot;empresarios&quot;, who recruited settlers from the United States, Europe, and the Mexican interior, primarily the U.S. Austin&#x27;s settlers, the Old Three Hundred, made places along the Brazos River in 1822. The population of Texas grew rapidly. In 1825, Texas had about 3,500 people, with most of Mexican descent. By 1834, the population had grown to about 37,800 people, with only 7,800 of Mexican descent.

Many immigrants openly flouted Mexican law, especially the prohibition against slavery. Combined with United States&#x27; attempts to purchase Texas, Mexican authorities decided in 1830 to prohibit continued immigration from the United States. However, illegal immigration from the United States into Mexico continued to increase the population of Texas. New laws also called for the enforcement of customs duties angering native Mexican citizens (&quot;Tejanos&quot;) and recent immigrants alike.
The Anahuac Disturbances in 1832 were the first open revolt against Mexican rule, coinciding with a revolt in Mexico against the nation&#x27;s president. Texians sided with the federalists against the government and drove all Mexican soldiers out of East Texas. They took advantage of the lack of oversight to agitate for more political freedom. Texians met at the Convention of 1832 to discuss requesting independent statehood, among other issues. The following year, Texians reiterated their demands at the Convention of 1833.

===Republic===

Within Mexico, tensions continued between federalists and centralists. In early 1835, wary Texians formed Committees of Correspondence and Safety. The unrest erupted into armed conflict in late 1835 at the Battle of Gonzales. This launched the Texas Revolution. Texians elected delegates to the Consultation, which created a provisional government. The provisional government soon collapsed from infighting, and Texas was without clear governance for the first two months of 1836.
Mexican President Antonio López de Santa Anna personally led an army to end the revolt. General José de Urrea defeated all the Texian resistance along the coast culminating in the Goliad massacre. López de Santa Anna&#x27;s forces, after a thirteen-day siege, overwhelmed Texian defenders at the Battle of the Alamo. News of the defeats sparked panic among Texas settlers.
The newly elected Texian delegates to the Convention of 1836 quickly signed a declaration of independence on March 2, forming the Republic of Texas. After electing interim officers, the Convention disbanded. The new government joined the other settlers in Texas in the Runaway Scrape, fleeing from the approaching Mexican army.

After several weeks of retreat, the Texian Army commanded by Sam Houston attacked and defeated López de Santa Anna&#x27;s forces at the Battle of San Jacinto. López de Santa Anna was captured and forced to sign the Treaties of Velasco, ending the war. The Constitution of the Republic of Texas prohibited the government from restricting slavery or freeing slaves, and required free people of African descent to leave the country.

Political battles raged between two factions of the new Republic. The nationalist faction, led by Mirabeau B. Lamar, advocated the continued independence of Texas, the expulsion of the Native Americans, and the expansion of the Republic to the Pacific Ocean. Their opponents, led by Sam Houston, advocated the annexation of Texas to the United States and peaceful co-existence with Native Americans. The conflict between the factions was typified by an incident known as the Texas Archive War. With wide popular support, Texas first applied for annexation to the United States in 1836, but its status as a slaveholding country caused its admission to be controversial and it was initially rebuffed. This status, and Mexican diplomacy in support of its claims to the territory, also complicated Texas&#x27;s ability to form foreign alliances and trade relationships.

The Comanche Indians furnished the main Native American opposition to the Texas Republic, manifested in multiple raids on settlements. Mexico launched two small expeditions into Texas in 1842. The town of San Antonio was captured twice and Texans were defeated in battle in the Dawson massacre. Despite these successes, Mexico did not keep an occupying force in Texas, and the republic survived. The cotton price crash of the 1840s depressed the country&#x27;s economy.

===Statehood===

Texas was finally annexed when the expansionist James K. Polk won the election of 1844. On December 29, 1845, the U.S. Congress admitted Texas to the U.S.
After Texas&#x27;s annexation, Mexico broke diplomatic relations with the United States. While the United States claimed Texas&#x27;s border stretched to the Rio Grande, Mexico claimed it was the Nueces River leaving the Rio Grande Valley under contested Texan sovereignty. While the former Republic of Texas could not enforce its border claims, the United States had the military strength and the political will to do so. President Polk ordered General Zachary Taylor south to the Rio Grande on January 13, 1846. A few months later Mexican troops routed an American cavalry patrol in the disputed area in the Thornton Affair starting the Mexican–American War. The first battles of the war were fought in Texas: the Siege of Fort Texas, Battle of Palo Alto and Battle of Resaca de la Palma. After these decisive victories, the United States invaded Mexican territory, ending the fighting in Texas.
The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo ended the two-year war. In return for US$18,250,000, Mexico gave the U.S. undisputed control of Texas, ceded the Mexican Cession in 1848, most of which today is called the American Southwest, and Texas&#x27;s borders were established at the Rio Grande.

The Compromise of 1850 set Texas&#x27;s boundaries at their present position: Texas ceded its claims to land which later became half of present-day New Mexico, a third of Colorado, and small portions of Kansas, Oklahoma, and Wyoming to the federal government, in return for the assumption of $10 million of the old republic&#x27;s debt. Post-war Texas grew rapidly as migrants poured into the cotton lands of the state. They also brought or purchased enslaved African Americans, whose numbers tripled in the state from 1850 to 1860, from 58,000 to 182,566.

===Civil War to late 19th century===
Texas re-entered war following the election of 1860. During this time, Black people comprised 30 percent of the state&#x27;s population, and they were overwhelmingly enslaved. When Abraham Lincoln was elected, South Carolina seceded from the Union; five other Deep South states quickly followed. A state convention considering secession opened in Austin on January 28, 1861. On February 1, by a vote of 166–8, the convention adopted an Ordinance of Secession. Texas voters approved this Ordinance on February 23, 1861. Texas joined the newly created Confederate States of America on March 4, 1861, ratifying the permanent C.S. Constitution on March 23.

Not all Texans favored secession initially, although many of the same would later support the Southern cause. Texas&#x27;s most notable Unionist was the state governor, Sam Houston. Not wanting to aggravate the situation, Houston refused two offers from President Lincoln for Union troops to keep him in office. After refusing to swear an oath of allegiance to the Confederacy, Houston was deposed.

While far from the major battlefields of the American Civil War, Texas contributed large numbers of soldiers and equipment. Union troops briefly occupied the state&#x27;s primary port, Galveston. Texas&#x27;s border with Mexico was known as the &quot;backdoor of the Confederacy&quot; because trade occurred at the border, bypassing the Union blockade. The Confederacy repulsed all Union attempts to shut down this route, but Texas&#x27;s role as a supply state was marginalized in mid-1863 after the Union capture of the Mississippi River. The final battle of the Civil War was fought at Palmito Ranch, near Brownsville, Texas, and saw a Confederate victory.

Texas descended into anarchy for two months between the surrender of the Army of Northern Virginia and the assumption of authority by Union General Gordon Granger. Violence marked the early months of Reconstruction. Juneteenth commemorates the announcement of the Emancipation Proclamation in Galveston by General Gordon Granger, almost two and a half years after the original announcement. President Johnson, in 1866, declared the civilian government restored in Texas. Despite not meeting Reconstruction requirements, Congress resumed allowing elected Texas representatives into the federal government in 1870. Social volatility continued as the state struggled with agricultural depression and labor issues.

Like most of the South, the Texas economy was devastated by the War. However, since the state had not been as dependent on slaves as other parts of the South, it was able to recover more quickly. The culture in Texas during the later 19th century exhibited many facets of a frontier territory. The state became notorious as a haven for people from other parts of the country who wanted to escape debt, war tensions, or other problems. &quot;Gone to Texas&quot; was a common expression for those fleeing the law in other states. Nevertheless, the state also attracted many businessmen and other settlers with more legitimate interests.

The cattle industry continued to thrive, though it gradually became less profitable. Cotton and lumber became major industries creating new economic booms in various regions. Railroad networks grew rapidly as did the port at Galveston as commerce expanded. The lumber industry quickly expanded and was Texas&#x27; largest industry prior to the 20th century.

===Early to mid-20th century===

In 1900, Texas suffered the deadliest natural disaster in U.S. history during the Galveston hurricane. On January 10, 1901, the first major oil well in Texas, Spindletop, was found south of Beaumont. Other fields were later discovered nearby in East Texas, West Texas, and under the Gulf of Mexico. The resulting &quot;oil boom&quot; transformed Texas. Oil production averaged three million barrels per day at its peak in 1972.

In 1901, the Democratic-dominated state legislature passed a bill requiring payment of a poll tax for voting, which effectively disenfranchised most Black and many poor White and Latino people. In addition, the legislature established white primaries, ensuring minorities were excluded from the formal political process. The number of voters dropped dramatically, and the Democrats crushed competition from the Republican and Populist parties. The Socialist Party became the second-largest party in Texas after 1912, coinciding with a large socialist upsurge in the United States during fierce battles in the labor movement and the popularity of national heroes like Eugene V. Debs. The socialists&#x27; popularity soon waned after their vilification by the federal government for their opposition to U.S. involvement in World War I.

The Great Depression and the Dust Bowl dealt a double blow to the state&#x27;s economy, which had significantly improved since the Civil War. Migrants abandoned the worst-hit sections of Texas during the Dust Bowl years. Especially from this period on, Black people left Texas in the Great Migration to get work in the Northern United States or California and to escape segregation. In 1940, Texas was 74% White, 14.4% Black, and 11.5% Hispanic.

World War II had a dramatic impact on Texas, as federal money poured in to build military bases, munitions factories, detention camps and Army hospitals; 750,000 Texans left for service; the cities exploded with new industry; and hundreds of thousands of poor farmers left the fields for much better-paying war jobs, never to return to agriculture. Texas manufactured 3.1 percent of total United States military armaments produced during World War II, ranking eleventh among the 48 states.

Texas modernized and expanded its system of higher education through the 1960s. The state created a comprehensive plan for higher education, funded in large part by oil revenues, and a central state apparatus designed to manage state institutions more efficiently. These changes helped Texas universities receive federal research funds.

===Mid-20th to early 21st century===
Beginning around the mid-20th century, Texas began to transform from a rural and agricultural state to one urban and industrialized. The state&#x27;s population grew quickly during this period, with large levels of migration from outside the state. As a part of the Sun Belt, Texas experienced strong economic growth, particularly during the 1970s and early 1980s. Texas&#x27;s economy diversified, lessening its reliance on the petroleum industry. By 1990, Hispanics and Latino Americans overtook Blacks to become the largest minority group. Texas has the largest Black population with over 3.9 million.

During the late 20th century, the Republican Party replaced the Democratic Party as the dominant party in the state. Beginning in the early 21st century, metropolitan areas including Dallas–Fort Worth and Greater Austin became centers for the Texas Democratic Party in statewide and national elections as liberal policies became more accepted in urban areas.

From the mid-2000s to 2019, Texas gained an influx of business relocations and regional headquarters from companies in California. Texas became a major destination for migration during the early 21st century and was named the most popular state to move for three consecutive years. Another study in 2019 determined Texas&#x27;s growth rate at 1,000 people per day.

During the COVID-19 pandemic in Texas, the first confirmed case of the virus in Texas was announced on March 4, 2020. On April 27, 2020, Governor Greg Abbott announced phase one of re-opening the economy. Amid a rise in COVID-19 cases in autumn 2020, Abbott refused to enact further lockdowns. In November 2020, Texas was selected as one of four states to test Pfizer&#x27;s COVID-19 vaccine distribution. As of February 2, 2021, there had been over 2.4 million confirmed cases in Texas, with at least 37,417 deaths.

During February 13–17, 2021, the state faced a major weather emergency as Winter Storm Uri hit the state, as well as most of the Southeastern and Midwestern United States. Historically high power usage across the state caused the state&#x27;s power grid to become overworked and ERCOT (the main operator of the Texas Interconnection grid) declared an emergency and began to implement rolling blackouts across Texas, causing a power crisis. Over 3 million Texans were without power and over 4 million were under boil-water notices.

==Geography==

Texas is the second-largest U.S. state by area, after Alaska, and the largest state within the contiguous United States, at . If it were an independent country, Texas would be the 39th-largest. It ranks 26th worldwide amongst country subdivisions by size.

Texas is in the south central part of the United States. The Rio Grande forms a natural border with the Mexican states of Chihuahua, Coahuila, Nuevo León, and Tamaulipas to the south. The Red River forms a natural border with Oklahoma and Arkansas to the north. The Sabine River forms a natural border with Louisiana to the east. The Texas Panhandle has an eastern border with Oklahoma at 100° W, a northern border with Oklahoma at 36°30&#x27; N and a western border with New Mexico at 103° W. El Paso lies on the state&#x27;s western tip at 32° N and the Rio Grande.

With 10 climatic regions, 14 soil regions and 11 distinct ecological regions, regional classification becomes complicated with differences in soils, topography, geology, rainfall, and plant and animal communities. One classification system divides Texas, in order from southeast to west, into the following: Gulf Coastal Plains, Interior Lowlands, Great Plains, and Basin and Range Province.

The Gulf Coastal Plains region wraps around the Gulf of Mexico on the southeast section of the state. Vegetation in this region consists of thick piney woods. The Interior Lowlands region consists of gently rolling to hilly forested land and is part of a larger pine-hardwood forest. The Cross Timbers region and Caprock Escarpment are part of the Interior Lowlands.

The Great Plains region in Central Texas spans through the state&#x27;s panhandle and Llano Estacado to the state&#x27;s hill country near Lago Vista and Austin. This region is dominated by prairie and steppe. &quot;Far West Texas&quot; or the &quot;Trans-Pecos&quot; region is the state&#x27;s Basin and Range Province. The most varied of the regions, this area includes Sand Hills, the Stockton Plateau, desert valleys, wooded mountain slopes and desert grasslands.

Texas has 3,700 named streams and 15 major rivers, with the Rio Grande as the largest. Other major rivers include the Pecos, the Brazos, Colorado, and Red River. While Texas has few natural lakes, Texans have built more than a hundred artificial reservoirs.

The size and unique history of Texas make its regional affiliation debatable; it can be considered a Southern or a Southwestern state, or both. The vast geographic, economic, and cultural diversity within the state itself prohibits easy categorization of the whole state into a recognized region of the United States. Notable extremes range from East Texas which is often considered an extension of the Deep South, to Far West Texas which is generally acknowledged to be part of the interior Southwest.

===Geology===


Texas is the southernmost part of the Great Plains, which ends in the south against the folded Sierra Madre Occidental of Mexico. The continental crust forms a stable Mesoproterozoic craton which changes across a broad continental margin and transitional crust into true oceanic crust of the Gulf of Mexico. The oldest rocks in Texas date from the Mesoproterozoic and are about 1,600 million years old.

This margin existed until Laurasia and Gondwana collided in the Pennsylvanian subperiod to form Pangea. Pangea began to break up in the Triassic, but seafloor spreading to form the Gulf of Mexico occurred only in the mid- and late Jurassic. The shoreline shifted again to the eastern margin of the state and the Gulf of Mexico&#x27;s passive margin began to form. Today of sediments are buried beneath the Texas continental shelf and a large proportion of remaining US oil reserves are here. The incipient Gulf of Mexico basin was restricted and seawater often evaporated completely to form thick evaporite deposits of Jurassic age. These salt deposits formed salt dome diapirs, and are found in East Texas along the Gulf coast.

East Texas outcrops consist of Cretaceous and Paleogene sediments which contain important deposits of Eocene lignite. The Mississippian and Pennsylvanian sediments in the north; Permian sediments in the west; and Cretaceous sediments in the east, along the Gulf coast and out on the Texas continental shelf contain oil. Oligocene volcanic rocks are found in far west Texas in the Big Bend area. A blanket of Miocene sediments known as the Ogallala formation in the western high plains region is an important aquifer. Located far from an active plate tectonic boundary, Texas has no volcanoes and few earthquakes.

===Wildlife===

Texas is the home to 65 species of mammals, 213 species of reptiles and amphibians, including the American green tree frog, and the greatest diversity of bird life in the United States—590 native species in all. At least 12 species have been introduced and now reproduce freely in Texas.

Texas plays host to several species of wasps, including an abundance of &quot;Polistes exclamans&quot;, and is an important ground for the study of &quot;Polistes annularis&quot;.

During the spring Texas wildflowers such as the state flower, the bluebonnet, line highways throughout Texas. During the Johnson Administration the first lady, Lady Bird Johnson, worked to draw attention to Texas wildflowers.

===Climate===
The large size of Texas and its location at the intersection of multiple climate zones gives the state highly variable weather. The Panhandle of the state has colder winters than North Texas, while the Gulf Coast has mild winters. Texas has wide variations in precipitation patterns. El Paso, on the western end of the state, averages of annual rainfall, while parts of southeast Texas average as much as per year. Dallas in the North Central region averages a more moderate per year.

Snow falls multiple times each winter in the Panhandle and mountainous areas of West Texas, once or twice a year in North Texas, and once every few years in Central and East Texas. Snow falls south of San Antonio or on the coast only in rare circumstances. Of note is the 2004 Christmas Eve snowstorm, when of snow fell as far south as Kingsville, where the average high temperature in December is 65 °F.

Night-time summer temperatures range from the upper 50s °F (14 °C) in the West Texas mountains to in Galveston.

The table below consists of averages for August (generally the warmest month) and January (generally the coldest) in selected cities in various regions of the state.

====Storms====

Thunderstorms strike Texas often, especially the eastern and northern portions of the state. Tornado Alley covers the northern section of Texas. The state experiences the most tornadoes in the United States, an average of 139 a year. These strike most frequently in North Texas and the Panhandle. Tornadoes in Texas generally occur in April, May, and June.

Some of the most destructive hurricanes in U.S. history have impacted Texas. A hurricane in 1875 killed about 400 people in Indianola, followed by another hurricane in 1886 that destroyed the town. These events allowed Galveston to take over as the chief port city. The 1900 Galveston hurricane subsequently devastated that city, killing about 8,000 people or possibly as many as 12,000 in the deadliest natural disaster in U.S. history. In 2017, Hurricane Harvey made landfall in Rockport as a Category 4 Hurricane, causing significant damage there. Its unprecedented amounts of rain over the Greater Houston area resulted in widespread and catastrophic flooding that inundated hundreds of thousands of homes. Harvey ultimately became the costliest hurricane worldwide, causing an estimated $198.6 billion in damage, surpassing the cost of Hurricane Katrina.

Other devastating Texas hurricanes include the 1915 Galveston hurricane, Hurricane Audrey in 1957, Hurricane Carla in 1961, Hurricane Beulah in 1967, Hurricane Alicia in 1983, Hurricane Rita in 2005, and Hurricane Ike in 2008. Tropical storms have also caused their share of damage: Allison in 1989 and again during 2001, Claudette in 1979, and Tropical Storm Imelda in 2019.

There is no substantial physical barrier between Texas and the polar region. Although it is unusual, it is possible for arctic or polar air masses to penetrate Texas, as occurred during the February 13–17, 2021 North American winter storm. Usually, prevailing winds in North America will push polar air masses to the southeast before they reach Texas. Because such intrusions are rare, and, perhaps, unexpected, they may result in crises such as the 2021 Texas power crisis.

===Greenhouse gases===

, Texas emitted the most greenhouse gases in the U.S. the state emits about of carbon dioxide annually. As an independent state, Texas would rank as the world&#x27;s seventh-largest producer of greenhouse gases. Causes of the state&#x27;s vast greenhouse gas emissions include the state&#x27;s large number of coal power plants and the state&#x27;s refining and manufacturing industries. In 2010, there were 2,553 &quot;emission events&quot; which poured of contaminants into the Texas sky.

===Administrative divisions===

The state has three cities with populations exceeding one million: Houston, San Antonio, and Dallas. These three rank among the 10 most populous cities of the United States. As of 2020, six Texas cities had populations greater than 600,000. Austin, Fort Worth, and El Paso are among the 20 largest U.S. cities. Texas has four metropolitan areas with populations greater than a million: , , , and . The Dallas–Fort Worth and Houston metropolitan areas number about 7.5 million and 7 million residents as of 2019, respectively.

Three interstate highways—I-35 to the west (Dallas–Fort Worth to San Antonio, with Austin in between), I-45 to the east (Dallas to Houston), and I-10 to the south (San Antonio to Houston) define the Texas Urban Triangle region. The region of contains most of the state&#x27;s largest cities and metropolitan areas as well as 17 million people, nearly 75 percent of Texas&#x27;s total population. Houston and Dallas have been recognized as world cities. These cities are spread out amongst the state.

In contrast to the cities, unincorporated rural settlements known as colonias often lack basic infrastructure and are marked by poverty. The office of the Texas Attorney General stated, in 2011, that Texas had about 2,294 colonias, and estimates about 500,000 lived in the colonias. Hidalgo County, as of 2011, has the largest number of colonias. Texas has the largest number of people living in colonias of all states.

Texas has 254 counties, more than any other state. Each county runs on Commissioners&#x27; Court system consisting of four elected commissioners (one from each of four precincts in the county, roughly divided according to population) and a county judge elected at large from the entire county. County government runs similar to a &quot;weak&quot; mayor-council system; the county judge has no veto authority, but votes along with the other commissioners.

Although Texas permits cities and counties to enter &quot;interlocal agreements&quot; to share services, the state does not allow consolidated city-county governments, nor does it have metropolitan governments. Counties are not granted home rule status; their powers are strictly defined by state law. The state does not have townships—areas within a county are either incorporated or unincorporated. Incorporated areas are part of a municipality. The county provides limited services to unincorporated areas and to some smaller incorporated areas. Municipalities are classified either &quot;general law&quot; cities or &quot;home rule&quot;. A municipality may elect home rule status once it exceeds 5,000 population with voter approval.

Texas also permits the creation of &quot;special districts&quot;, which provide limited services. The most common is the school district, but can also include hospital districts, community college districts, and utility districts. Municipal, school district, and special district elections are nonpartisan, though the party affiliation of a candidate may be well-known. County and state elections are partisan.

==Demographics==


The resident population of Texas was 29,145,505 in the 2020 census, a 15.9% increase since the 2010 census. At the 2020 census, the apportioned population of Texas stood at 29,183,290. The U.S. Census Bureau estimated the population was 31,290,831 as of July 1, 2024, an increase of 7.4% since the 2020 census. Texas is the second-most populous state in the United States after California and the only other U.S. state to surpass a total estimated population of 30 million people as of July 2, 2022.

In 2015, Texas had 4.7 million foreign-born residents, about 17% of the population and 21.6% of the state workforce. The major countries of origin for Texan immigrants were Mexico (55.1% of immigrants), India (5%), El Salvador (4.3%), Vietnam (3.7%), and China (2.3%). Of immigrant residents, 35.8 percent were naturalized U.S. citizens. As of 2018, the population increased to 4.9 million foreign-born residents or 17.2% of the state population, up from 2,899,642 in 2000.

In 2014, there were an estimated 1.7 million undocumented immigrants in Texas, making up 35% of the total Texas immigrant population and 6.1% of the total state population. In addition to the state&#x27;s foreign-born population, 4.1 million Texans (15% of the state&#x27;s population) were born in the United States yet had at least one immigrant parent.

According to the American Community Survey&#x27;s 2019 estimates, 1,739,000 residents were undocumented immigrants, a decrease of 103,000 since 2014 and but an increase of 142,000 since 2016. Of the undocumented immigrant population, 951,000 have resided in Texas from less than 5 up to 14 years. An estimated 788,000 lived in Texas from 15 to 19 and 20 years or more.

Texas&#x27;s Rio Grande Valley has seen significant migration from across the U.S.–Mexico border. During the 2014 crisis, many Central Americans, including unaccompanied minors traveling alone from Guatemala, Honduras, and El Salvador, reached the state, overwhelming Border Patrol resources for a time. Many sought asylum in the United States.

Texas&#x27;s population density as of 2010 is which is slightly higher than the average population density of the U.S. as a whole, at . In contrast, while Texas and France are similarly sized geographically, the European country has a population density of . Two-thirds of all Texans live in major metropolitan areas such as Houston.

According to HUD&#x27;s 2022 Annual Homeless Assessment Report, there were an estimated 24,432 homeless people in Texas.

===Race and ethnicity===

In 2019, non-Hispanic Whites represented 41.2% of Texas&#x27;s population, reflecting a national demographic shift. Black people made up 12.9%, American Indians and Alaska Natives 1.0%, Asian Americans 5.2%, Native Hawaiians and other Pacific Islanders 0.1%, some other race 0.2%, and two or more races 1.8%. Hispanics or Latino Americans of any race made up 39.7% of the estimated population.

At the 2020 census, the racial and ethnic composition of the state was 42.5% White (39.8% non-Hispanic White), 11.8% Black, 5.4% Asian, 0.3% American Indian and Alaska Native, 0.1% Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islander, 13.6% some other race, 17.6% two or more races, and 40.2% Hispanic and Latino American of any race.

In 2010, 49% of all births were Hispanics; 35% were non-Hispanic White; 11.5% were non-Hispanic Black, and 4.3% were Asians/Pacific Islanders. Based on U.S. Census Bureau data released in February 2011, for the first time in recent history, Texas&#x27;s White population is below 50% (45%) and Hispanics grew to 38%. Between 2000 and 2010, the total population grew by 20.6%, but Hispanics and Latino Americans grew by 65%, whereas non-Hispanic Whites grew by only 4.2%. Texas has the fifth highest rate of teenage births in the nation and a plurality of these are to Hispanics or Latinos. As of 2022, Hispanics and Latinos of any race replaced the non-Hispanic White population as the largest share of the state&#x27;s population.

Texas has the second-largest share of Mexican Americans in the US, making up 32.2% of the total population and 80% of the state&#x27;s Hispanic population. Other than Mexican, the largest self-reported ancestries in the state as of 2022 were German (8.1%), English (7.9%), Irish (5.8%), those identifying as American (4.6%), Italian (1.9%), Indian (1.9%), Salvadoran (1.4%), Scottish (1.3%), Vietnamese (1.1%), Chinese (1%), Puerto Rican (0.9%), Polish (0.9%), Honduran (0.8%), Filipino (0.8%), and Scotch-Irish (0.7%).

===Languages===

The most common accent or dialect spoken by natives throughout Texas is sometimes referred to as Texan English, itself a sub-variety of a broader category of American English known as Southern American English. Creole language is spoken in some parts of East Texas. In some areas of the state—particularly in the large cities—Western American English and General American English, is increasingly common. Chicano English—due to a growing Hispanic population—is widespread in South Texas, while African-American English is especially notable in historically minority areas of urban Texas.

At the 2020 American Community Survey&#x27;s estimates, 64.9% of the population spoke only English, while 35.1% spoke a language other than English. Roughly 30% of the total population spoke Spanish. By 2021, approximately 50,546 Texans spoke French or a French-based creole language. German and other West Germanic languages were spoken by 49,565 residents; Russian, Polish, and other Slavic languages by 37,444; Korean by 31,673; Chinese 86,370; Vietnamese 92,410; Tagalog 40,124; and Arabic by 47,170 Texans.

At the census of 2010, 65.8% (14,740,304) of Texas residents age5 and older spoke only English at home, while 29.2% (6,543,702) spoke Spanish, 0.8 percent (168,886) Vietnamese, and Chinese (which includes Cantonese and Mandarin) was spoken by 0.6% (122,921) of the population over five. Other languages spoken include German (including Texas German) by 0.3% (73,137), Tagalog with 0.3% (64,272) speakers, and French (including Cajun French) was spoken by 0.3% (55,773) of Texans. Reportedly, Cherokee is the most widely spoken Native American language in Texas. In total, 34.2% (7,660,406) of Texas&#x27;s population aged five and older spoke a language at home other than English as of 2006.

===Religion===

With the coming of Spanish Catholic and American Protestant missionary societies, Indigenous American Indian religions and spiritual traditions dwindled. Since then, colonial and present-day Texas has become a predominantly Christian state, with 75.5% of the population identifying as such according to the Public Religion Research Institute in 2020.

Among its majority Christian populace, the largest Christian denomination as of 2014 has been the Catholic Church, per the Pew Research Center at 23% of the population, although Protestants collectively constituted 50% of the Christian population in 2014; in the 2020 study by the Public Religion Research Institute, the Catholic Church&#x27;s membership increased to encompassing 28% of the population identifying with a religious or spiritual belief. At the 2020 Association of Religion Data Archives study, there were 5,905,142 Catholics in the state. The largest Catholic jurisdictions in Texas are the Archdiocese of Galveston–Houston—the first and oldest Latin Church diocese in Texas—the dioceses of Dallas and Fort Worth, and the Archdiocese of San Antonio.

Being part of the strongly, socially conservative Bible Belt, Protestants as a whole declined to 47% of the population in the 2020 study by the Public Religion Research Institute. Predominantly-white Evangelical Protestantism declined to 14% of the Protestant Christian population. Mainline Protestants in contrast made up 15% of Protestant Texas. Hispanic or Latino American-dominated Protestant churches and historically Black or African American Protestantism grew to a collective 13% of the Protestant population.

Evangelical Protestants were 31% of the population in 2014, and Baptists were the largest Evangelical tradition (14%); according to the 2014 study, they made up the second-largest Mainline Protestant group behind Methodists (4%). Nondenominational and interdenominational Protestant Christians were the second largest Evangelical group (7%) followed by Pentecostals (4%). The largest Evangelical Baptists in the state were the Southern Baptist Convention (9%) and independent Baptists (3%). The Assemblies of God USA was the largest Evangelical Pentecostal denomination in 2014. Among Mainline Protestants, the United Methodist Church was the largest denomination (4%) and the American Baptist Churches USA comprised the second-largest Mainline Protestant group (2%).

According to the Pew Research Center in 2014, the state&#x27;s largest historically African American Christian denominations were the National Baptist Convention (USA) and the Church of God in Christ. Black Methodists and other Christians made up less than 1 percent each of the Christian demographic. Other Christians made up 1 percent of the total Christian population, and the Eastern and Oriental Orthodox formed less than 1 percent of the statewide Christian populace. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the largest nontrinitarian Christian group in Texas alongside the Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses.

Among its Protestant population, the Association of Religion Data Archives in 2020 determined Southern Baptists numbered 3,319,962; non-denominational Protestants 2,405,786 (including Christian Churches and Churches of Christ, and the Churches of Christ altogether numbering 2,758,353); and United Methodists 938,399 as the most numerous Protestant groups in the state. Baptists altogether (Southern Baptists, American Baptist Associates, American Baptists, Full Gospel Baptists, General Baptists, Free Will Baptists, National Baptists, National Baptists of America, National Missionary Baptists, National Primitive Baptists, and Progressive National Baptists) numbered 3,837,306; Methodists within United Methodism, the AME, AME Zion, CME, and the Free Methodist Church numbered 1,026,453 Texans.

The same study tabulated 425,038 Pentecostals spread among the Assemblies of God, Church of God (Cleveland), and Church of God in Christ. Nontrinitarian or Oneness Pentecostals numbered 7,042 between Bible Way Church of Our Lord Jesus Christ, COOLJC, and the Pentecostal Assemblies of the World. Other Christians, including the Eastern and Oriental Orthodox, numbered 55,329 altogether, and Episcopalians numbered 134,318, although the Anglican Catholic Church, Anglican Church in America, Anglican Church in North America, Anglican Province of America, and Holy Catholic Church Anglican Rite had a collective presence in 114 churches.

Non-Christian faiths accounted for 4% of the religious population in 2014, and 5% in 2020 per the Pew Research Center and Public Religion Research Institute. Adherents of many other religions reside predominantly in the urban centers of Texas. Judaism, Islam, and Buddhism were tied as the second largest religion as of 2014 and 2020. In 2014, 18% of the state&#x27;s population were religiously unaffiliated. Of the unaffiliated in 2014, an estimated 2% were atheists and 3% agnostic; in 2020, the Public Religion Research Institute noted the largest non-Christian groups were the irreligious (20%), Judaism (1%), Islam (1%), Buddhism (1%) and Hinduism, and other religions at less than 1 percent each.

In 1990, the Islamic population was about 140,000 with more recent figures putting the current number of Muslims between 350,000 and 400,000 as of 2012. The Association of Religion Data Archives estimated there were 313,209 Muslims as of 2020. Texas is the fifth-largest Muslim-populated state as of 2014. The Jewish population was around 128,000 in 2008. In 2020, the Jewish population grew to over 176,000. According to ARDA&#x27;s 2020 study, there were 43 Chabad synagogues; 17,513 Conservative Jews; 8,110 Orthodox Jews; and 31,378 Reform Jews. Around 146,000 adherents of religions such as Hinduism and Sikhism lived in Texas as of 2004. By 2020, there were 112,153 Hindus and 20 Sikh gurdwaras; 60,882 Texans adhered to Buddhism.

==Economy==

As of 2024, Texas had a gross state product (GSP) of $2.664 trillion, the second highest of any U.S. state. Its GSP is greater than the GDP of Brazil, the world&#x27;s 8th-largest economy. The state ranks 22nd among U.S. states with a median household income of $64,034, while the poverty rate is 14.2%, making Texas the state with 14th highest poverty rate (compared to 13.15% nationally). Texas&#x27;s economy is the second-largest of any country subdivision globally, behind California.

Texas&#x27;s large population, an abundance of natural resources, thriving cities and leading centers of higher education have contributed to a large and diverse economy. Since oil was discovered, the state&#x27;s economy has reflected the state of the petroleum industry. In recent times, urban centers of the state have increased in size, containing two-thirds of the population in 2005. The state&#x27;s economic growth has led to urban sprawl and its associated symptoms.

In May 2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic, the state&#x27;s unemployment rate was 13 percent.

In 2010, &quot;Site Selection Magazine&quot; ranked Texas as the most business-friendly state, in part because of the state&#x27;s three-billion-dollar Texas Enterprise Fund. As of 2024, it has the second-highest number (52) of &quot;Fortune&quot; 500 companies headquartered in the United States. In 2010, there were 346,000 millionaires in Texas, the second-largest population of millionaires in the nation. In 2018, the number of millionaire households increased to 566,578.

===Taxation===
Texas has a reputation for a low tax. According to the Tax Foundation, Texans&#x27; state and local tax burdens are seventh-lowest nationally; state and local taxes cost $3,580 per capita, or 8.4 percent of resident incomes. Texas is one of seven states that lack a state income tax.

Instead, the state collects revenue from property taxes (though these are collected at the county, city, and school district level; Texas has a state constitutional prohibition against a state property tax) and sales taxes. The state sales tax rate is 6.25 percent, but local taxing jurisdictions (cities, counties, special purpose districts, and transit authorities) may also impose sales and use tax up to 2percent for a total maximum combined rate of 8.25 percent.

Texas is a &quot;tax donor state&quot;; in 2005, for every dollar Texans paid to the federal government in federal income taxes, the state got back about $0.94 in benefits. To attract business, Texas has incentive programs worth $19 billion per year (2012); more than any other U.S. state.

===Agriculture and mining===

Texas has the most farms and the highest acreage in the United States. The state is ranked for revenue generated from total livestock and livestock products. It is ranked for total agricultural revenue, behind California. At $7.4 billion or 56.7 percent of Texas&#x27;s annual agricultural cash receipts, beef cattle production represents the largest single segment of Texas agriculture. This is followed by cotton at $1.9 billion (14.6 percent), greenhouse/nursery at $1.5 billion (11.4 percent), broiler chickens at $1.3 billion (10 percent), and dairy products at $947 million (7.3 percent).

Texas leads the nation in the production of cattle, horses, sheep, goats, wool, mohair and hay. The state also leads the nation in production of cotton which is the number one crop grown in the state in terms of value. The state grows significant amounts of cereal crops and produce. Texas has a large commercial fishing industry. With mineral resources, Texas leads in creating cement, crushed stone, lime, salt, sand and gravel. Texas throughout the 21st century has been hammered by drought, costing the state billions of dollars in livestock and crops.

===Energy===


Ever since the discovery of oil at Spindletop, energy has been a dominant force politically and economically within the state. If Texas were its own country it would be the sixth-largest oil producer in the world according to a 2014 study.

The Railroad Commission of Texas regulates the state&#x27;s oil and gas industry, gas utilities, pipeline safety, safety in the liquefied petroleum gas industry, and surface coal and uranium mining. Until the 1970s, the commission controlled the price of petroleum because of its ability to regulate Texas&#x27;s oil reserves. The founders of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) used the Texas agency as one of their models for petroleum price control.

As of January 1, 2021, Texas has proved recoverable petroleum reserves of about of crude oil (44% of the known U.S. reserves) and of natural gas liquids. The state&#x27;s refineries can process of oil a day. The Port Arthur Refinery in Southeast Texas is the largest refinery in the U.S. Texas is also a leader in natural gas production at per day, some 32% of the nation&#x27;s production. Texas has of gas reserves which is 23% of the nation&#x27;s gas reserves. Many petroleum companies are based in Texas such as: ConocoPhillips, EOG Resources, ExxonMobil, Halliburton, Hilcorp, Marathon Oil, Occidental Petroleum, Valero Energy, and Western Refining.

According to the Energy Information Administration, Texans consume, on average, the fifth most energy (of all types) in the nation per capita and as a whole, following behind Wyoming, Alaska, Louisiana, North Dakota, and Iowa.

Unlike the rest of the nation, most of Texas is on its own alternating current power grid, the Texas Interconnection. Texas has a deregulated electric service. Texas leads the nation in total net electricity production, generating 437,236 MWh in 2014, 89% more MWh than Florida, which ranked second.

The state is a leader in renewable energy commercialization; it produces the most wind power in the nation. In 2014, 10.6% of the electricity consumed in Texas came from wind turbines. The Roscoe Wind Farm in Roscoe, Texas, is one of the world&#x27;s largest wind farms with a 781.5 megawatt (MW) capacity. The Energy Information Administration states the state&#x27;s large agriculture and forestry industries could give Texas an enormous amount of biomass for use in biofuels. The state also has the highest solar power potential for development in the U.S.

===Technology===

With large universities systems coupled with initiatives like the Texas Enterprise Fund and the Texas Emerging Technology Fund, a wide array of different high tech industries have developed in Texas. The Austin area is nicknamed the &quot;Silicon Hills&quot; and the north Dallas area the &quot;Silicon Prairie&quot;. Many high-tech companies are located in or have their headquarters in Texas (and Austin in particular), including Dell, Inc., Borland, Forcepoint, Indeed.com, Texas Instruments, Perot Systems, Rackspace and AT&amp;T.

The National Aeronautics and Space Administration&#x27;s Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center (NASA JSC) is located in Southeast Houston. Both SpaceX and Blue Origin have their test facilities in Texas. Fort Worth hosts both Lockheed Martin&#x27;s Aeronautics division and Bell Helicopter Textron. Lockheed builds the F-16 Fighting Falcon, the largest Western fighter program, and its successor, the F-35 Lightning II in Fort Worth.

===Commerce===
Texas&#x27;s affluence stimulates a strong commercial sector consisting of retail, wholesale, banking and insurance, and construction industries. Examples of &quot;Fortune&quot; 500 companies not based on Texas traditional industries are AT&amp;T, Kimberly-Clark, Blockbuster, J. C. Penney, Whole Foods Market, and Tenet Healthcare.

Nationally, the Dallas–Fort Worth area, home to the second shopping mall in the United States, has the most shopping malls per capita of any American metropolitan statistical area.

Mexico, the state&#x27;s largest trading partner, imports a third of the state&#x27;s exports because of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). NAFTA has encouraged the formation of maquiladoras on the Texas–Mexico border.

===Transportation===
The state&#x27;s large size and rough terrain have historically complicated transportation. Texas has compensated by building the nation&#x27;s largest highway and railway systems. The regulatory authority, the Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT), maintains the state&#x27;s highway system, regulates aviation, and public transportation systems.

The state is an important transportation hub. From the Dallas/Fort Worth area, trucks can reach 93 percent of the nation&#x27;s population within 48 hours, and 37 percent within 24 hours. Texas has 33 foreign trade zones (FTZ), the most in the nation. In 2004, a combined total of $298 billion of goods passed through Texas FTZs.

====Highways====
The first Texas freeway was the Gulf Freeway opened in 1948 in Houston. As of 2005, of public highway crisscrossed Texas (up from in 1984). To fund recent growth in the state highways, Texas has 17 toll roads with several additional tollways proposed. In Central Texas, the southern section of the State Highway 130 toll road has a speed limit of , the highest in the nation. All federal and state highways in Texas are paved.

====Airports====

Texas has 730 airports, second-most of any state in the nation. Largest in Texas by size and passengers served, Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport (DFW) is the second-largest by area in the United States, and fourth in the world with . In traffic, DFW airport is the busiest in the state, the fourth busiest in the United States, and sixth worldwide. Southwest Airlines, headquartered in Dallas, has its operations at Dallas Love Field. American Airlines Group&#x27;s American / American Eagle, the world&#x27;s largest airline in total passengers-miles transported and passenger fleet size, uses DFW as its largest and main hub.

Texas&#x27;s second-largest air facility is Houston&#x27;s George Bush Intercontinental Airport (IAH). It serves as the largest hub for United Airlines, the world&#x27;s third-largest airline, by passenger-miles flown. IAH offers service to the most Mexican destinations of any U.S. airport. The next five largest airports in the state all serve more than three million passengers annually; they include Austin-Bergstrom International Airport, William P. Hobby Airport, San Antonio International Airport, Dallas Love Field and El Paso International Airport. The smallest airport in the state to be designated an international airport is Del Rio International Airport.

====Ports====
Around 1,150 seaports dot Texas&#x27;s coast with over of channels. Ports employ nearly one-million people and handle an average of 317 million metric tons. Texas ports connect with the rest of the U.S. Atlantic seaboard with the Gulf section of the Intracoastal Waterway. The Port of Houston today is the busiest port in the United States in foreign tonnage, second in overall tonnage, and tenth worldwide in tonnage. The Houston Ship Channel spans wide by deep by long.

====Railroads====
Part of the state&#x27;s tradition of cowboys is derived from the massive cattle drives which its ranchers organized in the nineteenth century to drive livestock to railroads and markets.

The first railroad to operate in Texas was the Buffalo Bayou, Brazos and Colorado Railway, opening in August 1853. The first railroad to enter Texas from the north, completed in 1872, was the . With increasing railroad access, the ranchers did not have to take their livestock up to the Midwest and shipped beef out from Texas. This caused a decline in the economies of the cow towns.

Since 1911, Texas has led the nation in length of railroad miles within the state. Texas railway length peaked in 1932 at , but declined to by 2000. While the Railroad Commission of Texas originally regulated state railroads, in 2005 the state reassigned these duties to TxDOT.

In the Dallas–Fort Worth area, three public transit agencies provide rail service: Dallas Area Rapid Transit (DART), Denton County Transportation Authority (DCTA), and Trinity Metro. DART began operating the first light rail system in the Southwest United States in 1996. The Trinity Railway Express (TRE) commuter rail service, which connects Fort Worth and Dallas, is provided by Trinity Metro and DART. Trinity Metro also operates the TEXRail commuter rail line, connecting downtown Fort Worth and Northeast Tarrant County to DFW Airport. The A-train commuter rail line, operated by DCTA, acts as an extension of the DART Green line into Denton County. In the Austin area, Capital Metropolitan Transportation Authority operates a commuter rail service known as Capital MetroRail to the northwestern suburbs. The Metropolitan Transit Authority of Harris County, Texas (METRO) operates light rail lines called METRORail in the Houston area.

Amtrak provides Texas with limited intercity passenger rail service. Three scheduled routes serve the state: the daily &quot;Texas Eagle&quot; ; the tri-weekly &quot;Sunset Limited&quot; , with stops in Texas; and the daily &quot;Heartland Flyer&quot; . Texas may get one of the nation&#x27;s first high-speed rail line. Plans for a privately funded high-speed rail line between Dallas and Houston have been planned by the Texas Central Railway company.

==Culture==


Historically, Texas culture comes from a blend of mostly Southern (Dixie), Western (frontier), and Southwestern (Mexican/Anglo fusion) influences, varying in degrees of such from one intrastate region to another. A popular food item, the breakfast burrito, draws from all three, having a soft flour tortilla wrapped around bacon and scrambled eggs or other hot, cooked fillings. Adding to Texas&#x27;s traditional culture, established in the 18th and 19th centuries, immigration has made Texas a melting pot of cultures from around the world.

Texas has made a strong mark on national and international pop culture. The entire state is strongly associated with the image of the cowboy shown in westerns and in country western music. The state&#x27;s numerous oil tycoons are also a popular pop culture topic as seen in the hit TV series &quot;Dallas&quot;.

The internationally known slogan &quot;Don&#x27;t Mess with Texas&quot; began as an anti-littering advertisement. Since the campaign&#x27;s inception in 1986, the phrase has become &quot;an identity statement, a declaration of Texas swagger&quot;.

===Texas self-perception===
&quot;Texas-sized&quot; describes something that is about the size of the U.S. state of Texas, or something (usually but not always originating from Texas) that is large compared to other objects of its type. Texas was the largest U.S. state until Alaska became a state in 1959. The phrase &quot;everything is bigger in Texas&quot; has been in regular use since at least 1950.

===Arts===
Houston is one of only five American cities with permanent professional resident companies in all the major performing arts disciplines: the Houston Grand Opera, the Houston Symphony Orchestra, the Houston Ballet, and The Alley Theatre. Known for the vibrancy of its visual and performing arts, the Houston Theater District ranks second in the country in the number of theater seats in a concentrated downtown area, with 12,948 seats for live performances and 1,480 movie seats.

Founded in 1892, Modern Art Museum of Fort Worth, also called &quot;The Modern&quot;, is Texas&#x27;s oldest art museum. Fort Worth also has the Kimbell Art Museum, the Amon Carter Museum, the National Cowgirl Museum and Hall of Fame, the Will Rogers Memorial Center, and the Bass Performance Hall downtown. The Arts District of Downtown Dallas has arts venues such as the Dallas Museum of Art, the Morton H. Meyerson Symphony Center, the Margot and Bill Winspear Opera House, the Trammell &amp; Margaret Crow Collection of Asian Art, and the Nasher Sculpture Center.
The Deep Ellum district within Dallas became popular during the 1920s and 1930s as the prime jazz and blues hotspot in the Southern United States. The name Deep Ellum comes from local people pronouncing &quot;Deep Elm&quot; as &quot;Deep Ellum&quot;. Artists such as Blind Lemon Jefferson, Robert Johnson, Huddie &quot;Lead Belly&quot; Ledbetter, and Bessie Smith played in early Deep Ellum clubs.

Austin, &quot;The Live Music Capital of the World&quot;, boasts &quot;more live music venues per capita than such music hotbeds as Nashville, Memphis, Los Angeles, Las Vegas or New York City&quot;. The city&#x27;s music revolves around the nightclubs on 6th Street; events like the film, music, and multimedia festival South by Southwest; the longest-running concert music program on American television, &quot;Austin City Limits&quot;; and the Austin City Limits Music Festival held in Zilker Park.

Since 1980, San Antonio has evolved into &quot;The Tejano Music Capital Of The World&quot;. The Tejano Music Awards have provided a forum to create greater awareness and appreciation for Tejano music and culture.

===Sports===


Within the &quot;Big Four&quot; professional leagues, Texas has two NFL teams (the Dallas Cowboys and the Houston Texans), two MLB teams (the Houston Astros and the Texas Rangers), three NBA teams (the San Antonio Spurs, the Houston Rockets, and the Dallas Mavericks), and one NHL team (the Dallas Stars). The Dallas–Fort Worth metroplex is one of only thirteen American metropolitan areas that host sports teams from all the &quot;Big Four&quot; professional leagues. Outside of the &quot;Big Four&quot;, Texas also has a WNBA team (the Dallas Wings), three Major League Soccer teams (Austin FC, Houston Dynamo FC and FC Dallas), and one NWSL team (the Houston Dash).

Collegiate athletics have deep significance in Texas culture, especially football. The state has twelve Division I-FBS schools, the most in the nation. Four of the state&#x27;s schools claim at least one national championship in football: the Texas Longhorns, the Texas A&amp;M Aggies, the TCU Horned Frogs, and the SMU Mustangs. According to a survey of Division I-A coaches, the rivalry between the University of Oklahoma and the University of Texas at Austin, the Red River Shootout, ranks the third-best in the nation. The TCU Horned Frogs and SMU Mustangs also share a rivalry and compete annually in the Battle for the Iron Skillet. A fierce rivalry, the Lone Star Showdown, also exists between the state&#x27;s two largest universities, Texas A&amp;M University and the University of Texas at Austin. The athletics portion of the Lone Star Showdown rivalry was paused between 2012, when Texas A&amp;M left the Big 12 and joined the SEC, and 2024, when Texas joined them.

The University Interscholastic League (UIL) organizes most primary and secondary school competitions. Events organized by UIL include contests in athletics (the most popular being high school football) as well as artistic and academic subjects.

Texans also enjoy rodeo. The world&#x27;s first rodeo was hosted in Pecos, Texas. The annual Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo is the largest rodeo in the world. The Southwestern Exposition and Livestock Show in Fort Worth is the oldest continuously running rodeo incorporating many of the state&#x27;s most historic traditions into its annual events. Dallas hosts the State Fair of Texas each year at Fair Park.

Texas Motor Speedway hosts annual NASCAR Cup Series and IndyCar Series auto races since 1997. Since 2012, Austin&#x27;s Circuit of the Americas plays host to a round of the Formula 1 World Championship.

The Panther City Lacrosse Club is a professional lacrosse team in the National Lacrosse League. They have played local matches at Dickies Arena in Fort Worth, Texas since their inaugural 2021–2022 season.

==Education==

The second president of the Republic of Texas, Mirabeau B. Lamar, is the &quot;Father of Texas Education&quot;. During his term, the state set aside three leagues in each county for public schools. An additional 50 leagues of land set aside for the support of two universities would later become the basis of the state&#x27;s Permanent University Fund. Lamar&#x27;s actions set the foundation for a Texas-wide public school system.

Between 2006 and 2007, Texas spent $7,275 per pupil, ranking it below the national average of $9,389. The pupil/teacher ratio was 14.9, below the national average of 15.3. Texas paid instructors $41,744, below the national average of $46,593. The Texas Education Agency (TEA) administers the state&#x27;s public school systems. Texas has over 1,000 school districts; all districts except the Stafford Municipal School District are independent from municipal government and many cross city boundaries. School districts have the power to tax their residents and to assert eminent domain over privately owned property. Due to court-mandated equitable school financing, the state has a tax redistribution system called the &quot;Robin Hood plan&quot; which transfers property tax revenue from wealthy school districts to poor ones. The TEA has no authority over private or homeschooling activities.

Students in Texas take the State of Texas Assessments of Academic Readiness (STAAR) in primary and secondary school. STAAR assess students&#x27; attainment of reading, writing, mathematics, science, and social studies skills required under Texas education standards and the No Child Left Behind Act. The test replaced the Texas Assessment of Knowledge and Skills (TAKS) test in the 2011–2012 school year.

Generally prohibited in the Western world, school corporal punishment is not unusual in the more conservative, rural areas of the state, with 28,569 public school students paddled at least one time, according to government data for the 2011–2012 school year. The rate of school corporal punishment in Texas is surpassed only by Mississippi, Alabama, and Arkansas.

===Higher education===


The state&#x27;s two most widely recognized flagship universities are The University of Texas at Austin and Texas A&amp;M University, ranked as the 21st and 41st best universities in the nation according to 2020&#x27;s latest Center for World University Rankings report, respectively. Some observers also include the University of Houston and Texas Tech University as tier one flagships alongside UT Austin and A&amp;M. The Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board ranks the state&#x27;s public universities into three distinct tiers:
* National Research Universities (Tier 1)
**The University of Texas at Austin
**Texas A&amp;M University
**Texas Tech University
**University of Houston
**Rice University
**The University of Texas at Arlington
**The University of Texas at Dallas
**The University of North Texas
**The University of Texas at El Paso
* Emerging Research Universities (Tier 2)
**The University of Texas at San Antonio
**Texas State University
* Comprehensive Universities (Tier 3)
** All other public universities (25 in total)

Texas&#x27;s alternative affirmative action plan, Texas House Bill 588, guarantees Texas students who graduated in the percent of their high school class automatic admission to state-funded universities. This does not apply to The University of Texas at Austin, which automatically admits Texas students who graduated in the percent of their high school class. The bill encourages demographic diversity while attempting to avoid problems stemming from the &quot;Hopwood v. Texas&quot; (1996) case.

Thirty-six public universities exist in Texas, of which 32 belong to one of the six state university systems. Discovery of minerals on Permanent University Fund land, particularly oil, has helped fund the rapid growth of the state&#x27;s two largest university systems: the University of Texas System and the Texas A&amp;M System. The four other university systems: the University of Houston System, the University of North Texas System, the Texas State System, and the Texas Tech System are not funded by the Permanent University Fund.

The Carnegie Foundation classifies five of Texas&#x27;s universities as Tier One research institutions: Rice University, The University of Texas at Austin, the Texas A&amp;M University, the University of Houston and Texas Tech University. The University of Texas at Austin and Texas A&amp;M University are the flagship universities of the University of Texas System and Texas A&amp;M University System, respectively. Both were established by the Texas Constitution and hold stakes in the Permanent University Fund.

The state has sought to expand the number of flagship universities by elevating some of its seven institutions designated as &quot;emerging research universities&quot;. The two expected to emerge first are the University of Houston and Texas Tech University, likely in that order according to discussions on the House floor of the 82nd Texas Legislature.

The state is home to various private institutions of higher learning—ranging from liberal arts colleges to a nationally recognized top-tier research university. in Houston is one of the leading teaching and research universities of the United States and is ranked the nation&#x27;s 17th-best overall university by &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot;.

Trinity University, a private, primarily undergraduate liberal arts university in San Antonio, has ranked first among universities granting primarily bachelor&#x27;s and select master&#x27;s degrees in the Western United States for 20 consecutive years by &quot;U.S. News&quot;. Private universities include Abilene Christian University, , , , and .

Universities in Texas host three presidential libraries: George Bush Presidential Library at Texas A&amp;M University, the Lyndon Baines Johnson Library and Museum at The University of Texas at Austin, and the George W. Bush Presidential Library at Southern Methodist University.

==Healthcare==

Notwithstanding the concentration of elite medical centers in the state, The Commonwealth Fund ranks the Texas healthcare system the third worst in the nation. Texas ranks close to last in access to healthcare, quality of care, avoidable hospital spending, and equity. In May 2006, Texas initiated the program &quot;code red&quot; in response to the report the state had 25.1 percent of the population without health insurance, the largest proportion in the nation.

The Trust for America&#x27;s Health ranked Texas 15th highest in adult obesity: 27.2 percent of the state&#x27;s population is obese. The 2008 Men&#x27;s Health obesity survey ranked four Texas cities among the top 25 fattest cities in America: Houston ranked 6th, Dallas 7th, El Paso 8th, and Arlington 14th. Texas had only one city (Austin, ranked 21st) in the top 25 &quot;fittest cities&quot; in America. The state is ranked forty-second in the percentage of residents who engage in regular exercise according to a 2007 study.

Texas has the highest maternal mortality rate in the developed world, and the rate by which Texas women died from pregnancy-related complications doubled from 2010 to 2014, to 23.8 per 100,000—a rate unmatched in any other U.S. state or economically developed country. In May 2021, the state legislature passed the Texas Heartbeat Act, which banned abortion from as early as six weeks of pregnancy, except to save the life of the mother. The Act allows private citizens to sue abortion providers and anyone else who assists in an abortion, except for the woman on whom the abortion is performed. On August 25, 2022, another law took effect that made committing abortion at any stage of pregnancy a felony punishable by life in prison.

===Medical research===

Texas has many elite research medical centers. The state has 15 medical schools, four dental schools, and two optometry schools. Texas has two Biosafety Level 4 (BSL-4) laboratories: one at The University of Texas Medical Branch (UTMB) in Galveston, and the other at the Southwest Foundation for Biomedical Research in San Antonio—the first privately owned BSL-4 lab in the United States.

The Texas Medical Center in Houston holds the world&#x27;s largest concentration of research and healthcare institutions, with over 50 member institutions. Texas Medical Center performs the most heart transplants in the world. The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston is a highly regarded academic institution that centers around cancer patient care, research, education and prevention.

San Antonio&#x27;s South Texas Medical Center facilities rank sixth in clinical medicine research impact in the United States. The University of Texas Health Science Center is another highly ranked research and educational institution in San Antonio.

Both the American Heart Association and the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center call Dallas home. The institution&#x27;s medical school employs the most medical school Nobel laureates in the world.

==Government and politics==
The current Texas Constitution was adopted in 1876. Like many states, it explicitly provides for a separation of powers. The state&#x27;s Bill of Rights is much larger than its federal counterpart, and has provisions unique to Texas.

===State government===


Texas has a plural executive branch system limiting the power of the governor, which is a weak executive compared to some other states. Except for the secretary of state, voters elect executive officers independently; candidates are directly answerable to the public, not the governor. This election system has led to some executive branches split between parties and reduced the ability of the governor to carry out a program. When Republican president George W. Bush served as Texas&#x27;s governor, the state had a Democratic lieutenant governor, Bob Bullock. The executive branch positions consist of the governor, lieutenant governor, comptroller of public accounts, land commissioner, attorney general, agriculture commissioner, the three-member Texas Railroad Commission, the State Board of Education, and the secretary of state.

The bicameral Texas Legislature consists of the House of Representatives, with 150 members, and a Senate, with 31 members. The Speaker of the House leads the House, and the lieutenant governor, the Senate. The Legislature meets in regular session biennially for just over a hundred days, but the governor can call for special sessions as often as desired (notably, the Legislature cannot call itself into session). The state&#x27;s fiscal year begins September1.

The judiciary of Texas is among the most complex in the United States, with many layers and overlapping jurisdictions. Texas has two courts of last resort: the Texas Supreme Court, for civil cases, and the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals. Except for some municipal benches, partisan elections select judges at all levels of the judiciary; the governor fills vacancies by appointment. Texas is notable for its use of capital punishment, having led the country in executions since capital punishment was reinstated in the &quot;Gregg v. Georgia&quot; case.

The Texas Ranger Division of the Texas Department of Public Safety is a law enforcement agency with statewide jurisdiction. Over the years, the Texas Rangers have investigated crimes ranging from murder to political corruption. They have acted as riot police and as detectives, protected the Texas governor, tracked down fugitives, and functioned as a paramilitary force. The Texas Rangers were unofficially created by Stephen F. Austin in 1823 and formally constituted in 1835. The Rangers were integral to several important events of Texas history and some of the best-known criminal cases in the history of the Old West.

The Texas constitution defines the responsibilities of county governments, which serve as agents of the state. Commissioners court and court judges are elected to serve as the administrative arm. Most cities in the state, those over 5,000 in population, have home-rule governments. The vast majority of these have charters for council-manager forms of government, by which voters elect council members, who hire a professional city manager as an operating officer.

===Politics===

The Democratic Party dominated Texas politics from the turn of the 20th century, imposing racial segregation and white supremacy. It held power until after passage in the mid-1960s of national civil rights legislation enforcing constitutional rights of all citizens.

The state&#x27;s conservative White voters began to support Republican presidential candidates by the mid-20th century. After this period, they supported Republicans for local and state offices as well, and most Whites became Republican Party members. The party also attracted some minorities, but many have continued to vote for Democratic candidates. The shift to the Republican Party is much-attributed to the fact the Democratic Party became increasingly liberal during the 20th century, and thus increasingly out-of-touch with the average Texas voter. As Texas was always a conservative state, voters switched to the Republicans, which now more closely reflected their beliefs. Commentators have also attributed the shift to Republican political consultant Karl Rove, who managed numerous political campaigns in Texas in the 1980s and 1990s. Other stated reasons included court-ordered redistricting and the demographic shift in relation to the Sun Belt that favored the Republican Party and conservatism.

The 2003 Texas redistricting of Congressional districts led by Republican Tom DeLay, was called by &quot;The New York Times&quot; &quot;an extreme case of partisan gerrymandering&quot;. A group of Democratic legislators, the &quot;Texas Eleven&quot;, fled the state in a quorum-busting effort to prevent the legislature from acting, but was unsuccessful. The state had already redistricted following the 2000 census. Despite these efforts, the legislature passed a map heavily in favor of Republicans, based on 2000 data and ignoring the estimated nearly one million new residents in the state since then. Career attorneys and analysts at the Department of Justice objected to the plan as diluting the votes of African American and Hispanic voters, but political appointees overrode them and approved it. Legal challenges to the redistricting reached the national Supreme Court in the case &quot;League of United Latin American Citizens v. Perry&quot; (2006), but the court ruled in favor of the state (and Republicans).

In the 2014 Texas elections, the Tea Party movement made large gains, with numerous Tea Party favorites being elected into office, including Dan Patrick as lieutenant governor, Ken Paxton as attorney general, in addition to numerous other candidates including conservative Republican Greg Abbott as governor.

Texas voters lean toward fiscal conservatism, while enjoying the benefits of significant federal investment in the state in military and other facilities achieved by the power of the Solid South in the 20th century. They also tend to have socially conservative values.

Since 1980, most Texas voters have supported Republican presidential candidates. Austin, Dallas, Houston, San Antonio, and El Paso consistently lean Democratic in both local and statewide elections. Residents of counties along the Rio Grande closer to the Mexico–United States border, where there are many Latino residents, generally vote for Democratic Party candidates, while most other rural and suburban areas of Texas have shifted to voting for Republican Party candidates.

As of the midterm elections of 2022, a large majority of the members of Texas&#x27;s U.S. House delegation are Republican, along with both U.S. Senators. In the 119th United States Congress, of the 38 Congressional districts in Texas, 25 are held by Republicans and 13 by Democrats. Texas&#x27;s Senators are John Cornyn and Ted Cruz. Since 1994, Texans have not elected a Democrat to a statewide office. The state&#x27;s Democratic voters are made up primarily by liberal and minority groups in Austin, Beaumont, Dallas, El Paso, Houston, and San Antonio as well as minority voters in East and South Texas.
According to a study by the Cato Institute, Texas ranks last in personal freedom among the states, by factors including incarceration rates, cannabis laws, civil asset forfeiture policies, educational freedom, gambling laws, marriage freedom, and travel freedom.

Lesser parties that have ballot access are the Green Party and the Libertarian Party.

===Criminal law===
Texas has a reputation of very harsh criminal punishment for criminal offenses. It is one of the 32 states that practice capital punishment, and since the US Supreme Court allowed capital punishment to resume in 1976, 40% of all U.S. executions have taken place in Texas. In 2018, Texas had the 8th highest incarceration rate in the U.S. Texas also has strong right of self-defense and self defense laws, allowing citizens to use lethal force to defend themselves, their families, or their property. Texas has one of the strictest abortion bans in the country.

==See also==

* Outline of Texas
* Index of Texas-related articles
* List of people from Texas
* USS &quot;Texas&quot;, 4 ships

==Notes==

==References==
==Bibliography==
* originally published 2004 by New York: Free Press 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==

* The Texas State History Museum
* The Handbook of Texas Online
* &quot;Texas Register&quot;
* South and West Texas: A National Register of Historic Places Travel Itinerary
* View historical photographs from Texas at the University of Houston Digital Library.
* Lawrence T. Jones III Texas Photographs, DeGolyer Library 
* Texas: Photographs, Manuscripts, and Imprints, DeGolyer Library
* George W. Cook Dallas/Texas Image Collection, DeGolyer Library
* John Miller Morris Real Photographic Postcards and Photographs of Texas, DeGolyer Library
* Rowe-Barr Collection of Texas Currency, DeGolyer Library 
* Oklahoma Digital Maps: Digital Collections of Oklahoma and Indian Territory

===State government===
*The Official Website of the Government of Texas
*The State of Texas
* Texas State Databases
* Texas Politics

===Federal government===
* Energy Profile for Texas—Economic, environmental, and energy data
* USGS real-time, geographic, and other scientific resources of Texas 
* Texas State Facts from USDA
* South and West Texas, a National Park Service &quot;Discover Our Shared Heritage&quot; Travel Itinerary</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="0" end="5" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="40" end="45" title="U.S. state" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140073" start="53" end="66" title="South Central United States" label="South Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="81" end="94" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="107" end="116" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="130" end="138" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="157" end="165" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="180" end="190" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057263" start="212" end="235" title="Mexico-United States border" label="an international border"/>
<link wikidata="Q28912963" start="245" end="259" title="Mexican states" label="Mexican states"/>
<link wikidata="Q655" start="263" end="272" title="Chihuahua (state)" label="Chihuahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q53079" start="274" end="282" title="Coahuila" label="Coahuila"/>
<link wikidata="Q15282" start="284" end="294" title="Nuevo León" label="Nuevo León"/>
<link wikidata="Q80007" start="300" end="310" title="Tamaulipas" label="Tamaulipas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="368" end="382" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q150340" start="500" end="504" title="List of U.S. states and territories by area" label="area"/>
<link wikidata="Q125503" start="509" end="519" title="List of U.S. states and territories by population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q170588" start="614" end="631" title="Republic of Texas" label="Republic of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="634" end="639" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505587" start="674" end="697" title="Spanish Texas" label="claim and control Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q22124342" start="709" end="729" title="French colonization of Texas" label="a short-lived colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187072" start="929" end="952" title="Texas annexation" label="state&amp;#x27;s annexation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="995" end="1015" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573058" start="1082" end="1093" title="slave state" label="slave state"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1104" end="1122" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q214102" start="1160" end="1169" title="Union (American Civil War)" label="the Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="1214" end="1243" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753129" start="1444" end="1457" title="Texas economy" label="Texas economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1467" end="1479" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="1839" end="1848" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602814" start="1859" end="1869" title="Spindletop" label="Spindletop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707889" start="1895" end="1911" title="Texas oil boom" label="an economic boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q466410" start="2033" end="2042" title="high tech" label="high tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q76615" start="2094" end="2115" title="List of U.S. states by number of Fortune 500 companies" label="second-highest number"/>
<link wikidata="Q76615" start="2124" end="2147" title="Fortune 500" label="&amp;quot;Fortune&amp;quot; 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="2273" end="2280" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869622" start="2282" end="2293" title="Agriculture in Texas" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364904" start="2295" end="2309" title="petrochemicals" label="petrochemicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q105638207" start="2311" end="2317" title="Energy in Texas" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11661" start="2319" end="2328" title="Computer industry" label="computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q581105" start="2333" end="2344" title="Consumer electronics" label="electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876213" start="2346" end="2355" title="aerospace" label="aerospace"/>
<link wikidata="Q13439429" start="2361" end="2380" title="biomedical sciences" label="biomedical sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q65044626" start="2405" end="2428" title="List of U.S. states and territories by exports" label="in state export revenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241935" start="2452" end="2466" title="List of U.S. states by GDP" label="second-highest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610525" start="2467" end="2486" title="gross state product" label="gross state product"/>
<link wikidata="Q179295" start="2493" end="2520" title="Dallas–Fort Worth metroplex" label="Dallas–Fort Worth metroplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q426435" start="2525" end="2540" title="Greater Houston" label="Greater Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768043" start="2600" end="2613" title="Metropolitan statistical area" label="urban regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="2648" end="2654" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624307" start="2706" end="2720" title="Balcones Fault" label="Balcones Fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753519" start="2745" end="2755" title="Geography of Texas" label="landscapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="2780" end="2788" title="Southern United States" label="Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="2797" end="2817" title="Southwestern United States" label="Southwestern regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q194281" start="2866" end="2873" title="prairie" label="prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006733" start="2876" end="2885" title="grassland" label="grassland"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="2905" end="2914" title="coastline" label="coastline"/>
<link wikidata="Q166735" start="2973" end="2978" title="swamp" label="swamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3905191" start="2984" end="2995" title="piney woods" label="piney woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494060" start="3068" end="3076" title="Big Bend (Texas)" label="Big Bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q56756" start="3134" end="3144" title="Caddo language" label="Caddo word"/>
<link wikidata="Q35170" start="3224" end="3229" title="Caddo" label="Caddo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357832" start="3259" end="3266" title="Hasinai" label="Hasinai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505587" start="3288" end="3309" title="Spanish Texas" label="Spanish colonial rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q108544558" start="3361" end="3376" title="New Philippines" label="New Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q285658" start="3555" end="3569" title="First Mexican Empire" label="Mexican Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q170588" start="3592" end="3602" title="Republic of Texas" label="a republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11993457" start="3616" end="3637" title="Royal Spanish Academy" label="Royal Spanish Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9968" start="3808" end="3809" title="x" label="x"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354926" start="3816" end="3835" title="Spanish orthography" label="Spanish orthography"/>
<link wikidata="Q251749" start="4045" end="4051" title="Pueblo" label="Pueblo"/>
<link wikidata="Q607846" start="4080" end="4102" title="Jacques-Nicolas Bellin" label="Jacques-Nicolas Bellin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969490" start="4151" end="4164" title="Trinity River (Texas)" label="Trinity River"/>
<link wikidata="Q975928" start="4194" end="4202" title="Crockett, Texas" label="Crockett"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="4289" end="4316" title="Pre-Columbian North America" label="Pre-Columbian North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340721" start="4322" end="4334" title="Southwestern tribes" label="Southwestern"/>
<link wikidata="Q907924" start="4343" end="4349" title="Plains Indians" label="Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="4357" end="4371" title="Archaeologists" label="Archaeologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q478805" start="4533" end="4552" title="Ancestral Puebloans" label="Ancestral Puebloans"/>
<link wikidata="Q160636" start="4568" end="4578" title="Rio Grande" label="Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052095" start="4615" end="4636" title="Mississippian culture" label="Mississippian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q262714" start="4652" end="4666" title="Mound Builders" label="Mound Builders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879371" start="4693" end="4717" title="Mississippi River Valley" label="Mississippi River Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="4758" end="4769" title="Mesoamerica" label="Mesoamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q172613" start="4820" end="4831" title="Teotihuacan" label="Teotihuacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q56962" start="5023" end="5030" title="Atakapa" label="Atakapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104182" start="5045" end="5057" title="Coahuiltecan" label="Coahuiltecan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454881" start="5125" end="5132" title="Tonkawa language" label="Tonkawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359237" start="5159" end="5165" title="Jumanos" label="Jumano"/>
<link wikidata="Q156032" start="5415" end="5418" title="Red River of the South" label="Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q596106" start="5420" end="5426" title="Sabine River (Texas–Louisiana)" label="Sabine"/>
<link wikidata="Q964437" start="5428" end="5444" title="Neches River" label="and Neches River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561062" start="5482" end="5489" title="Akokisa" label="Akokisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903991" start="5494" end="5499" title="Bidai" label="Bidai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728967" start="5545" end="5554" title="Karankawa people" label="Karankawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104182" start="5608" end="5620" title="Coahuiltecan" label="Coahuiltecan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257165" start="5627" end="5634" title="Aranama people" label="Aranama"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="5723" end="5729" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q499687" start="5935" end="5942" title="Alabama people" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q102090" start="5944" end="5950" title="Apache" label="Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q56962" start="5952" end="5959" title="Atakapa" label="Atakapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903991" start="5962" end="5967" title="Bidai" label="Bidai"/>
<link wikidata="Q35170" start="5969" end="5974" title="Caddo" label="Caddo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257165" start="5976" end="5983" title="Aranama people" label="Aranama"/>
<link wikidata="Q117133" start="5985" end="5993" title="Comanche" label="Comanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q324516" start="5995" end="6002" title="Choctaw" label="Choctaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q494699" start="6004" end="6013" title="Coushatta" label="Coushatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357832" start="6015" end="6022" title="Hasinai" label="Hasinai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359237" start="6024" end="6030" title="Jumano people" label="Jumano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728967" start="6032" end="6041" title="Karankawa people" label="Karankawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429504" start="6043" end="6051" title="Kickapoo people" label="Kickapoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q117100" start="6053" end="6058" title="Kiowa" label="Kiowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493185" start="6060" end="6067" title="Tonkawa" label="Tonkawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425238" start="6073" end="6080" title="Wichita people" label="Wichita"/>
<link wikidata="Q324516" start="6176" end="6183" title="Choctaw" label="Choctaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q82048" start="6208" end="6216" title="Lenape" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q638530" start="6280" end="6296" title="Texas Revolution" label="Texas Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q193155" start="6848" end="6866" title="Louisiana Purchase" label="Louisiana Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q51705" start="7145" end="7153" title="Muscogee" label="Muscogee"/>
<link wikidata="Q51716" start="7155" end="7168" title="Houma people" label="Houma Choctaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q82048" start="7170" end="7176" title="Lenape" label="Lenape"/>
<link wikidata="Q128531" start="7181" end="7193" title="Mingo" label="Mingo Seneca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818899" start="7339" end="7346" title="settler" label="settler"/>
<link wikidata="Q223930" start="7444" end="7453" title="game (food)" label="wild game"/>
<link wikidata="Q216547" start="8527" end="8538" title="Sam Houston" label="Sam Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q456633" start="8613" end="8630" title="Mirabeau B. Lamar" label="Mirabeau B. Lamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="8785" end="8801" title="Indian Territory" label="Indian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q16158833" start="8830" end="8847" title="Alabama–Coushatta Tribe of Texas" label="Alabama-Coushatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q55241" start="9124" end="9134" title="Gulf Coast" label="Gulf Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q703619" start="9172" end="9196" title="Alonso Álvarez de Pineda" label="Alonso Álvarez de Pineda"/>
<link wikidata="Q250763" start="9245" end="9271" title="Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca" label="Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q271974" start="9582" end="9611" title="Francisco Vázquez de Coronado" label="Francisco Vázquez de Coronado"/>
<link wikidata="Q60040" start="9687" end="9703" title="Hernando de Soto" label="Hernando de Soto"/>
<link wikidata="Q298156" start="10099" end="10131" title="René-Robert Cavelier de La Salle" label="René-Robert Cavelier de La Salle"/>
<link wikidata="Q22124342" start="10175" end="10191" title="French colonization of Texas" label="Fort Saint Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1600098" start="10195" end="10208" title="Matagorda Bay" label="Matagorda Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="10231" end="10248" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573424" start="10575" end="10583" title="Spanish missions in Texas" label="missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576428" start="10587" end="10597" title="East Texas" label="East Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q658054" start="10711" end="10720" title="Louisiana (New France)" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="10842" end="10853" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402468" start="11119" end="11131" title="Lipan Apache people" label="Lipan Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q128393" start="11447" end="11452" title="nomad" label="nomad"/>
<link wikidata="Q193155" start="11505" end="11524" title="Louisiana Purchase" label="purchased Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q596106" start="11695" end="11707" title="Sabine River (Texas–Louisiana)" label="Sabine River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073738" start="11839" end="11850" title="filibuster (military)" label="filibusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="11924" end="11935" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="12081" end="12090" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002622" start="12097" end="12114" title="Ethnic groups in the Philippines" label="Philippine exiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="12157" end="12168" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="12179" end="12186" title="British Empire" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q4172847" start="12202" end="12210" title="Filipino people" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q3463967" start="12219" end="12229" title="Saint Malo, Louisiana" label="Saint Malo"/>
<link wikidata="Q454672" start="12251" end="12263" title="Jean Lafitte" label="Jean Lafitte"/>
<link wikidata="Q41894" start="12271" end="12292" title="Battle of New Orleans" label="Battle of New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q68750" start="12308" end="12335" title="Mexican War of Independence" label="Mexican War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q112865" start="12458" end="12490" title="administrative divisions of Mexico" label="states and territories of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q949898" start="12536" end="12552" title="Coahuila y Tejas" label="Coahuila y Tejas"/>
<link wikidata="Q80007" start="12605" end="12615" title="Tamaulipas" label="Tamaulipas"/>
<link wikidata="Q655" start="12617" end="12626" title="Chihuahua (state)" label="Chihuahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q921283" start="12656" end="12680" title="Santa Fe de Nuevo México" label="Santa Fe de Nuevo México"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315810" start="12751" end="12764" title="Mexican Texas" label="Mexican Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049924" start="12899" end="12909" title="empresario" label="empresario"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350218" start="13046" end="13063" title="Old Three Hundred" label="Old Three Hundred"/>
<link wikidata="Q903306" start="13087" end="13099" title="Brazos River" label="Brazos River"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="13390" end="13397" title="slavery" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q856681" start="13564" end="13583" title="illegal immigration" label="illegal immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q16687744" start="13710" end="13724" title="duty (economics)" label="customs duties"/>
<link wikidata="Q45321045" start="13765" end="13771" title="Tejano" label="Tejano"/>
<link wikidata="Q865948" start="13813" end="13833" title="Anahuac Disturbances" label="Anahuac Disturbances"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049712" start="13963" end="13969" title="Texian" label="Texian"/>
<link wikidata="Q204886" start="13986" end="13997" title="federalism" label="federalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166259" start="14174" end="14192" title="Convention of 1832" label="Convention of 1832"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166258" start="14318" end="14336" title="Convention of 1833" label="Convention of 1833"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049712" start="14446" end="14453" title="Texians" label="Texians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191854" start="14561" end="14579" title="Battle of Gonzales" label="Battle of Gonzales"/>
<link wikidata="Q638530" start="14599" end="14615" title="Texas Revolution" label="Texas Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164596" start="14650" end="14662" title="Consultation (Texas)" label="Consultation"/>
<link wikidata="Q189145" start="14854" end="14881" title="Antonio López de Santa Anna" label="Antonio López de Santa Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135419" start="14932" end="14945" title="José de Urrea" label="José de Urrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q9030262" start="15016" end="15031" title="Goliad massacre" label="Goliad massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510533" start="15076" end="15094" title="Siege of the Alamo" label="thirteen-day siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q235344" start="15132" end="15151" title="Battle of the Alamo" label="Battle of the Alamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996249" start="15251" end="15269" title="Convention of 1836" label="Convention of 1836"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186774" start="15287" end="15314" title="Texas Declaration of Independence" label="declaration of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q170588" start="15339" end="15356" title="Republic of Texas" label="Republic of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379669" start="15478" end="15492" title="Runaway Scrape" label="Runaway Scrape"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708336" start="15574" end="15585" title="Texian Army" label="Texian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q216547" start="15599" end="15610" title="Sam Houston" label="Sam Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q841278" start="15674" end="15695" title="Battle of San Jacinto" label="Battle of San Jacinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361674" start="15753" end="15772" title="Treaties of Velasco" label="Treaties of Velasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164260" start="15794" end="15831" title="Constitution of the Republic of Texas" label="Constitution of the Republic of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q456633" start="16067" end="16084" title="Mirabeau B. Lamar" label="Mirabeau B. Lamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="16154" end="16170" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="16213" end="16226" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407592" start="16444" end="16461" title="Texas Archive War" label="Texas Archive War"/>
<link wikidata="Q117133" start="16840" end="16848" title="Comanche" label="Comanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150525" start="16949" end="16969" title="Comanche Wars" label="raids on settlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242669" start="17114" end="17129" title="Dawson massacre" label="Dawson massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187072" start="17342" end="17349" title="Texas annexation" label="annexed"/>
<link wikidata="Q11891" start="17372" end="17385" title="James K. Polk" label="James K. Polk"/>
<link wikidata="Q698731" start="17394" end="17410" title="1844 United States presidential election" label="election of 1844"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="17438" end="17451" title="United States Congress" label="U.S. Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468723" start="17675" end="17687" title="Nueces River" label="Nueces River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644904" start="17700" end="17717" title="Rio Grande Valley (Texas)" label="Rio Grande Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q11896" start="17933" end="17947" title="Zachary Taylor" label="Zachary Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796515" start="18089" end="18104" title="Thornton Affair" label="Thornton Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="18118" end="18138" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q815139" start="18195" end="18214" title="Siege of Fort Texas" label="Siege of Fort Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736004" start="18216" end="18235" title="Battle of Palo Alto" label="Battle of Palo Alto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890818" start="18240" end="18268" title="Battle of Resaca de la Palma" label="Battle of Resaca de la Palma"/>
<link wikidata="Q616109" start="18381" end="18408" title="Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo" label="Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186695" start="18522" end="18537" title="Mexican Cession" label="Mexican Cession"/>
<link wikidata="Q39392" start="18667" end="18685" title="Compromise of 1850" label="Compromise of 1850"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="18811" end="18821" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="18834" end="18842" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="18866" end="18872" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="18874" end="18882" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="18888" end="18895" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q698842" start="19293" end="19309" title="1860 United States presidential election" label="election of 1860"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="19439" end="19454" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q864007" start="19518" end="19528" title="Deep South" label="Deep South"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042941" start="19694" end="19716" title="Ordinance of Secession" label="Ordinance of Secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q614045" start="19880" end="19897" title="Constitution of the Confederate States" label="C.S. Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570565" start="20048" end="20056" title="Southern Unionist" label="Unionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q216547" start="20081" end="20092" title="Sam Houston" label="Sam Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q749397" start="20331" end="20349" title="Eastern Theater of the American Civil War" label="major battlefields"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="20357" end="20375" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087443" start="20457" end="20465" title="First Battle of Galveston" label="occupied"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="20834" end="20851" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q48776" start="20857" end="20886" title="Battle of Palmito Ranch" label="final battle of the Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q48776" start="20901" end="20914" title="Palmito Ranch Battlefield" label="Palmito Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355391" start="21029" end="21038" title="Battle of Appomattox Courthouse" label="surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q689847" start="21046" end="21071" title="Army of Northern Virginia" label="Army of Northern Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895184" start="21121" end="21135" title="Gordon Granger" label="Gordon Granger"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="21173" end="21187" title="Reconstruction Era" label="Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6312521" start="21189" end="21199" title="Juneteenth" label="Juneteenth"/>
<link wikidata="Q391358" start="21237" end="21262" title="Emancipation Proclamation" label="Emancipation Proclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q186166" start="22795" end="22814" title="1900 Galveston hurricane" label="Galveston hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q587682" start="22853" end="22861" title="oil well" label="oil well"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602814" start="22872" end="22882" title="Spindletop" label="Spindletop"/>
<link wikidata="Q128282" start="22903" end="22911" title="Beaumont, Texas" label="Beaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044903" start="22958" end="22968" title="East Texas Oil Field" label="East Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358102" start="22970" end="22980" title="West Texas" label="West Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="22996" end="23010" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707889" start="23032" end="23040" title="Texas oil boom" label="oil boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7503357" start="23231" end="23239" title="Poll tax (United States)" label="poll tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282172" start="23270" end="23285" title="Disenfranchisement after the Reconstruction Era" label="disenfranchised"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="23321" end="23327" title="Latinos" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995674" start="23377" end="23392" title="white primaries" label="white primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551709" start="23590" end="23605" title="Socialist Party of Texas" label="Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q334993" start="23809" end="23823" title="Eugene V. Debs" label="Eugene V. Debs"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="23963" end="23974" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="23981" end="23997" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q726501" start="24006" end="24015" title="Dust Bowl" label="Dust Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506365" start="24261" end="24276" title="Great Migration (African American)" label="Great Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048763" start="24383" end="24388" title="Non-Hispanic Whites" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="24424" end="24436" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24949" end="24975" title="Education in Texas#Public colleges and universities" label="system of higher education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058501" start="25556" end="25564" title="Sun Belt" label="Sun Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q862571" start="25719" end="25737" title="petroleum industry" label="petroleum industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q16799549" start="25748" end="25778" title="Latin Americans" label="Hispanics and Latino Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="25930" end="25946" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="25960" end="25976" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q179295" start="26079" end="26096" title="Dallas–Fort Worth metroplex" label="Dallas–Fort Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600444" start="26101" end="26115" title="Greater Austin" label="Greater Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707623" start="26139" end="26161" title="Texas Democratic Party" label="Texas Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="26375" end="26385" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q87742765" start="26633" end="26659" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Texas" label="COVID-19 pandemic in Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605224" start="26768" end="26779" title="Greg Abbott" label="Greg Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q105528997" start="27214" end="27230" title="Winter Storm Uri" label="Winter Storm Uri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357475" start="27419" end="27424" title="ERCOT" label="ERCOT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707775" start="27451" end="27472" title="Texas Interconnection" label="Texas Interconnection"/>
<link wikidata="Q105592508" start="27566" end="27578" title="2021 Texas power crisis" label="power crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q150340" start="27700" end="27714" title="List of U.S. states and territories by area" label="second-largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="27741" end="27747" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q578170" start="27782" end="27806" title="contiguous United States" label="contiguous United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q260023" start="27867" end="27879" title="List of countries by area" label="39th-largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q468508" start="27913" end="27941" title="List of the largest country subdivisions by area" label="country subdivisions by size"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140073" start="27960" end="27973" title="South Central United States" label="south central"/>
<link wikidata="Q160636" start="28005" end="28015" title="Rio Grande" label="Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q655" start="28066" end="28075" title="Chihuahua (state)" label="Chihuahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q53079" start="28077" end="28085" title="Coahuila" label="Coahuila"/>
<link wikidata="Q15282" start="28087" end="28097" title="Nuevo León" label="Nuevo León"/>
<link wikidata="Q80007" start="28103" end="28113" title="Tamaulipas" label="Tamaulipas"/>
<link wikidata="Q156032" start="28132" end="28141" title="Red River of the South" label="Red River"/>
<link wikidata="Q596106" start="28210" end="28222" title="Sabine River (Texas-Louisiana)" label="Sabine River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297417" start="28278" end="28293" title="Texas Panhandle" label="Texas Panhandle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420440" start="28333" end="28339" title="100th meridian west" label="100° W"/>
<link wikidata="Q5952511" start="28376" end="28389" title="Parallel 36°30&amp;#x27; north" label="36°30&amp;#x27; N"/>
<link wikidata="Q599326" start="28430" end="28436" title="103rd meridian west" label="103° W"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="28438" end="28445" title="El Paso" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135260" start="28486" end="28491" title="32nd parallel north" label="32° N"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="28521" end="28537" title="Köppen climate classification" label="climatic regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693974" start="28542" end="28554" title="Agricultural soil science" label="soil regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q295469" start="28571" end="28589" title="Ecoregion" label="ecological regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536415" start="28821" end="28840" title="Gulf Coastal Plains" label="Gulf Coastal Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="28861" end="28873" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3003780" start="29194" end="29214" title="Cross Timbers" label="Cross Timbers region"/>
<link wikidata="Q939487" start="29219" end="29237" title="Caprock Escarpment" label="Caprock Escarpment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297417" start="29346" end="29355" title="Texas Panhandle" label="panhandle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052758" start="29360" end="29374" title="Llano Estacado" label="Llano Estacado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576201" start="29395" end="29407" title="Texas Hill Country" label="hill country"/>
<link wikidata="Q652866" start="29413" end="29423" title="Lago Vista, Texas" label="Lago Vista"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="29428" end="29434" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q194281" start="29464" end="29471" title="prairie" label="prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q123991" start="29476" end="29482" title="steppe" label="steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347780" start="29524" end="29535" title="Trans-Pecos" label="Trans-Pecos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294308" start="29662" end="29678" title="Edwards Plateau" label="Stockton Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q160636" start="29803" end="29813" title="Rio Grande" label="Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356561" start="29861" end="29866" title="Pecos River" label="Pecos"/>
<link wikidata="Q903306" start="29872" end="29878" title="Brazos River" label="Brazos"/>
<link wikidata="Q847785" start="29880" end="29888" title="Colorado River (Texas)" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q156032" start="29894" end="29903" title="Red River of the South" label="Red River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624836" start="29978" end="29999" title="List of lakes in Texas" label="artificial reservoirs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264649" start="30280" end="30318" title="List of regions of the United States" label="recognized region of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576428" start="30348" end="30358" title="East Texas" label="East Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q864007" start="30405" end="30415" title="Deep South" label="Deep South"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347780" start="30420" end="30434" title="Trans-Pecos" label="Far West Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="30485" end="30503" title="Southwestern United States" label="interior Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124584" start="30617" end="30640" title="Sierra Madre Occidental" label="Sierra Madre Occidental"/>
<link wikidata="Q858571" start="30656" end="30673" title="continental crust" label="continental crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q210611" start="30689" end="30704" title="Mesoproterozoic" label="Mesoproterozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191110" start="30705" end="30711" title="craton" label="craton"/>
<link wikidata="Q238851" start="30793" end="30806" title="oceanic crust" label="oceanic crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q132033" start="30952" end="30960" title="Laurasia" label="Laurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q80583" start="30965" end="30973" title="Gondwana" label="Gondwana"/>
<link wikidata="Q373772" start="30990" end="31003" title="Pennsylvanian (geology)" label="Pennsylvanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4398" start="31022" end="31028" title="Pangea" label="Pangea"/>
<link wikidata="Q47158" start="31062" end="31070" title="Triassic" label="Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q215920" start="31076" end="31094" title="seafloor spreading" label="seafloor spreading"/>
<link wikidata="Q499312" start="31152" end="31165" title="late Jurassic" label="late Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q115827361" start="31395" end="31407" title="oil reserves" label="oil reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q491689" start="31523" end="31532" title="evaporite" label="evaporite"/>
<link wikidata="Q477449" start="31586" end="31595" title="salt dome" label="salt dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q943898" start="31596" end="31602" title="diapir" label="diapir"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="31687" end="31697" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q55810" start="31702" end="31711" title="Paleogene" label="Paleogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="31758" end="31764" title="Eocene" label="Eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q156267" start="31765" end="31772" title="lignite" label="lignite"/>
<link wikidata="Q134851" start="31945" end="31962" title="continental shelf" label="continental shelf"/>
<link wikidata="Q101873" start="31976" end="31985" title="Oligocene" label="Oligocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="31986" end="31994" title="volcanic" label="volcanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494060" start="32036" end="32044" title="Big Bend, Texas" label="Big Bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="32064" end="32071" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q444161" start="32095" end="32113" title="Ogallala Aquifer" label="Ogallala formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q208791" start="32164" end="32171" title="aquifer" label="aquifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="32200" end="32214" title="plate tectonic" label="plate tectonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="32238" end="32247" title="volcanoes" label="volcanoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640189" start="32384" end="32408" title="American green tree frog" label="American green tree frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458574" start="32614" end="32618" title="wasp" label="wasp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210115" start="32653" end="32671" title="Polistes exclamans" label="Polistes exclamans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4047178" start="32729" end="32747" title="Polistes annularis" label="Polistes annularis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3585615" start="32780" end="32791" title="wildflowers" label="wildflowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115567" start="32822" end="32832" title="Lupinus texensis" label="bluebonnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q233648" start="32916" end="32933" title="Lady Bird Johnson" label="Lady Bird Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="33070" end="33083" title="Köppen climate classification" label="climate zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297417" start="33129" end="33138" title="Texas Panhandle" label="Panhandle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4602637" start="33755" end="33783" title="2004 Christmas Eve snowstorm" label="2004 Christmas Eve snowstorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q970495" start="33819" end="33829" title="Kingsville, Texas" label="Kingsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857578" start="34185" end="34197" title="Thunderstorm" label="Thunderstorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q923442" start="34278" end="34291" title="Tornado Alley" label="Tornado Alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q8081" start="34361" end="34368" title="tornado" label="tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q972308" start="34667" end="34676" title="Indianola, Texas" label="Indianola"/>
<link wikidata="Q185505" start="34690" end="34707" title="1886 Indianola hurricane" label="another hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q135744" start="34762" end="34771" title="Galveston, Texas" label="Galveston"/>
<link wikidata="Q186166" start="34813" end="34837" title="1900 Galveston hurricane" label="1900 Galveston hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q8065" start="34947" end="34963" title="natural disaster" label="natural disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q37933184" start="34990" end="35006" title="Hurricane Harvey" label="Hurricane Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q982338" start="35024" end="35032" title="Rockport, Texas" label="Rockport"/>
<link wikidata="Q426435" start="35137" end="35152" title="Greater Houston" label="Greater Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="35384" end="35401" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q198961" start="35451" end="35475" title="1915 Galveston hurricane" label="1915 Galveston hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246568" start="35477" end="35493" title="Hurricane Audrey" label="Hurricane Audrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559974" start="35503" end="35518" title="Hurricane Carla" label="Hurricane Carla"/>
<link wikidata="Q545412" start="35528" end="35544" title="Hurricane Beulah" label="Hurricane Beulah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078655" start="35554" end="35570" title="Hurricane Alicia" label="Hurricane Alicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q737890" start="35580" end="35594" title="Hurricane Rita" label="Hurricane Rita"/>
<link wikidata="Q392603" start="35608" end="35621" title="Hurricane Ike" label="Hurricane Ike"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="35631" end="35646" title="Tropical cyclone" label="Tropical storms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301480" start="35687" end="35694" title="Tropical Storm Allison (1989)" label="Allison"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179558" start="35713" end="35724" title="Tropical Storm Allison" label="during 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244657" start="35726" end="35735" title="Tropical Storm Claudette (1979)" label="Claudette"/>
<link wikidata="Q67975133" start="35749" end="35779" title="Tropical Storm Imelda" label="Tropical Storm Imelda in 2019."/>
<link wikidata="Q60670" start="35844" end="35856" title="Polar regions of Earth" label="polar region"/>
<link wikidata="Q216823" start="35917" end="35925" title="air mass" label="air mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q105528997" start="35971" end="36019" title="February 13–17, 2021 North American winter storm" label="February 13–17, 2021 North American winter storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q105592508" start="36231" end="36254" title="2021 Texas power crisis" label="2021 Texas power crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="36306" end="36320" title="greenhouse gas" label="greenhouse gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434958" start="36591" end="36608" title="Fossil fuel power plant" label="coal power plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q131079" start="37095" end="37114" title="List of United States cities by population" label="largest U.S. cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q4431788" start="37131" end="37149" title="List of Texas metropolitan areas" label="metropolitan areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q94247" start="37338" end="37357" title="Interstate Highway System" label="interstate highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445457" start="37358" end="37362" title="Interstate 35 (Texas)" label="I-35"/>
<link wikidata="Q94297" start="37435" end="37439" title="Interstate 45 (Texas)" label="I-45"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442501" start="37477" end="37481" title="Interstate 10 (Texas)" label="I-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028703" start="37531" end="37551" title="Texas Urban Triangle" label="Texas Urban Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q208511" start="37771" end="37783" title="global city" label="world cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148199" start="37902" end="37909" title="Colonia (border settlement)" label="colonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q26519" start="38116" end="38130" title="Hidalgo County, Texas" label="Hidalgo County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148199" start="38229" end="38237" title="colonia (United States)" label="colonias"/>
<link wikidata="Q757323" start="38264" end="38276" title="List of counties in Texas" label="254 counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152868" start="38325" end="38350" title="Commissioners&amp;#x27; Court" label="Commissioners&amp;#x27; Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308596" start="38601" end="38614" title="mayor-council" label="mayor-council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301053" start="38840" end="38864" title="consolidated city-county" label="consolidated city-county"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501447" start="38895" end="38918" title="metropolitan government" label="metropolitan government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191952" start="38946" end="38955" title="home rule" label="home rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q398141" start="39571" end="39586" title="school district" label="school district"/>
<link wikidata="Q637217" start="39744" end="39755" title="Non-partisan democracy" label="nonpartisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="39936" end="39947" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="39976" end="39987" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="40070" end="40088" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="40179" end="40190" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q841440" start="40693" end="40704" title="Naturalization" label="naturalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="41231" end="41256" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644904" start="41597" end="41614" title="Rio Grande Valley (Texas)" label="Rio Grande Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057263" start="41662" end="41680" title="U.S.–Mexico border" label="U.S.–Mexico border"/>
<link wikidata="Q17513126" start="41693" end="41704" title="2014 American immigration crisis" label="2014 crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="41711" end="41726" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q774" start="41782" end="41791" title="Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q783" start="41793" end="41801" title="Honduras" label="Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="Q792" start="41807" end="41818" title="El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q11283415" start="41900" end="41906" title="Right of asylum" label="asylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q176310" start="42018" end="42036" title="List of countries by population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q811595" start="42278" end="42281" title="United States Department of Housing and Urban Development" label="HUD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769654" start="42294" end="42327" title="Annual Homeless Assessment Report to Congress" label="Annual Homeless Assessment Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q131327" start="42360" end="42368" title="Homelessness" label="homeless"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048763" start="42422" end="42441" title="Non-Hispanic or Latino whites" label="non-Hispanic Whites"/>
<link wikidata="Q5774888" start="42529" end="42541" title="African Americans in Texas" label="Black people"/>
<link wikidata="Q112030577" start="42557" end="42592" title="Native Americans in Texas" label="American Indians and Alaska Natives"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="42599" end="42614" title="Asian Americans" label="Asian Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283606" start="42621" end="42637" title="Native Hawaiians" label="Native Hawaiians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349057" start="42648" end="42665" title="Pacific Islander Americans" label="Pacific Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935055" start="42698" end="42715" title="Multiracial Americans" label="two or more races"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152773" start="42722" end="42751" title="Hispanics and Latinos in Texas" label="Hispanics or Latino Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="42885" end="42890" title="White Americans" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q581921" start="43905" end="43922" title="Mexican Americans" label="Mexican Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="44109" end="44115" title="German Americans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344183" start="44124" end="44131" title="English Americans" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="44140" end="44145" title="Irish Americans" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745454" start="44175" end="44183" title="American ancestry" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q974693" start="44192" end="44199" title="Italian Americans" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643509" start="44208" end="44214" title="Indian Americans" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406487" start="44223" end="44233" title="Salvadoran Americans" label="Salvadoran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476361" start="44242" end="44250" title="Scottish Americans" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657969" start="44259" end="44269" title="Vietnamese Americans" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146100" start="44278" end="44285" title="Chinese Americans" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q893594" start="44292" end="44304" title="Puerto Ricans" label="Puerto Rican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189552" start="44313" end="44319" title="Polish Americans" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5892930" start="44328" end="44336" title="Honduran Americans" label="Honduran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413685" start="44345" end="44353" title="Filipino Americans" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435494" start="44366" end="44378" title="Scotch-Irish Americans" label="Scotch-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q16001535" start="44421" end="44427" title="accent (sociolinguistics)" label="accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q33384" start="44431" end="44438" title="dialect" label="dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707309" start="44502" end="44515" title="Texan English" label="Texan English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="44563" end="44579" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q6144345" start="44589" end="44614" title="Southern American English" label="Southern American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q33289" start="44616" end="44631" title="Creole language" label="Creole language"/>
<link wikidata="Q17041575" start="44731" end="44755" title="Western American English" label="Western American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308526" start="44760" end="44784" title="General American English" label="General American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095935" start="44810" end="44825" title="Chicano English" label="Chicano English"/>
<link wikidata="Q48767245" start="44899" end="44923" title="African-American English" label="African-American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q33260" start="45249" end="45277" title="French-based creole language" label="French-based creole language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="45594" end="45601" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="45641" end="45648" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199" start="45672" end="45682" title="Vietnamese language" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="45688" end="45695" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9186" start="45712" end="45721" title="Cantonese" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q727694" start="45726" end="45734" title="Standard Chinese" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="45825" end="45831" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q126154" start="45843" end="45855" title="Texas German" label="Texas German"/>
<link wikidata="Q34057" start="45875" end="45882" title="Tagalog language" label="Tagalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="45916" end="45922" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083213" start="45934" end="45946" title="Cajun French" label="Cajun French"/>
<link wikidata="Q33388" start="45999" end="46007" title="Cherokee language" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q51739" start="46034" end="46058" title="Native American language" label="Native American language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162345" start="46310" end="46360" title="Native American religions" label="American Indian religions and spiritual traditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257538" start="46524" end="46558" title="Public Religion Research Institute" label="Public Religion Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="46667" end="46682" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="46692" end="46711" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="46747" end="46758" title="Protestantism" label="Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810029" start="47034" end="47071" title="Association of Religion Data Archives" label="Association of Religion Data Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q538791" start="47176" end="47208" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Galveston–Houston" label="Archdiocese of Galveston–Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q597526" start="47230" end="47242" title="Latin Church" label="Latin Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q868264" start="47276" end="47282" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q143954" start="47287" end="47297" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Fort Worth" label="Fort Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q974950" start="47307" end="47333" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of San Antonio" label="Archdiocese of San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q210181" start="47386" end="47396" title="Bible Belt" label="Bible Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="47536" end="47561" title="Evangelicalism" label="Evangelical Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121095" start="47618" end="47637" title="Mainline Protestant" label="Mainline Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922295" start="47746" end="47798" title="Black church" label="historically Black or African American Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="47919" end="47927" title="Baptists" label="Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="48068" end="48078" title="Methodism" label="Methodists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049261" start="48085" end="48102" title="Nondenominational Christianity" label="Nondenominational"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="48208" end="48220" title="Pentecostalism" label="Pentecostals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351880" start="48282" end="48309" title="Southern Baptist Convention" label="Southern Baptist Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422454" start="48350" end="48371" title="Assemblies of God USA" label="Assemblies of God USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121095" start="48440" end="48460" title="Mainline Protestants" label="Mainline Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q329646" start="48466" end="48489" title="United Methodist Church" label="United Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q463455" start="48532" end="48561" title="American Baptist Churches USA" label="American Baptist Churches USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q496651" start="48758" end="48791" title="National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc." label="National Baptist Convention (USA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q391499" start="48800" end="48823" title="Church of God in Christ" label="Church of God in Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="49004" end="49011" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q49377" start="49016" end="49033" title="Oriental Orthodox Churches" label="Oriental Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722984" start="49102" end="49145" title="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Texas" label="Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q584205" start="49161" end="49175" title="Nontrinitarianism" label="nontrinitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="49215" end="49239" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110310" start="49426" end="49467" title="Christian churches and churches of Christ" label="Christian Churches and Churches of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272775" start="49477" end="49495" title="Churches of Christ" label="Churches of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743136" start="49652" end="49679" title="American Baptist Association" label="American Baptist Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508059" start="49700" end="49720" title="Full Gospel Baptist Church Fellowship" label="Full Gospel Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531727" start="49722" end="49738" title="General Baptists" label="General Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500154" start="49740" end="49757" title="Free Will Baptist" label="Free Will Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970937" start="49779" end="49807" title="National Baptist Convention of America International, Inc." label="National Baptists of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974370" start="49809" end="49837" title="National Missionary Baptist Convention of America" label="National Missionary Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975049" start="49839" end="49866" title="National Primitive Baptist Convention of the U.S.A." label="National Primitive Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248425" start="49872" end="49901" title="Progressive National Baptist Convention" label="Progressive National Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q384121" start="49963" end="49966" title="African Methodist Episcopal Church" label="AME"/>
<link wikidata="Q384125" start="49968" end="49976" title="African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church" label="AME Zion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081108" start="49978" end="49981" title="Christian Methodist Episcopal Church" label="CME"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066164" start="49991" end="50012" title="Free Methodist Church" label="Free Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q700743" start="50123" end="50148" title="Church of God (Cleveland, Tennessee)" label="Church of God (Cleveland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466181" start="50197" end="50217" title="Oneness Pentecostalism" label="Oneness Pentecostals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903114" start="50241" end="50282" title="Bible Way Church of Our Lord Jesus Christ" label="Bible Way Church of Our Lord Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617023" start="50284" end="50290" title="Church of Our Lord Jesus Christ of the Apostolic Faith" label="COOLJC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6739460" start="50300" end="50335" title="Pentecostal Assemblies of the World" label="Pentecostal Assemblies of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714390" start="50477" end="50501" title="Anglican Catholic Church" label="Anglican Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q540728" start="50503" end="50529" title="Anglican Church in America" label="Anglican Church in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269815" start="50531" end="50563" title="Anglican Church in North America" label="Anglican Church in North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763544" start="50565" end="50593" title="Anglican Province of America" label="Anglican Province of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q25345800" start="50599" end="50633" title="Holy Catholic Church (Anglican Rite)" label="Holy Catholic Church Anglican Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="51138" end="51146" title="Atheism" label="atheists"/>
<link wikidata="Q288928" start="51154" end="51162" title="Agnosticism" label="agnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493578" start="51260" end="51271" title="Spiritual but not religious" label="irreligious"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="51279" end="51286" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="51293" end="51298" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="51305" end="51313" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="51323" end="51331" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="51654" end="51660" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q737685" start="51843" end="51849" title="Chabad" label="Chabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q205644" start="51869" end="51886" title="Conservative Jews" label="Conservative Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q80970" start="51894" end="51907" title="Orthodox Jews" label="Orthodox Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133485" start="51920" end="51931" title="Reform Judaism" label="Reform Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="51979" end="51987" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9316" start="51992" end="51999" title="Sikhism" label="Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="52110" end="52118" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610525" start="52158" end="52177" title="gross state product" label="gross state product"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241935" start="52208" end="52240" title="List of U.S. states by GDP (nominal)" label="second highest of any U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q845120" start="52277" end="52283" title="Economy of Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q19093" start="52302" end="52321" title="List of countries by GDP (nominal)" label="8th-largest economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372903" start="52415" end="52427" title="Poverty in the United States" label="poverty rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254793" start="52553" end="52594" title="List of country subdivisions by GDP over 200 billion USD" label="second-largest of any country subdivision"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746454" start="52612" end="52622" title="Economy of California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52878" end="52896" title="Energy in Texas#Petroleum" label="petroleum industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q192042" start="53059" end="53071" title="urban sprawl" label="urban sprawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q87742765" start="53126" end="53143" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Texas" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707663" start="53349" end="53370" title="Texas Enterprise Fund" label="Texas Enterprise Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q76615" start="53395" end="53416" title="List of U.S. states by number of Fortune 500 companies" label="second-highest number"/>
<link wikidata="Q76615" start="53425" end="53448" title="Fortune 500" label="&amp;quot;Fortune&amp;quot; 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q106920173" start="53630" end="53652" title="List of U.S. states by the number of millionaire households" label="millionaire households"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689379" start="53746" end="53760" title="Tax Foundation" label="Tax Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603703" start="53957" end="53973" title="state income tax" label="state income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q607695" start="54017" end="54029" title="property tax" label="property tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q11055488" start="54187" end="54196" title="sales tax" label="sales tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308197" start="54552" end="54572" title="Income tax in the United States" label="federal income taxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q326301" start="55264" end="55279" title="broiler chicken" label="broiler chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308640" start="55836" end="55855" title="Drought in the United States" label="hammered by drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602814" start="55970" end="55980" title="Spindletop" label="Spindletop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647484" start="56180" end="56208" title="Railroad Commission of Texas" label="Railroad Commission of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q862571" start="56236" end="56256" title="oil industry" label="oil and gas industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q351609" start="56304" end="56327" title="liquefied petroleum gas" label="liquefied petroleum gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="56359" end="56366" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795" start="56523" end="56568" title="Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries" label="Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q115827361" start="56684" end="56721" title="Oil and gas reserves and resource quantification" label="proved recoverable petroleum reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="56734" end="56743" title="Petroleum" label="crude oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328318" start="56784" end="56803" title="Natural-gas condensate" label="natural gas liquids"/>
<link wikidata="Q12353044" start="56822" end="56832" title="Oil refinery" label="refineries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230488" start="56863" end="56883" title="Port Arthur Refinery" label="Port Arthur Refinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="56965" end="56976" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356889" start="57121" end="57140" title="List of petroleum companies" label="petroleum companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q214763" start="57169" end="57183" title="ConocoPhillips" label="ConocoPhillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275577" start="57185" end="57198" title="EOG Resources" label="EOG Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q156238" start="57200" end="57210" title="ExxonMobil" label="ExxonMobil"/>
<link wikidata="Q656165" start="57212" end="57223" title="Halliburton" label="Halliburton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577587" start="57234" end="57246" title="Marathon Oil" label="Marathon Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2013357" start="57248" end="57268" title="Occidental Petroleum" label="Occidental Petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283291" start="57270" end="57283" title="Valero Energy" label="Valero Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988215" start="57289" end="57305" title="Western Refining" label="Western Refining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133499" start="57325" end="57358" title="Energy Information Administration" label="Energy Information Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q124164" start="57595" end="57614" title="alternating current" label="alternating current"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096907" start="57615" end="57625" title="power grid" label="power grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707775" start="57631" end="57652" title="Texas Interconnection" label="Texas Interconnection"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261751" start="57666" end="57677" title="Deregulation of the Texas electricity market" label="deregulated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945833" start="57862" end="57896" title="renewable energy commercialization" label="renewable energy commercialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024039" start="57919" end="57929" title="wind power in Texas" label="wind power"/>
<link wikidata="Q49833" start="58007" end="58019" title="wind turbine" label="wind turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508564" start="58026" end="58042" title="Roscoe Wind Farm" label="Roscoe Wind Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q981720" start="58046" end="58059" title="Roscoe, Texas" label="Roscoe, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q194356" start="58096" end="58105" title="wind farm" label="wind farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="58120" end="58128" title="megawatt" label="megawatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q18537" start="58287" end="58294" title="biomass" label="biomass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483757" start="58347" end="58358" title="solar power" label="solar power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707660" start="58512" end="58542" title="Texas Emerging Technology Fund" label="Texas Emerging Technology Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q466410" start="58570" end="58579" title="high tech" label="high tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227709" start="58655" end="58668" title="Silicon Hills" label="Silicon Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483878" start="58711" end="58726" title="Silicon Prairie" label="Silicon Prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q16971133" start="58815" end="58835" title="List of companies based in Austin, Texas" label="Austin in particular"/>
<link wikidata="Q30873" start="58848" end="58852" title="Dell" label="Dell"/>
<link wikidata="Q210075" start="58860" end="58867" title="Borland" label="Borland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934027" start="58869" end="58879" title="Forcepoint" label="Forcepoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045367" start="58881" end="58891" title="Indeed.com" label="Indeed.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q193412" start="58893" end="58910" title="Texas Instruments" label="Texas Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375548" start="58912" end="58925" title="Perot Systems" label="Perot Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990586" start="58927" end="58936" title="Rackspace" label="Rackspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q35476" start="58941" end="58949" title="AT&amp;amp;T" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="58956" end="59001" title="National Aeronautics and Space Administration" label="National Aeronautics and Space Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q208371" start="59009" end="59039" title="Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center" label="Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q193701" start="59089" end="59095" title="SpaceX" label="SpaceX"/>
<link wikidata="Q885836" start="59100" end="59111" title="Blue Origin" label="Blue Origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16558" start="59149" end="59159" title="Fort Worth, Texas" label="Fort Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240" start="59171" end="59186" title="Lockheed Martin" label="Lockheed Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627738" start="59194" end="59214" title="Lockheed Martin Aeronautics" label="Aeronautics division"/>
<link wikidata="Q815723" start="59219" end="59242" title="Bell Helicopter Textron" label="Bell Helicopter Textron"/>
<link wikidata="Q100026" start="59264" end="59284" title="F-16 Fighting Falcon" label="F-16 Fighting Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q29261" start="59346" end="59363" title="F-35 Lightning II" label="F-35 Lightning II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689019" start="59408" end="59417" title="Affluence in the United States" label="affluence"/>
<link wikidata="Q35476" start="59633" end="59641" title="AT&amp;amp;T Inc" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741634" start="59643" end="59657" title="Kimberly-Clark" label="Kimberly-Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q884711" start="59659" end="59670" title="Blockbuster Inc." label="Blockbuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q920037" start="59672" end="59684" title="J. C. Penney" label="J. C. Penney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809448" start="59686" end="59704" title="Whole Foods Market" label="Whole Foods Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518066" start="59710" end="59726" title="Tenet Healthcare" label="Tenet Healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135443" start="59781" end="59801" title="Highland Park Village" label="second shopping mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q181574" start="60020" end="60055" title="North American Free Trade Agreement" label="North American Free Trade Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360592" start="60103" end="60115" title="maquiladoras" label="maquiladoras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639780" start="60351" end="60371" title="regulatory authority" label="regulatory authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q568743" start="60377" end="60411" title="Texas Department of Transportation" label="Texas Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="60488" end="60509" title="public transportation" label="public transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298537" start="60546" end="60564" title="transportation hub" label="transportation hub"/>
<link wikidata="Q494978" start="60721" end="60740" title="Special Economic Zone" label="foreign trade zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q94297" start="60900" end="60912" title="Gulf Freeway" label="Gulf Freeway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61063" end="61076" title="List of Toll Roads in the United States#Texas" label="17 toll roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q16939396" start="61101" end="61108" title="tollway" label="tollway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109433" start="61123" end="61136" title="Central Texas" label="Central Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503903" start="61166" end="61183" title="Texas State Highway 130" label="State Highway 130"/>
<link wikidata="Q459096" start="61426" end="61465" title="Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport" label="Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q503308" start="61670" end="61688" title="Southwest Airlines" label="Southwest Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q613569" start="61737" end="61754" title="Dallas Love Field" label="Dallas Love Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742937" start="61756" end="61779" title="American Airlines Group" label="American Airlines Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q32396" start="61787" end="61795" title="American Airlines" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q371306" start="61798" end="61812" title="American Eagle Airlines" label="American Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811588" start="61944" end="61947" title="Airline hub" label="hub"/>
<link wikidata="Q744748" start="62009" end="62045" title="George Bush Intercontinental Airport" label="George Bush Intercontinental Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q174769" start="62086" end="62101" title="United Airlines" label="United Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430913" start="62354" end="62392" title="Austin-Bergstrom International Airport" label="Austin-Bergstrom International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q771340" start="62394" end="62418" title="William P. Hobby Airport" label="William P. Hobby Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432706" start="62420" end="62453" title="San Antonio International Airport" label="San Antonio International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q613569" start="62455" end="62472" title="Dallas Love Field" label="Dallas Love Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231062" start="62477" end="62506" title="El Paso International Airport" label="El Paso International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1657383" start="62587" end="62616" title="Del Rio International Airport" label="Del Rio International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="62646" end="62654" title="seaports" label="seaports"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210950" start="62691" end="62699" title="channel (geography)" label="channels"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="62777" end="62788" title="metric tons" label="metric tons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425393" start="62863" end="62867" title="Gulf Intracoastal Waterway" label="Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q756421" start="62883" end="62904" title="Intracoastal Waterway" label="Intracoastal Waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921365" start="62910" end="62925" title="Port of Houston" label="Port of Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2780148" start="63024" end="63029" title="List of world&amp;#x27;s busiest ports by cargo tonnage" label="tenth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640210" start="63056" end="63076" title="Houston Ship Channel" label="Houston Ship Channel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63149" end="63158" title="Cowboy#Texas tradition" label="tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307301" start="63198" end="63211" title="Cattle drives in the United States" label="cattle drives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307301" start="63270" end="63275" title="Cattle drives in the United States" label="drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927632" start="63360" end="63402" title="Buffalo Bayou, Brazos and Colorado Railway" label="Buffalo Bayou, Brazos and Colorado Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647484" start="63858" end="63886" title="Railroad Commission of Texas" label="Railroad Commission of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q380660" start="64061" end="64086" title="Dallas Area Rapid Transit" label="Dallas Area Rapid Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259601" start="64095" end="64133" title="Denton County Transportation Authority" label="Denton County Transportation Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472408" start="64146" end="64159" title="Trinity Metro" label="Trinity Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453601" start="64254" end="64277" title="Trinity Railway Express" label="Trinity Railway Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412403" start="64284" end="64297" title="commuter rail" label="commuter rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472408" start="64360" end="64373" title="Trinity Metro" label="Trinity Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q28228164" start="64416" end="64423" title="TEXRail" label="TEXRail"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647009" start="64524" end="64531" title="A-train (Denton County)" label="A-train"/>
<link wikidata="Q587830" start="64654" end="64699" title="Capital Metropolitan Transportation Authority" label="Capital Metropolitan Transportation Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q4338668" start="64742" end="64759" title="Capital MetroRail" label="Capital MetroRail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015387" start="64793" end="64847" title="Metropolitan Transit Authority of Harris County, Texas" label="Metropolitan Transit Authority of Harris County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q586193" start="64889" end="64898" title="METRORail" label="METRORail"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="64921" end="64927" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q756538" start="65046" end="65057" title="Texas Eagle" label="Texas Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q906130" start="65087" end="65101" title="Sunset Limited" label="Sunset Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q734900" start="65151" end="65166" title="Heartland Flyer" label="Heartland Flyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q211382" start="65220" end="65235" title="high-speed rail" label="high-speed rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707553" start="65344" end="65365" title="Texas Central Railway" label="Texas Central Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="65456" end="65463" title="Southern United States" label="(Dixie)"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="65502" end="65524" title="Southwestern United States" label="(Mexican/Anglo fusion)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25004446" start="65628" end="65645" title="breakfast burrito" label="breakfast burrito"/>
<link wikidata="Q862085" start="65886" end="65897" title="melting pot" label="melting pot"/>
<link wikidata="Q178521" start="66068" end="66074" title="cowboy" label="cowboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590660" start="66084" end="66092" title="westerns" label="westerns"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="66100" end="66121" title="country western music" label="country western music"/>
<link wikidata="Q168708" start="66227" end="66245" title="Dallas (1978 TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Dallas&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242320" start="66287" end="66313" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Mess with Texas" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Mess with Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761818" start="66347" end="66360" title="advertising campaign" label="advertisement"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="66599" end="66609" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="66773" end="66779" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113726" start="67055" end="67074" title="Houston Grand Opera" label="Houston Grand Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631506" start="67080" end="67106" title="Houston Symphony Orchestra" label="Houston Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3787020" start="67112" end="67126" title="Houston Ballet" label="Houston Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3612530" start="67132" end="67149" title="The Alley Theatre" label="The Alley Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q36649" start="67181" end="67187" title="Visual arts" label="visual"/>
<link wikidata="Q184485" start="67192" end="67207" title="performing arts" label="performing arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141400" start="67213" end="67237" title="Houston Theater District" label="Houston Theater District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414796" start="67411" end="67442" title="Modern Art Museum of Fort Worth" label="Modern Art Museum of Fort Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741629" start="67539" end="67557" title="Kimbell Art Museum" label="Kimbell Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q255559" start="67563" end="67581" title="Amon Carter Museum" label="Amon Carter Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971983" start="67587" end="67627" title="National Cowgirl Museum and Hall of Fame" label="National Cowgirl Museum and Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003053" start="67633" end="67660" title="Will Rogers Memorial Center" label="Will Rogers Memorial Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887300" start="67670" end="67691" title="Bass Performance Hall" label="Bass Performance Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865867" start="67706" end="67719" title="Arts District, Dallas" label="Arts District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038331" start="67723" end="67738" title="Downtown Dallas" label="Downtown Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q745866" start="67767" end="67787" title="Dallas Museum of Art" label="Dallas Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q670323" start="67793" end="67827" title="Morton H. Meyerson Symphony Center" label="Morton H. Meyerson Symphony Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5493322" start="67829" end="67869" title="the Margot and Bill Winspear Opera House" label="the Margot and Bill Winspear Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833157" start="67871" end="67927" title="the Trammell &amp;amp; Margaret Crow Collection of Asian Art" label="the Trammell &amp;amp; Margaret Crow Collection of Asian Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q921055" start="67937" end="67960" title="Nasher Sculpture Center" label="Nasher Sculpture Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021127" start="67966" end="67976" title="Deep Ellum" label="Deep Ellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="68055" end="68059" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="68064" end="68069" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q45001" start="68229" end="68250" title="Blind Lemon Jefferson" label="Blind Lemon Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q192133" start="68252" end="68266" title="Robert Johnson (musician)" label="Robert Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q314310" start="68281" end="68291" title="Lead Belly" label="Lead Belly"/>
<link wikidata="Q93349" start="68313" end="68325" title="Bessie Smith" label="Bessie Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942008" start="68375" end="68410" title="Music of Austin" label="The Live Music Capital of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q622425" start="68601" end="68610" title="nightclub" label="nightclub"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079139" start="68615" end="68625" title="6th Street (Austin)" label="6th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q131765" start="68660" end="68670" title="multimedia" label="multimedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q959755" start="68680" end="68698" title="South by Southwest" label="South by Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305766" start="68772" end="68790" title="Austin City Limits" label="Austin City Limits"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241091" start="68806" end="68839" title="Austin City Limits Music Festival" label="Austin City Limits Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q8071899" start="68848" end="68859" title="Zilker Park" label="Zilker Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q431415" start="68913" end="68925" title="Tejano Music" label="Tejano Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695191" start="68958" end="68977" title="Tejano Music Awards" label="Tejano Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409663" start="69102" end="69143" title="Major professional sports leagues in the United States and Canada" label="&amp;quot;Big Four&amp;quot; professional leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="69159" end="69162" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q204862" start="69174" end="69188" title="Dallas Cowboys" label="Dallas Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q223514" start="69197" end="69211" title="Houston Texans" label="Houston Texans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="69218" end="69221" title="Major League Baseball" label="MLB"/>
<link wikidata="Q848117" start="69233" end="69247" title="Houston Astros" label="Houston Astros"/>
<link wikidata="Q329816" start="69256" end="69269" title="Texas Rangers (baseball)" label="Texas Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="69278" end="69281" title="National Basketball Association" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q159729" start="69293" end="69310" title="San Antonio Spurs" label="San Antonio Spurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q161345" start="69316" end="69331" title="Houston Rockets" label="Houston Rockets"/>
<link wikidata="Q132893" start="69341" end="69357" title="Dallas Mavericks" label="Dallas Mavericks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="69368" end="69371" title="National Hockey League" label="NHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q208652" start="69382" end="69394" title="Dallas Stars" label="Dallas Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q179295" start="69401" end="69428" title="Dallas–Fort Worth metroplex" label="Dallas–Fort Worth metroplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q17039038" start="69444" end="69558" title="U.S. cities with teams from four major league sports" label="thirteen American metropolitan areas that host sports teams from all the &amp;quot;Big Four&amp;quot; professional leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593221" start="69614" end="69618" title="Women&amp;#x27;s National Basketball Association" label="WNBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q21334944" start="69629" end="69641" title="Dallas Wings" label="Dallas Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q18543" start="69650" end="69669" title="Major League Soccer" label="Major League Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q60643348" start="69677" end="69686" title="Austin FC" label="Austin FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q328313" start="69688" end="69705" title="Houston Dynamo FC" label="Houston Dynamo FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q642291" start="69710" end="69719" title="FC Dallas" label="FC Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101443" start="69730" end="69734" title="National Women&amp;#x27;s Soccer League" label="NWSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q15303416" start="69745" end="69757" title="Houston Dash" label="Houston Dash"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146583" start="69761" end="69781" title="College athletics" label="Collegiate athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="69834" end="69842" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="69865" end="69879" title="Division I-FBS" label="Division I-FBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146910" start="70142" end="70149" title="College rivalry" label="rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q640652" start="70162" end="70184" title="University of Oklahoma" label="University of Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304859" start="70228" end="70246" title="Red River Shootout" label="Red River Shootout"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870182" start="70371" end="70398" title="Battle for the Iron Skillet" label="Battle for the Iron Skillet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603217" start="70422" end="70440" title="Lone Star Showdown" label="Lone Star Showdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894798" start="70744" end="70777" title="University Interscholastic League" label="University Interscholastic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757701" start="70920" end="70940" title="high school football" label="high school football"/>
<link wikidata="Q207703" start="71004" end="71009" title="rodeo" label="rodeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q978232" start="71054" end="71066" title="Pecos, Texas" label="Pecos, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3787044" start="71079" end="71111" title="Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo" label="Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3965635" start="71151" end="71193" title="Southwestern Exposition and Livestock Show" label="Southwestern Exposition and Livestock Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497291" start="71354" end="71373" title="State Fair of Texas" label="State Fair of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q278452" start="71387" end="71396" title="Fair Park" label="Fair Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636819" start="71399" end="71419" title="Texas Motor Speedway" label="Texas Motor Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707177" start="71433" end="71450" title="NASCAR Cup Series" label="NASCAR Cup Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q832052" start="71455" end="71469" title="IndyCar Series" label="IndyCar Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q59626" start="71519" end="71542" title="Circuit of the Americas" label="Circuit of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="71572" end="71581" title="Formula 1" label="Formula 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q97627822" start="71607" end="71633" title="Panther City Lacrosse Club" label="Panther City Lacrosse Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550259" start="71673" end="71697" title="National Lacrosse League" label="National Lacrosse League"/>
<link wikidata="Q16157683" start="71835" end="71869" title="List of Presidents of the Republic of Texas" label="president of the Republic of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q456633" start="71871" end="71888" title="Mirabeau B. Lamar" label="Mirabeau B. Lamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q660818" start="71979" end="71986" title="league (unit)" label="leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q3899999" start="72150" end="72175" title="Permanent University Fund" label="Permanent University Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647529" start="72504" end="72526" title="Texas Education Agency" label="Texas Education Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6637338" start="72595" end="72605" title="List of school districts in Texas" label="over 1,000"/>
<link wikidata="Q398141" start="72606" end="72621" title="school district" label="school district"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596645" start="72649" end="72683" title="Stafford Municipal School District" label="Stafford Municipal School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q8161" start="72793" end="72796" title="taxation" label="tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q166332" start="72827" end="72841" title="eminent domain" label="eminent domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352546" start="72982" end="72997" title="Robin Hood plan" label="Robin Hood plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q83602" start="73126" end="73139" title="homeschooling" label="homeschooling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603801" start="73180" end="73228" title="State of Texas Assessments of Academic Readiness" label="State of Texas Assessments of Academic Readiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q199657" start="73312" end="73319" title="reading (activity)" label="reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="73330" end="73341" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q14565700" start="73356" end="73370" title="social studies" label="social studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329394" start="73427" end="73451" title="No Child Left Behind Act" label="No Child Left Behind Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707518" start="73475" end="73515" title="Texas Assessment of Knowledge and Skills" label="Texas Assessment of Knowledge and Skills"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="73587" end="73600" title="Western world" label="Western world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060630" start="73602" end="73628" title="school corporal punishment" label="school corporal punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11294156" start="73731" end="73738" title="paddle (spanking)" label="paddled"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494" start="73887" end="73898" title="Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="73900" end="73907" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="73913" end="73921" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="74019" end="74052" title="The University of Texas at Austin" label="The University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q49212" start="74057" end="74081" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M University" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472358" start="74266" end="74287" title="University of Houston" label="University of Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423756" start="74292" end="74313" title="Texas Tech University" label="Texas Tech University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707732" start="74373" end="74414" title="Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board" label="Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="74529" end="74562" title="The University of Texas at Austin" label="The University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q49212" start="74565" end="74589" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M University" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423756" start="74592" end="74613" title="Texas Tech University" label="Texas Tech University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472358" start="74616" end="74637" title="University of Houston" label="University of Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q842909" start="74640" end="74655" title="Rice University" label="Rice University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230739" start="74658" end="74694" title="The University of Texas at Arlington" label="The University of Texas at Arlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781394" start="74697" end="74730" title="The University of Texas at Dallas" label="The University of Texas at Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q860527" start="74733" end="74762" title="The University of North Texas" label="The University of North Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093110" start="74765" end="74799" title="The University of Texas at El Paso" label="The University of Texas at El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q183170" start="74844" end="74882" title="The University of Texas at San Antonio" label="The University of Texas at San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495387" start="74885" end="74907" title="Texas State University" label="Texas State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707748" start="75044" end="75064" title="Texas House Bill 588" label="Texas House Bill 588"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="75221" end="75254" title="The University of Texas at Austin" label="The University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5901376" start="75456" end="75472" title="Hopwood v. Texas" label="Hopwood v. Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3899999" start="75628" end="75653" title="Permanent University Fund" label="Permanent University Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140391" start="75767" end="75793" title="University of Texas System" label="University of Texas System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781044" start="75802" end="75822" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M University System" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M System"/>
<link wikidata="Q569446" start="75863" end="75891" title="University of Houston System" label="University of Houston System"/>
<link wikidata="Q385046" start="75897" end="75929" title="University of North Texas System" label="University of North Texas System"/>
<link wikidata="Q623581" start="75935" end="75953" title="Texas State University System" label="Texas State System"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407664" start="75963" end="75980" title="Texas Tech University System" label="Texas Tech System"/>
<link wikidata="Q842909" start="76135" end="76150" title="Rice University" label="Rice University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="76152" end="76185" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="The University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q49212" start="76191" end="76215" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M University" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472358" start="76221" end="76242" title="University of Houston" label="University of Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423756" start="76247" end="76268" title="Texas Tech University" label="Texas Tech University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140391" start="76370" end="76396" title="University of Texas System" label="University of Texas System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781044" start="76401" end="76432" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M University System" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M University System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311379" start="77260" end="77278" title="Trinity University (Texas)" label="Trinity University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805145" start="77568" end="77596" title="Abilene Christian University" label="Abilene Christian University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507065" start="77668" end="77700" title="George Bush Presidential Library" label="George Bush Presidential Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853779" start="77734" end="77774" title="Lyndon Baines Johnson Library and Museum" label="Lyndon Baines Johnson Library and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508430" start="77821" end="77856" title="George W. Bush Presidential Library" label="George W. Bush Presidential Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536258" start="77860" end="77889" title="Southern Methodist University" label="Southern Methodist University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3684876" start="77981" end="78002" title="The Commonwealth Fund" label="The Commonwealth Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q3999881" start="78379" end="78410" title="Trust for America&amp;#x27;s Health" label="Trust for America&amp;#x27;s Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="78446" end="78453" title="obesity" label="obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q384671" start="78518" end="78535" title="Men&amp;#x27;s Health (magazine)" label="Men&amp;#x27;s Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q17943" start="78669" end="78678" title="Arlington, Texas" label="Arlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134451" start="78921" end="78952" title="Maternal Healthcare System in Texas" label="highest maternal mortality rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q108373970" start="79222" end="79241" title="Texas Heartbeat Act" label="Texas Heartbeat Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="79256" end="79264" title="abortion" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="79731" end="79746" title="List of colleges and universities in Texas#Health science" label="medical schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q618211" start="79777" end="79786" title="optometry" label="optometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q898943" start="79810" end="79827" title="Biosafety Level 4" label="Biosafety Level 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q921264" start="79857" end="79895" title="The University of Texas Medical Branch" label="The University of Texas Medical Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3985377" start="79938" end="79982" title="Southwest Foundation for Biomedical Research" label="Southwest Foundation for Biomedical Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323511" start="80061" end="80081" title="Texas Medical Center" label="Texas Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525831" start="80288" end="80336" title="University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center" label="University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3965584" start="80487" end="80513" title="South Texas Medical Center" label="South Texas Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4005868" start="80599" end="80640" title="UTHSCSA" label="University of Texas Health Science Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q464880" start="80729" end="80755" title="American Heart Association" label="American Heart Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725999" start="80764" end="80811" title="University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center" label="University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725999" start="80834" end="80867" title="University of Texas Southwestern Medical School" label="institution&amp;#x27;s medical school"/>
<link wikidata="Q339619" start="80900" end="80915" title="Nobel laureates" label="Nobel laureates"/>
<link wikidata="Q196177" start="80971" end="80989" title="Texas Constitution" label="Texas Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603671" start="81021" end="81027" title="State constitution (United States)" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="81136" end="81155" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="federal counterpart"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="81238" end="81254" title="executive branch" label="executive branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444388" start="81370" end="81388" title="Secretary of State of Texas" label="secretary of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="81652" end="81662" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="81673" end="81687" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="81737" end="81747" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931979" start="81769" end="81780" title="Bob Bullock" label="Bob Bullock"/>
<link wikidata="Q878323" start="81828" end="81836" title="List of Governors of Texas" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q639115" start="81838" end="81857" title="Lieutenant Governor of Texas" label="lieutenant governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707525" start="81910" end="81926" title="Texas Attorney General" label="attorney general"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647484" start="81971" end="81996" title="Texas Railroad Commission" label="Texas Railroad Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="82061" end="82070" title="Bicameralism" label="bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653964" start="82071" end="82088" title="Texas Legislature" label="Texas Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q827550" start="82105" end="82129" title="Texas House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q515426" start="82155" end="82161" title="Texas Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574310" start="82184" end="82204" title="Speaker of the Texas House of Representatives" label="Speaker of the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q191891" start="82489" end="82500" title="fiscal year" label="fiscal year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303153" start="82525" end="82543" title="judiciary of Texas" label="judiciary of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3694683" start="82681" end="82700" title="Texas Supreme Court" label="Texas Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3694688" start="82727" end="82758" title="Texas Court of Criminal Appeals" label="Texas Court of Criminal Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858781" start="82926" end="82955" title="Capital punishment in Texas" label="its use of capital punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660855" start="83047" end="83063" title="Gregg v. Georgia" label="Gregg v. Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q510865" start="83081" end="83102" title="Texas Ranger Division" label="Texas Ranger Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3985379" start="83110" end="83143" title="Texas Department of Public Safety" label="Texas Department of Public Safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q35535" start="83149" end="83171" title="police" label="law enforcement agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q471855" start="83187" end="83199" title="jurisdiction" label="jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q117252847" start="83273" end="83279" title="Murder in Texas law" label="murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825410" start="83324" end="83335" title="riot police" label="riot police"/>
<link wikidata="Q250040" start="83496" end="83513" title="Stephen F. Austin" label="Stephen F. Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947899" start="83691" end="83699" title="American Old West" label="Old West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191952" start="83961" end="83970" title="home-rule" label="home-rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q946819" start="84029" end="84044" title="council-manager" label="council-manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q3907432" start="84215" end="84229" title="Politics of Texas" label="Texas politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q721556" start="84911" end="84918" title="Liberalism in the United States" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="85031" end="85043" title="Conservatism in the United States" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q311135" start="85214" end="85223" title="Karl Rove" label="Karl Rove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058501" start="85402" end="85410" title="Sun Belt" label="Sun Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4601897" start="85468" end="85492" title="2003 Texas redistricting" label="2003 Texas redistricting"/>
<link wikidata="Q180390" start="85538" end="85547" title="Tom DeLay" label="Tom DeLay"/>
<link wikidata="Q476310" start="85628" end="85642" title="gerrymandering" label="gerrymandering"/>
<link wikidata="Q526999" start="85735" end="85741" title="quorum" label="quorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="86328" end="86341" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6509111" start="86360" end="86409" title="League of United Latin American Citizens v. Perry" label="League of United Latin American Citizens v. Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098244" start="86493" end="86513" title="Texas elections, 2014" label="2014 Texas elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q19042" start="86519" end="86537" title="Tea Party movement" label="Tea Party movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214174" start="86627" end="86638" title="Dan Patrick (politician)" label="Dan Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388290" start="86663" end="86673" title="Ken Paxton" label="Ken Paxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605224" start="86770" end="86781" title="Greg Abbott" label="Greg Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698984" start="86821" end="86840" title="fiscal conservatism" label="fiscal conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414298" start="87035" end="87056" title="social conservatism" label="socially conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q160636" start="87297" end="87307" title="Rio Grande" label="Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057263" start="87322" end="87349" title="Mexico–United States border" label="Mexico–United States border"/>
<link wikidata="Q110252005" start="87556" end="87581" title="2024 United States elections" label="midterm elections of 2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="87631" end="87641" title="U.S. House of Representatives" label="U.S. House"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="87657" end="87667" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="87685" end="87698" title="United States Senate" label="U.S. Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q113893555" start="87707" end="87735" title="119th United States Congress" label="119th United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846951" start="87747" end="87779" title="Texas Congressional Districts" label="Congressional districts in Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q719568" start="87855" end="87866" title="John Cornyn" label="John Cornyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036942" start="87871" end="87879" title="Ted Cruz" label="Ted Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q30103" start="88023" end="88038" title="minority groups" label="minority groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051256" start="88182" end="88196" title="Cato Institute" label="Cato Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603049" start="88465" end="88476" title="Green Party of Texas" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q558334" start="88485" end="88502" title="Libertarian Party (United States)" label="Libertarian Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858781" start="88645" end="88663" title="capital punishment in Texas" label="capital punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="88679" end="88695" title="US Supreme Court" label="US Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6600999" start="88819" end="88861" title="List of U.S. states and territories by incarceration and correctional supervision rate" label="8th highest incarceration rate in the U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q157479" start="88884" end="88905" title="right of self-defense" label="right of self-defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q40283" start="88910" end="88922" title="Self-defense" label="self defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q64876956" start="89055" end="89063" title="abortion in Texas" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112483" start="89102" end="89118" title="Outline of Texas" label="Outline of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6018604" start="89121" end="89152" title="Index of Texas-related articles" label="Index of Texas-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5976188" start="89155" end="89180" title="List of people from Texas" label="List of people from Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q586698" start="89183" end="89204" title="USS Texas" label="USS &amp;quot;Texas&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29811" wikidata="Q34171" url="?curid=29811" title="Kra–Dai languages">
<text>The Kra–Dai languages ( , also known as Tai–Kadai and Daic ), are a language family in mainland Southeast Asia, southern China, and northeastern India. All languages in the family are tonal, including Thai and Lao, the national languages of Thailand and Laos, respectively. Around 93 million people speak Kra–Dai languages; 60% of those speak Thai. &quot;Ethnologue&quot; lists 95 languages in the family, with 62 of these being in the Tai branch.

==Names==
The name &quot;Kra–Dai&quot; was proposed by Weera Ostapirat (2000), as Kra and Dai are the reconstructed autonyms of the Kra and Tai branches, respectively. &quot;Kra–Dai&quot; has since been used by the majority of specialists working on Southeast Asian linguistics, including Norquest (2007), Pittayaporn (2009), Baxter &amp; Sagart (2014), and Enfield &amp; Comrie (2015).

The name &quot;Tai–Kadai&quot; is used in many references, as well as &quot;Ethnologue&quot; and &quot;Glottolog&quot;, but Ostapirat (2000) and others suggest that it is problematic and confusing, preferring the name &quot;Kra–Dai&quot; instead. &quot;Tai–Kadai&quot; comes from an obsolete bifurcation of the family into two branches, Tai and Kadai, which had first been proposed by Paul K. Benedict (1942). In 1942, Benedict placed three Kra languages (Gelao, Laqua (Qabiao), and Lachi) together with Hlai in a group that he called &quot;Kadai&quot;, from &quot;ka&quot;, meaning &quot;person&quot; in Gelao and Laqua and &quot;dai&quot;, a form of a Hlai autonym. Benedict&#x27;s (1942) &quot;Kadai&quot; group was based on his observation that Kra and Hlai languages have Austronesian-like numerals. However, this classification is now universally rejected as obsolete after Ostapirat (2000) demonstrated the coherence of the Kra branch, which does not subgroup with the Hlai branch as Benedict (1942) had proposed. &quot;Kadai&quot; is sometimes used to refer to the entire Kra–Dai family, including by Solnit (1988). Adding to the confusion, some other references restrict the usage of &quot;Kadai&quot; to only the Kra branch of the family.

The name &quot;Daic&quot; is used by Roger Blench (2008).

==Origin==
James R. Chamberlain (2016) proposes that the Tai–Kadai (Kra–Dai) language family was formed as early as the 12th century BCE in the middle of the Yangtze basin, coinciding roughly with the establishment of the Chu fiefdom and the beginning of the Zhou dynasty. The high diversity of Kra–Dai languages in southern China, especially in Guizhou and Hainan, points to that being an origin of the Kra–Dai language family, founding the nations that later became Thailand and Laos in what had been Austroasiatic territory. Genetic and linguistic analyses show great homogeneity among Kra–Dai-speaking people in Thailand.

Although the position of Kra–Dai in relation to Austronesian is still contested, some propose that Kra–Dai and Austronesian are genetically connected. Weera Ostapirat (2005) sets out a series of regular sound correspondences between them, assuming a model of a primary split between the two; they would then be co-ordinate branches. Ostapirat (2013) continues to maintain that Kra–Dai and Austronesian are sister language families, based on certain phonological correspondences. On the other hand, Laurent Sagart (2008) proposes that Kra–Dai is a later form of what he calls &quot;FATK&quot; (Formosan Ancestor of Tai–Kadai) a branch of Austronesian belonging to the subgroup &quot;Puluqic&quot;, developed in Taiwan, whose speakers migrated back to the mainland, to Guangdong, Hainan, and north Vietnam, around the second half of the 3rd millennium BCE. Upon their arrival in this region, they underwent linguistic contact with an unknown population, resulting in a partial relexification of FATK vocabulary. Erica Brindley (2015) supports Sagart&#x27;s hypothesis, arguing that the radically different Kra-Dai history of migration to the mainland (as opposed to the Philippines for Proto-Austronesian) and extended contact with Austro-Asiatic and Sinitic speakers would make the relationship appear more distant. She also suggests that the presence of only the most basic Austronesian vocabulary in Kra-Dai makes this scenario of relexification more plausible. 

Besides various concrete pieces of evidence for a Kra–Dai existence in present-day Guangdong, remnants of Kra–Dai languages spoken further north can be found in unearthed inscriptional materials and non-Han substrata in Min and Wu Chinese.

Wolfgang Behr (2002, 2006, 2009, 2017) points out that most non-Sinitic words found in Chu inscriptional materials are of Kra–Dai origin. For example, the Chu graph for &#x27;one, once&#x27; written as (? &lt; OC *nnəŋ) in the &quot;E jun qijie&quot; 鄂君啟筯 bronze tally and in Warring States bamboo inscriptions, which represents a Kra–Dai areal word; compare Proto-Tai *hnïŋ &quot;=&quot; *hnɯŋ (Siamese 22nɯŋ, Dai 33nɯŋ, Longzhou nəəŋA etc.) &#x27;one, once&#x27;.

In the early 1980s, Wei Qingwen (韦庆稳), a Zhuang linguist, proposed that the Old Yue language recorded in the Song of the Yue Boatman is in fact a language ancestral to Zhuang. Wei used reconstructed Old Chinese for the characters and discovered that the resulting vocabulary showed strong resemblance to modern Zhuang. Later, Zhengzhang Shangfang (1991) followed Wei&#x27;s proposal but used Thai script for comparison, since this orthography dates from the 13th century and preserves archaisms not found in modern pronunciation. Zhengzhang notes that &#x27;evening, night, dark&#x27; bears the C tone in Wuming Zhuang &quot;xamC2&quot; and &quot;ɣamC2&quot; &#x27;night&#x27;. The item &quot;raa&quot; normally means &#x27;we (inclusive)&#x27; but in some places, e.g., Tai Lue and White Tai, it means &#x27;I&#x27;. However, Laurent Sagart criticizes Zhengzhang&#x27;s interpretation as anachronistic, because however archaic the Thai script is, the Thai language was only written 2,000 years after the song had been recorded; even if Proto-Kam–Tai had emerged by the 6th century BCE, its pronunciation would have been substantially different from Thai.

==Internal classification==

Kra–Dai consists of at least five well-established branches, namely Kra, Kam–Sui, Tai, Be, and Hlai (Ostapirat 2005:109).

;Tai: southern China and Southeast Asia
;Kra: southern China, northern Vietnam; called &quot;Kadai&quot; in &quot;Ethnologue&quot; and &quot;Geyang&quot; (仡央) in Chinese
;Kam–Sui: Guizhou and Guangxi, China
;Be: Hainan; possibly also includes Jizhao of Guangdong
;Hlai: Hainan

Chinese linguists have also proposed a Kam–Tai group that includes Kam–Sui, Tai, and Be.

Kra–Dai languages that are not securely classified and may constitute independent Kra–Dai branches include the following:
* Lakkia and Biao, which may or may not subgroup with each other, are difficult to classify due to aberrant vocabulary but are sometimes classified as sisters of Kam–Sui (Solnit 1988).
* Jiamao of southern Hainan, China, is an aberrant Kra–Dai language traditionally classified as a Hlai language, although Jiamao contains many words of non-Hlai origin.
* Jizhao of Guangdong, China, is currently unclassified within Kra–Dai but appears to be most closely related to Be (Ostapirat 1998).

Kra–Dai languages of mixed origins are:
* &quot;Hezhang Buyi&quot;: Northern Tai and Kra
* &quot;E&quot;: Northern Tai and Pinghua Chinese
* &quot;Caolan&quot;: Northern Tai and Central Tai
* &quot;Jiamao&quot;: Hlai and other unknown elements (Austroasiatic?)

===Edmondson and Solnit (1988)===
An early but influential classification, with the traditional Kam–Tai clade, was Edmondson and Solnit&#x27;s classification from 1988:
* Kra–Dai
** Kra (Geyang)
** Hlai
** Kam–Tai
**** Lakkia–Biao
**** Kam–Sui
**** Be
**** Tai

This classification is also used by Liang and Zhang (1996), Chamberlain (2016: 38), and &quot;Ethnologue&quot;, though by 2009 Lakkia was made a third branch of Kam–Tai and Biao was moved into Kam–Sui.

===Ostapirat (2005); Norquest (2007)===
Weera Ostapirat (2005:128) suggests the possibility of Kra and Kam–Sui being grouped together as Northern Kra–Dai and Hlai with Tai as Southern Kra–Dai. Norquest (2007) has further updated this classification to include Lakkia and Be. Norquest notes that Lakkia shares some similarities with Kam–Sui, while Be shares some similarities with Tai. Norquest (2007:15) notes that Be shares various similarities with Northern Tai languages in particular. Following Ostapirat, Norquest adopts the name Kra–Dai for the family as a whole. The following tree of Kra–Dai is from Norquest (2007:16):
* Kra–Dai
** Northern
*** Kra
*** Northeastern 
**** Lakkia
**** Kam–Sui
** Southern
*** Hlai
*** Be–Tai
**** Tai
**** Be
Additionally, Norquest (2007) also proposes a reconstruction for Proto-Southern Kra–Dai.

===Norquest (2015, 2020)===
A classification of Kra–Dai by Norquest (2015, 2020) is provided as follows:
* Kra–Dai
** Kra
** Eastern Kra–Dai
*** Biao
*** Lakkja–Kam–Tai
**** Lakkja
**** Kam–Tai 
***** Kam–Sui
***** Western Kam–Tai 
****** Hlai
****** Be–Tai
******* Ong-Be
******* Tai
===Norquest (2021)===
Based on shared lexical innovations, Norquest (2021) significantly revised his classification of Kra–Dai. Together, Biao and Lakkja form the most divergent subgroup of Kra–Dai. Be–Tai and Hlai are placed together as part of a &quot;Hlai–Tai&quot; group.
* Kra–Dai
** Biao–Lakkja
** Kam–Tai
*** Kam–Sui
*** Kra–Tai
**** Kra
**** Hlai–Tai
***** Hlai
***** Be–Tai
****** Be
****** Tai
==Hypotheses regarding external relationships==
===Austro-Tai===

Several scholars have presented evidence that Kra–Dai may be related to, or even a branch of, the Austronesian language family. There are a number of possible cognates in the core vocabulary, displaying regular sound correspondences. Among proponents, there is yet no agreement as to whether they are a sister group to Austronesian in a family called Austro-Tai, a back-migration from Taiwan to the mainland or a later migration from the Philippines to Hainan during the Austronesian expansion.

The inclusion of Japanese in the Austro-Tai family, as proposed by Paul K. Benedict in the late 20th century, is not supported by the current proponents of the Austro-Tai hypothesis.

===Sino-Tai===
The Kra–Dai languages were formerly considered to be part of the Sino-Tibetan family, partly because they contain large numbers of words that are similar to Sino-Tibetan languages. However, Western scholars generally consider them to be Sinitic loanwords and note that basic vocabulary words in Kra–Dai languages often have cognates with Austronesian instead. Outside China, the Kra–Dai languages are now classified as an independent family. In China, they are called &quot;Dong–Tai&quot; (侗台) or &quot;Zhuang–Dong&quot; (壮侗) languages and are generally included, along with the Hmong–Mien languages, in the Sino-Tibetan family.

===Hmong–Mien===
Kosaka (2002) has argued specifically for a Miao–Dai family. Based on proposed lexical cognates, he proposes a genetic relation between Hmong–Mien and Kra–Dai languages. He further suggests that similarities between Kra–Dai and Austronesian are due to later areal contact in the coastal areas of eastern and southeastern China or an older ancestral relation (Proto-East Asian).

===Japonic===
Vovin (2014) has proposed that the location of the Japonic Urheimat (linguistic homeland) is in southern China. He argues for typological evidence that Proto-Japanese may have been a monosyllabic, SVO syntax and isolating language, which is also characteristic of Kra–Dai languages. According to him, these common features are however not due to a genetic relationship but rather the result of intense contact.

==Reconstruction==
==See also==

* Austric languages
* Proto-Hlai language
* Proto-Hmong–Mien language
* Proto-Kam–Sui language
* Proto-Kra language
* Proto-Tibeto-Burman language
* Proto-Tai language
* Sino-Austronesian languages

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* Blench, Roger. 2004. &quot;Stratification in the peopling of China: how far does the linguistic evidence match genetics and archaeology?&quot; Paper for the Symposium &quot;Human migrations in continental East Asia and Taiwan: genetic, linguistic and archaeological evidence&quot;. Geneva 10–13 June 2004. Université de Genève.
* 
* Edmondson, J.A. and D.B. Solnit eds. 1997. &quot;Comparative Kadai: the Tai branch&quot;. Dallas: Summer Institute of Linguistics and the University of Texas at Arlington. 
* 
* 
* 


==Further reading==
* Chamberlain, James R. (2016). Kra-Dai and the Proto-History of South China and Vietnam. &quot;Journal of the Siam Society, 104&quot;, 27-76.
* Diller, A., J. Edmondson, &amp; Yongxian Luo, ed., (2005). &quot;The Tai–Kadai languages&quot;. London [etc.]: Routledge. 
* Edmondson, J. A. (1986). &quot;Kam tone splits and the variation of breathiness&quot;.
* Edmondson, J. A., &amp; Solnit, D. B. (eds.) (1988). &quot;Comparative Kadai: linguistic studies beyond Tai&quot;. Summer Institute of Linguistics publications in linguistics, no. 86. Arlington, TX: Summer Institute of Linguistics. 
* Mann, Noel, Wendy Smith and Eva Ujlakyova. 2009. &quot;Linguistic clusters of Mainland Southeast Asia: an overview of the language families&quot;. Chiang Mai: Payap University.
* Ostapirat, Weera. (2000). &quot;Proto-Kra.&quot; &quot;Linguistics of the Tibeto-Burman Area&quot; 23 (1): 1-251.
* Somsonge Burusphat, &amp; Sinnott, M. (1998). &quot;Kam–Tai oral literatures: collaborative research project between&quot;. Salaya Nakhon Pathom, Thailand: Institute of Language and Culture for Rural Development, Mahidol University. 

==External links==
* Word lists of Tai–Kadai languages from the Austronesian Basic Vocabulary Database
* Tai–Kadai word lists by Ilya Peiros (Intercontinental Dictionary Series)
* StarLing: Tai–Kadai 100-word lists and etymology
** StarLing: Zhuang–Tai 100-word lists and etymology
** StarLing: Kam–Sui 100-word lists and etymology
* Appendix:Kra–Dai Swadesh lists (from Wiktionary&#x27;s )
* Kra–Dai vocabulary lists (from Wiktionary&#x27;s )</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34171" start="4" end="21" title="Kra–Dai languages" label="Kra–Dai languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q34171" start="40" end="49" title="Kra–Dai languages" label="Tai–Kadai"/>
<link wikidata="Q34171" start="54" end="58" title="Kra–Dai languages" label="Daic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25295" start="68" end="83" title="language family" label="language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q43467" start="87" end="110" title="mainland Southeast Asia" label="mainland Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138179" start="112" end="126" title="southern China" label="southern China"/>
<link wikidata="Q863038" start="132" end="150" title="northeastern India" label="northeastern India"/>
<link wikidata="Q833734" start="184" end="189" title="tonal language" label="tonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9217" start="201" end="205" title="Thai language" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q9211" start="210" end="213" title="Lao language" label="Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="241" end="249" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="254" end="258" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q14790" start="355" end="365" title="Ethnologue" label="Ethnologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q749720" start="436" end="446" title="Tai languages" label="Tai branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q22920493" start="565" end="573" title="Exonym and endonym" label="autonyms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022087" start="581" end="584" title="Kra languages" label="Kra"/>
<link wikidata="Q749720" start="589" end="592" title="Tai languages" label="Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q104223800" start="738" end="746" title="Peter K. Norquest" label="Norquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010321" start="775" end="781" title="William H. Baxter" label="Baxter"/>
<link wikidata="Q835793" start="788" end="794" title="Laurent Sagart" label="Sagart"/>
<link wikidata="Q705700" start="821" end="827" title="Bernard Comrie" label="Comrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q14790" start="913" end="923" title="Ethnologue" label="Ethnologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q17165062" start="940" end="949" title="Glottolog" label="Glottolog"/>
<link wikidata="Q532753" start="1222" end="1238" title="Paul K. Benedict" label="Paul K. Benedict"/>
<link wikidata="Q56401" start="1293" end="1298" title="Gelao languages" label="Gelao"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436700" start="1307" end="1313" title="Qabiao language" label="Qabiao"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583606" start="1320" end="1325" title="Lachi language" label="Lachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023648" start="1341" end="1345" title="Hlai languages" label="Hlai"/>
<link wikidata="Q49228" start="1614" end="1626" title="Austronesian languages" label="Austronesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4088081" start="2124" end="2136" title="Roger Blench" label="Roger Blench"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413" start="2304" end="2317" title="Yangtze basin" label="Yangtze basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q504759" start="2368" end="2379" title="Chu (state)" label="Chu fiefdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="2405" end="2417" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q47097" start="2492" end="2499" title="Guizhou" label="Guizhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q42200" start="2504" end="2510" title="Hainan" label="Hainan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33199" start="2649" end="2662" title="Austroasiatic languages" label="Austroasiatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q917520" start="4409" end="4432" title="Chinese bronze inscriptions" label="inscriptional materials"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4445" end="4454" title="Stratum (linguistics)#Substratum" label="substrata"/>
<link wikidata="Q56504" start="4458" end="4461" title="Min Chinese" label="Min"/>
<link wikidata="Q34290" start="4466" end="4476" title="Wu Chinese" label="Wu Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q35137" start="4689" end="4691" title="Old Chinese" label="OC"/>
<link wikidata="Q13216" start="4987" end="4993" title="Zhuang language" label="Zhuang"/>
<link wikidata="Q4536509" start="5022" end="5038" title="Old Yue language" label="Old Yue language"/>
<link wikidata="Q15027378" start="5055" end="5078" title="Song of the Yue Boatman" label="Song of the Yue Boatman"/>
<link wikidata="Q35137" start="5145" end="5156" title="Old Chinese" label="Old Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9088401" start="5272" end="5292" title="Zhengzhang Shangfang" label="Zhengzhang Shangfang"/>
<link wikidata="Q835793" start="5773" end="5787" title="Laurent Sagart" label="Laurent Sagart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921933" start="5983" end="5996" title="Kam–Tai languages" label="Proto-Kam–Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q749720" start="6256" end="6259" title="Tai languages" label="Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022087" start="6296" end="6299" title="Kra languages" label="Kra"/>
<link wikidata="Q14790" start="6369" end="6379" title="Ethnologue" label="Ethnologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023641" start="6426" end="6433" title="Kam–Sui languages" label="Kam–Sui"/>
<link wikidata="Q47097" start="6435" end="6442" title="Guizhou" label="Guizhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q15176" start="6447" end="6454" title="Guangxi" label="Guangxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093790" start="6463" end="6465" title="Be languages" label="Be"/>
<link wikidata="Q42200" start="6467" end="6473" title="Hainan" label="Hainan"/>
<link wikidata="Q45242758" start="6498" end="6504" title="Jizhao language" label="Jizhao"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="6508" end="6517" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023648" start="6519" end="6523" title="Hlai languages" label="Hlai"/>
<link wikidata="Q42200" start="6525" end="6531" title="Hainan" label="Hainan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921933" start="6572" end="6579" title="Kam–Tai languages" label="Kam–Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023641" start="6600" end="6607" title="Kam–Sui languages" label="Kam–Sui"/>
<link wikidata="Q749720" start="6609" end="6612" title="Tai languages" label="Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093790" start="6618" end="6620" title="Be languages" label="Be"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027879" start="6747" end="6753" title="Lakkia language" label="Lakkia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4902547" start="6758" end="6762" title="Biao language" label="Biao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567633" start="6896" end="6903" title="sister group" label="sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023641" start="6907" end="6914" title="Kam–Sui languages" label="Kam–Sui"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178570" start="6932" end="6938" title="Jiamao language" label="Jiamao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023648" start="7028" end="7041" title="Hlai languages" label="Hlai language"/>
<link wikidata="Q45242758" start="7101" end="7107" title="Jizhao language" label="Jizhao"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="7111" end="7120" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093790" start="7212" end="7214" title="Be languages" label="Be"/>
<link wikidata="Q48847674" start="7282" end="7294" title="Hezhang Buyi language" label="Hezhang Buyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059014" start="7302" end="7314" title="Northern Tai languages" label="Northern Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022087" start="7319" end="7322" title="Kra languages" label="Kra"/>
<link wikidata="Q35386" start="7331" end="7332" title="E language" label="E"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059014" start="7340" end="7352" title="Northern Tai languages" label="Northern Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735715" start="7357" end="7364" title="Pinghua" label="Pinghua"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446682" start="7381" end="7387" title="Caolan language" label="Caolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059014" start="7395" end="7407" title="Northern Tai languages" label="Northern Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061891" start="7412" end="7423" title="Central Tai languages" label="Central Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178570" start="7432" end="7438" title="Jiamao language" label="Jiamao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023648" start="7446" end="7450" title="Hlai languages" label="Hlai"/>
<link wikidata="Q33199" start="7479" end="7492" title="Austroasiatic languages" label="Austroasiatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6182502" start="7611" end="7620" title="Jerold A. Edmondson" label="Edmondson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022087" start="7678" end="7681" title="Kra languages" label="Kra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023648" start="7694" end="7698" title="Hlai languages" label="Hlai"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921933" start="7702" end="7709" title="Kam–Tai languages" label="Kam–Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027879" start="7715" end="7721" title="Lakkia language" label="Lakkia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4902547" start="7722" end="7726" title="Biao language" label="Biao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023641" start="7732" end="7739" title="Kam–Sui languages" label="Kam–Sui"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093790" start="7745" end="7747" title="Be languages" label="Be"/>
<link wikidata="Q749720" start="7753" end="7756" title="Tai languages" label="Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q104223800" start="8154" end="8162" title="Peter K. Norquest" label="Norquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027879" start="8221" end="8227" title="Lakkia language" label="Lakkia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093790" start="8232" end="8234" title="Be languages" label="Be"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059014" start="8412" end="8434" title="Northern Tai languages" label="Northern Tai languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022087" start="8615" end="8618" title="Kra languages" label="Kra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027879" start="8642" end="8648" title="Lakkia language" label="Lakkia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023641" start="8654" end="8661" title="Kam–Sui languages" label="Kam–Sui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023648" start="8678" end="8682" title="Hlai languages" label="Hlai"/>
<link wikidata="Q749720" start="8699" end="8702" title="Tai languages" label="Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093790" start="8708" end="8710" title="Be languages" label="Be"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022087" start="8919" end="8922" title="Kra languages" label="Kra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4902547" start="8946" end="8950" title="Biao language" label="Biao"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027879" start="8975" end="8981" title="Lakkia language" label="Lakkja"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921933" start="8987" end="8994" title="Kam–Tai languages" label="Kam–Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023641" start="9002" end="9009" title="Kam–Sui languages" label="Kam–Sui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023648" start="9040" end="9044" title="Hlai languages" label="Hlai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093790" start="9067" end="9073" title="Be languages" label="Ong-Be"/>
<link wikidata="Q749720" start="9082" end="9085" title="Tai languages" label="Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q4902547" start="9224" end="9228" title="Biao language" label="Biao"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027879" start="9233" end="9239" title="Lakkia language" label="Lakkja"/>
<link wikidata="Q4902547" start="9375" end="9379" title="Biao language" label="Biao"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027879" start="9380" end="9386" title="Lakkia language" label="Lakkja"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921933" start="9390" end="9397" title="Kam–Tai languages" label="Kam–Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023641" start="9402" end="9409" title="Kam–Sui languages" label="Kam–Sui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022087" start="9427" end="9430" title="Kra languages" label="Kra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023648" start="9451" end="9455" title="Hlai languages" label="Hlai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093790" start="9476" end="9478" title="Be languages" label="Be"/>
<link wikidata="Q749720" start="9486" end="9489" title="Tai languages" label="Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q49228" start="9654" end="9682" title="Austronesian languages" label="Austronesian language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q783816" start="9907" end="9917" title="Austro-Tai languages" label="Austro-Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q715278" start="9941" end="9947" title="Formosan languages" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33612" start="10069" end="10077" title="Japonic languages" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q532753" start="10119" end="10135" title="Paul K. Benedict" label="Paul K. Benedict"/>
<link wikidata="Q45961" start="10316" end="10335" title="Sino-Tibetan languages" label="Sino-Tibetan family"/>
<link wikidata="Q33322" start="10830" end="10850" title="Hmong–Mien languages" label="Hmong–Mien languages"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10942" end="10957" title="Proto-Hmong–Mien#Kra-Dai" label="Miao–Dai family"/>
<link wikidata="Q99274778" start="11263" end="11273" title="East Asian languages" label="East Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q848595" start="11291" end="11296" title="Alexander Vovin" label="Vovin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33612" start="11342" end="11349" title="Japonic languages" label="Japonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458559" start="11350" end="11358" title="Urheimat" label="Urheimat"/>
<link wikidata="Q783787" start="11738" end="11755" title="Austric languages" label="Austric languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251845" start="11758" end="11777" title="Proto-Hlai language" label="Proto-Hlai language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251846" start="11780" end="11805" title="Proto-Hmong–Mien language" label="Proto-Hmong–Mien language"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630682" start="11808" end="11830" title="Proto-Kam–Sui language" label="Proto-Kam–Sui language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251854" start="11833" end="11851" title="Proto-Kra language" label="Proto-Kra language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251864" start="11854" end="11882" title="Proto-Tibeto-Burman language" label="Proto-Tibeto-Burman language"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583709" start="11885" end="11903" title="Proto-Tai language" label="Proto-Tai language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7524744" start="11906" end="11933" title="Sino-Austronesian languages" label="Sino-Austronesian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4088081" start="11980" end="11993" title="Roger Blench" label="Blench, Roger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6182502" start="12787" end="12803" title="Jerold A. Edmondson" label="Edmondson, J. A."/>
<link wikidata="Q6045904" start="13783" end="13817" title="Intercontinental Dictionary Series" label="Intercontinental Dictionary Series"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13975" end="14005" title=":wikt:Appendix:Kra–Dai Swadesh lists" label="Appendix:Kra–Dai Swadesh lists"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14034" end="14058" title=":wikt:Appendix:Vocabulary lists of Southeast Asian languages#Kra-Dai" label="Kra–Dai vocabulary lists"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29812" wikidata="Q1299" url="?curid=29812" title="The Beatles">
<text>The Beatles were an English rock band formed in Liverpool in 1960. The core lineup of the band comprised John Lennon, Paul McCartney, George Harrison and Ringo Starr. They are widely regarded as the most influential band in Western popular music and were integral to the development of 1960s counterculture and the recognition of popular music as an art form. Rooted in skiffle, beat and 1950s rock &#x27;n&#x27; roll, their sound incorporated elements of classical music and traditional pop in innovative ways. The band also explored music styles ranging from folk and Indian music to psychedelia and hard rock. As pioneers in recording, songwriting and artistic presentation, the Beatles revolutionised many aspects of the music industry and were often publicised as leaders of the era&#x27;s youth and sociocultural movements.

Led by primary songwriters Lennon and McCartney, the Beatles evolved from Lennon&#x27;s previous group, the Quarrymen, and built their reputation by playing clubs in Liverpool and Hamburg, Germany, starting in 1960, initially with Stuart Sutcliffe playing bass. The core trio of Lennon, McCartney and Harrison, together since 1958, went through a succession of drummers, including Pete Best, before inviting Starr to join them in 1962. Manager Brian Epstein moulded them into a professional act, and producer George Martin developed their recordings, greatly expanding their domestic success after they signed with EMI and achieved their first hit, &quot;Love Me Do&quot;, in late 1962. As their popularity grew into the intense fan frenzy dubbed &quot;Beatlemania&quot;, the band acquired the nickname &quot;the Fab Four&quot;. Epstein, Martin or other members of the band&#x27;s entourage were sometimes informally referred to as a &quot;fifth Beatle&quot;.

By early 1964, the Beatles were international stars and had achieved unprecedented levels of critical and commercial success. They became a leading force in Britain&#x27;s cultural resurgence, ushering in the British Invasion of the United States pop market. They soon made their film debut with &quot;A Hard Day&#x27;s Night&quot; (1964). A growing desire to refine their studio efforts, coupled with the challenging nature of their concert tours, led to the band&#x27;s retirement from live performances in 1966. During this time, they produced albums of greater sophistication, including &quot;Rubber Soul&quot; (1965), &quot;Revolver&quot; (1966) and &quot;Sgt. Pepper&#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band&quot; (1967). They enjoyed further commercial success with &quot;The Beatles&quot; (also known as &quot;the White Album&quot;, 1968) and &quot;Abbey Road&quot; (1969). The success of these records heralded the album era, increased public interest in psychedelic drugs and Eastern spirituality, and furthered advancements in electronic music, album art and music videos. In 1968, they founded Apple Corps, a multi-armed multimedia corporation that continues to oversee projects related to the band&#x27;s legacy. After the group&#x27;s break-up in 1970, all principal former members enjoyed success as solo artists, and some partial reunions occurred. Lennon was murdered in 1980, and Harrison died of lung cancer in 2001. McCartney and Starr remain musically active.

The Beatles are the best-selling music act of all time, with estimated sales of 600 million units worldwide. They are the most successful act in the history of the US &quot;Billboard&quot; charts, with the most number-one hits on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 chart (20), and they hold the record for most number-one albums on the UK Albums Chart (15) and most singles sold in the UK (21.9 million). The band received many accolades, including eight Grammy Awards, four Brit Awards, an Academy Award (for Best Original Song Score for the 1970 documentary film &quot;Let It Be&quot;) and fifteen Ivor Novello Awards. They were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in their first year of eligibility, 1988, and each principal member was individually inducted between 1994 and 2015. In 2004 and 2011, the group topped &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;″s lists of the greatest artists in history. &quot;Time&quot; magazine named them among the 20th century&#x27;s 100 most important people.

== History ==
=== 1956–1963: Formation ===
==== The Quarrymen and name changes ====

In November 1956, sixteen-year-old John Lennon formed a skiffle group with several friends from Quarry Bank High School in Liverpool. They were called &quot;the Quarrymen&quot;, a reference to their school song &quot;Quarry men old before our birth&quot;. Fifteen-year-old Paul McCartney met Lennon on 6 July 1957 and joined as a rhythm guitarist shortly after. In February 1958, McCartney invited his friend George Harrison, then aged fifteen, to watch the band. Harrison auditioned for Lennon, impressing him with his playing, but Lennon initially thought Harrison was too young. After a month&#x27;s persistence, during a second meeting (arranged by McCartney), Harrison performed the lead guitar part of the instrumental song &quot;Raunchy&quot; on the upper deck of a Liverpool bus, and they enlisted him as lead guitarist.

By January 1959, Lennon&#x27;s Quarry Bank friends had left the group and he began his studies at the Liverpool College of Art. The three guitarists, billing themselves as Johnny and the Moondogs, were playing rock and roll whenever they could find a drummer. They also performed as &quot;the Rainbows&quot;. Paul McCartney later told &quot;New Musical Express&quot; that they called themselves that &quot;because we all had different coloured shirts and we couldn&#x27;t afford any others!&quot;

Lennon&#x27;s art school friend Stuart Sutcliffe, who had just sold one of his paintings and was persuaded to purchase a bass guitar with the proceeds, joined in January 1960. He suggested changing the band&#x27;s name to &quot;Beatals&quot;, as a tribute to Buddy Holly and the Crickets. They used this name until May, when they became &quot;the Silver Beetles&quot;, before undertaking a brief tour of Scotland as the backing group for pop singer and fellow Liverpudlian Johnny Gentle. By early July, they had refashioned themselves as &quot;the Silver Beatles&quot; and by the middle of August simply &quot;the Beatles&quot;.

==== Early residencies and UK popularity ====
Allan Williams, the Beatles&#x27; unofficial manager, arranged a residency for them in Hamburg. They auditioned and hired drummer Pete Best in mid-August 1960. The band, now a five-piece, departed Liverpool for Hamburg four days later, contracted to club owner Bruno Koschmider for what would be a 3½ -month residency. Beatles historian Mark Lewisohn writes: &quot;They pulled into Hamburg at dusk on 17 August, the time when the red-light area comes to life ... flashing neon lights screamed out the various entertainment on offer, while scantily clad women sat unabashed in shop windows waiting for business opportunities.&quot;

Koschmider had converted a couple of strip clubs in the Red light Reeperbahn district of St. Pauli into music venues and initially placed the Beatles at the Indra Club. After closing Indra due to noise complaints, he moved them to the Kaiserkeller in October. When he learned they had been performing at the rival Top Ten Club in breach of their contract, he gave them one month&#x27;s termination notice, and reported the underage Harrison, who had obtained permission to stay in Hamburg by lying to the German authorities about his age. The authorities arranged for Harrison&#x27;s deportation in late November. One week later, Koschmider had McCartney and Best arrested for arson after they set fire to a condom in a concrete corridor; the authorities deported them. Lennon returned to Liverpool in early December, while Sutcliffe remained in Hamburg until late February with his German fiancée Astrid Kirchherr, who took the first semi-professional photos of the Beatles.

During the next two years, the Beatles were 
resident for periods in Hamburg, where they used Preludin both recreationally and to maintain their energy through all-night performances. In 1961, during their second Hamburg engagement, Kirchherr cut Sutcliffe&#x27;s hair in the &quot;exi&quot; (existentialist) style, later adopted by the other Beatles. Later on, Sutcliffe decided to leave the band early that year and resume his art studies in Germany. McCartney took over bass. Producer Bert Kaempfert contracted what was now a four-piece group until June 1962, and he used them as Tony Sheridan&#x27;s backing band on a series of recordings for Polydor Records. As part of the sessions, the Beatles were signed to Polydor for one year. Credited to &quot;Tony Sheridan &amp; the Beat Brothers&quot;, the single &quot;My Bonnie&quot;, recorded in June 1961 and released four months later, reached number 32 on the &quot;Musikmarkt&quot; chart.

After the Beatles completed their second Hamburg residency, they enjoyed increasing popularity in Liverpool with the growing Merseybeat movement. However, they were growing tired of the monotony of numerous appearances at the same clubs night after night. In November 1961, during one of the group&#x27;s frequent performances at the Cavern Club, they encountered Brian Epstein, a local record-store owner and music columnist. He later recalled: &quot;I immediately liked what I heard. They were fresh, and they were honest, and they had what I thought was a sort of presence ... [a] star quality.&quot;

==== First EMI recordings ====
Epstein courted the band over the next couple of months, and they appointed him as their manager in January 1962. Throughout early and mid-1962, Epstein sought to free the Beatles from their contractual obligations to Bert Kaempfert Productions. He eventually negotiated a one-month early release in exchange for one last recording session in Hamburg. On their return to Germany in April, a distraught Kirchherr met them at the airport with news of Sutcliffe&#x27;s death the previous day from a brain haemorrhage. Epstein began negotiations with record labels for a recording contract. To secure a UK record contract, Epstein negotiated an early end to the band&#x27;s contract with Polydor, in exchange for more recordings backing Tony Sheridan. After a New Year&#x27;s Day audition, Decca Records rejected the band, saying, &quot;Guitar groups are on the way out, Mr. Epstein&quot;. However, three months later, producer George Martin signed the Beatles to EMI&#x27;s Parlophone label.

Martin&#x27;s first recording session with the Beatles took place at EMI Recording Studios (later Abbey Road Studios) in London on 6 June 1962. He immediately complained to Epstein about Best&#x27;s drumming and suggested they use a session drummer in his place. Already contemplating Best&#x27;s dismissal, the Beatles replaced him in mid-August with Ringo Starr, who left Rory Storm and the Hurricanes to join them. A 4 September session at EMI yielded a recording of &quot;Love Me Do&quot; featuring Starr on drums, but a dissatisfied Martin hired drummer Andy White for the band&#x27;s third session a week later, which produced recordings of &quot;Love Me Do&quot;, &quot;Please Please Me&quot; and &quot;P.S. I Love You&quot;.

Martin initially selected the Starr version of &quot;Love Me Do&quot; for the band&#x27;s first single, though subsequent re-pressings featured the White version, with Starr on tambourine. Released in early October, &quot;Love Me Do&quot; peaked at number seventeen on the &quot;Record Retailer&quot; chart. Their television debut came later that month with a live performance on the regional news programme &quot;People and Places&quot;. After Martin suggested rerecording &quot;Please Please Me&quot; at a faster tempo, a studio session in late November yielded that recording, of which Martin accurately predicted, &quot;You&#x27;ve just made your first No. 1&quot;.

In December 1962, the Beatles concluded their fifth and final Hamburg residency at the Star-Club. By 1963, they had agreed that all four band members would contribute vocals to their albums – including Starr, despite his restricted vocal range, to validate his standing in the group. Lennon and McCartney had established a songwriting partnership, and as the band&#x27;s success grew, their dominant collaboration limited Harrison&#x27;s opportunities as a lead vocalist. Epstein, to maximise the Beatles&#x27; commercial potential, encouraged them to adopt a professional approach to performing. Lennon recalled him saying, &quot;Look, if you really want to get in these bigger places, you&#x27;re going to have to change – stop eating on stage, stop swearing, stop smoking ...&quot;.

=== 1963–1966: Beatlemania and touring years ===
==== &quot;Please Please Me&quot; and &quot;With the Beatles&quot; ====
On 11 February 1963, the Beatles recorded ten songs during a single studio session for their debut LP, &quot;Please Please Me&quot;. It was supplemented by the four tracks already released on their first two singles. Martin considered recording the LP live at The Cavern Club, but after deciding that the building&#x27;s acoustics were inadequate, he elected to simulate a &quot;live&quot; album with minimal production in &quot;a single marathon session at Abbey Road&quot;. After the moderate success of &quot;Love Me Do&quot;, the single &quot;Please Please Me&quot; was released in January 1963, two months ahead of the album. It reached number one on every UK chart except &quot;Record Retailer&quot;, where it peaked at number two.

Recalling how the Beatles &quot;rushed to deliver a debut album, bashing out &quot;Please Please Me&quot; in a day&quot;, AllMusic critic Stephen Thomas Erlewine wrote: &quot;Decades after its release, the album still sounds fresh, precisely because of its intense origins.&quot; Lennon said little thought went into composition at the time; he and McCartney were &quot;just writing songs &quot;à la&quot; Everly Brothers, &quot;à la&quot; Buddy Holly, pop songs with no more thought of them than that – to create a sound. And the words were almost irrelevant.&quot;
Released in March 1963, &quot;Please Please Me&quot; was the first of eleven consecutive Beatles albums released in the United Kingdom to reach number one. The band&#x27;s third single, &quot;From Me to You&quot;, came out in April and began an almost unbroken string of seventeen British number-one singles, including all but one of the eighteen they released over the next six years. Issued in August, their fourth single, &quot;She Loves You&quot;, achieved the fastest sales of any record in the UK up to that time, selling three-quarters of a million copies in under four weeks. It became their first single to sell a million copies and remained the biggest-selling record in the UK until 1978.

The success brought increased media exposure, to which the Beatles responded with an irreverent and comical attitude that defied the expectations of pop musicians at the time, inspiring even more interest. The band toured the UK three times in the first half of the year: a four-week tour that began in February, the Beatles&#x27; first nationwide, preceded three-week tours in March and May–June. As their popularity spread, a frenzied adulation of the group took hold. On 13 October, the Beatles starred on &quot;Sunday Night at the London Palladium&quot;, the UK&#x27;s top variety show. Their performance was televised live and watched by 15 million viewers. One national paper&#x27;s headlines in the following days coined the term &quot;Beatlemania&quot; to describe the riotous enthusiasm by screaming fans who greeted the band – and it stuck. Although not billed as tour leaders, the Beatles overshadowed American acts Tommy Roe and Chris Montez during the February engagements and assumed top billing &quot;by audience demand&quot;, something no British act had previously accomplished while touring with artists from the US. A similar situation arose during their May–June tour with Roy Orbison.

In late October, the Beatles began a five-day tour of Sweden, their first time abroad since the final Hamburg engagement of December 1962. On their return to the UK on 31 October, several hundred screaming fans greeted them in heavy rain at Heathrow Airport. Around 50 to 100 journalists and photographers, as well as representatives from the BBC, also joined the airport reception, the first of more than 100 such events. The next day, the band began its fourth tour of Britain within nine months, this one scheduled for six weeks. In mid-November, as Beatlemania intensified, police resorted to using high-pressure water hoses to control the crowd before a concert in Plymouth. On 4 November, they played in front of The Queen Mother and Princess Margaret during the Royal Variety Performance at the Prince of Wales Theatre.

&quot;Please Please Me&quot; maintained the top position on the &quot;Record Retailer&quot; chart for 30 weeks, only to be displaced by its follow-up, &quot;With the Beatles&quot;, which EMI released on 22 November to record advance orders of 270,000 copies. The LP topped a half-million albums sold in one week. Recorded between July and October, &quot;With the Beatles&quot; made better use of studio production techniques than its predecessor. It held the top spot for 21 weeks with a chart life of 40 weeks. Erlewine described the LP as &quot;a sequel of the highest order – one that betters the original&quot;.

In a reversal of then standard practice, EMI released the album ahead of the impending single &quot;I Want to Hold Your Hand&quot;, with the song excluded to maximise the single&#x27;s sales. The album caught the attention of music critic William Mann of &quot;The Times&quot;, who suggested that Lennon and McCartney were &quot;the outstanding English composers of 1963&quot;. The newspaper published a series of articles in which Mann offered detailed analyses of the music, lending it respectability. &quot;With the Beatles&quot; became the second album in UK chart history to sell a million copies, a figure previously reached only by the 1958 &quot;South Pacific&quot; soundtrack. When writing the sleeve notes for the album, the band&#x27;s press officer, Tony Barrow, used the superlative the &quot;fabulous foursome&quot;, which the media widely adopted as &quot;the Fab Four&quot;.
==== First visit to the United States and the British Invasion ====

EMI&#x27;s American subsidiary, Capitol Records, hindered the Beatles&#x27; releases in the United States for more than a year by initially declining to issue their music, including their first three singles. Concurrent negotiations with the independent US label Vee-Jay led to the release of some, but not all, of the songs in 1963. Vee-Jay finished preparation for the album &quot;Introducing... The Beatles&quot;, comprising most of the songs of Parlophone&#x27;s &quot;Please Please Me&quot;, but a management shake-up led to the album not being released. After it emerged that the label did not report royalties on their sales, the licence that Vee-Jay had signed with EMI was voided. A new licence was granted to the Swan label for the single &quot;She Loves You&quot;. The record received some airplay in the Tidewater area of Virginia from Gene Loving of radio station WGH and was featured on the &quot;Rate-a-Record&quot; segment of &quot;American Bandstand&quot;, but it failed to catch on nationally.
Epstein brought a demo copy of &quot;I Want to Hold Your Hand&quot; to Capitol&#x27;s Brown Meggs, who signed the band and arranged for a $40,000 US marketing campaign. American chart success began after disc jockey Carroll James of AM radio station WWDC, in Washington, DC, obtained a copy of the British single &quot;I Want to Hold Your Hand&quot; in mid-December 1963 and began playing it on-air. Taped copies of the song soon circulated among other radio stations throughout the US. This caused an increase in demand, leading Capitol to bring forward the release of &quot;I Want to Hold Your Hand&quot; by three weeks. Issued on 26 December, with the band&#x27;s previously scheduled debut there just weeks away, &quot;I Want to Hold Your Hand&quot; sold a million copies, becoming a number-one hit in the US by mid-January. In its wake Vee-Jay released &quot;Introducing... The Beatles&quot; along with Capitol&#x27;s debut album, &quot;Meet the Beatles!&quot;, while Swan reactivated production of &quot;She Loves You&quot;.
On 7 February 1964, the Beatles departed from Heathrow with an estimated 4,000 fans waving and screaming as the aircraft took off. Upon landing at New York&#x27;s John F. Kennedy Airport, an uproarious crowd estimated at 3,000 greeted them. They gave their first live US television performance two days later on &quot;The Ed Sullivan Show&quot;, watched by approximately 73 million viewers in over 23 million households, or 34 per cent of the American population. Biographer Jonathan Gould writes that, according to the Nielsen rating service, it was &quot;the largest audience that had ever been recorded for an American television &quot;. The next morning, the Beatles awoke to a largely negative critical consensus in the US, but a day later at their first US concert, Beatlemania erupted at the Washington Coliseum. Back in New York the following day, the Beatles met with another strong reception during two shows at Carnegie Hall. The band flew to Florida, where they appeared on &quot;The Ed Sullivan Show&quot; a second time, again before 70 million viewers, before returning to the UK on 22 February.

The Beatles&#x27; first visit to the US took place when the nation was still mourning the assassination of President John F. Kennedy the previous November.&lt;ref name=&quot;Gimore (RS Beatles/Dylan/60s)&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Commentators often suggest that for many, particularly the young, the Beatles&#x27; performances reignited the sense of excitement and possibility that momentarily faded in the wake of the assassination and helped pave the way for the revolutionary social changes to come later in the decade. Their hairstyle, unusually long for the era and mocked by many adults, became an emblem of rebellion to the burgeoning youth culture.

The group&#x27;s popularity generated unprecedented interest in British music, and many other UK acts subsequently made their American debuts, successfully touring over the next three years in what was termed the British Invasion. The Beatles&#x27; success in the US opened the door for a successive string of British beat groups and pop acts such as the Dave Clark Five, the Animals, Herman&#x27;s Hermits, Petula Clark, the Kinks and the Rolling Stones to achieve success in America. During the week of 4 April 1964, the Beatles held twelve positions on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 singles chart, including the top five.

==== &quot;A Hard Day&#x27;s Night&quot; ====

Capitol Records&#x27; lack of interest throughout 1963 did not go unnoticed, and a competitor, United Artists Records, encouraged its film division to offer the Beatles a three-motion-picture deal, primarily for the commercial potential of the soundtracks in the US. Directed by Richard Lester, &quot;A Hard Day&#x27;s Night&quot; involved the band for six weeks in March–April 1964 as they played themselves in a musical comedy. The film premiered in London and New York in July and August, respectively, and was an international success, with some critics drawing a comparison with the Marx Brothers.

United Artists released a full soundtrack album for the North American market, combining Beatles songs and Martin&#x27;s orchestral score; elsewhere, the group&#x27;s third studio LP, &quot;A Hard Day&#x27;s Night&quot;, contained songs from the film on side one and other new recordings on side two. According to Erlewine, the album saw them &quot;truly coming into their own as a band. All of the disparate influences on their first two albums coalesced into a bright, joyous, original sound, filled with ringing guitars and irresistible melodies.&quot; That &quot;ringing guitar&quot; sound was primarily the product of Harrison&#x27;s 12-string electric Rickenbacker, a prototype given to him by the manufacturer, which made its debut on the record.

==== 1964 world tour, meeting Bob Dylan and stand on civil rights ====
Touring internationally in June and July, the Beatles staged 37 shows over 27 days in Denmark, the Netherlands, Hong Kong, Australia and New Zealand. In August and September, they returned to the US, with a 30-concert tour of 23 cities. Generating intense interest once again, the month-long tour attracted between 10,000 and 20,000 people to each 30-minute performance in cities from San Francisco to New York.

In August, journalist Al Aronowitz arranged for the Beatles to meet Bob Dylan. Visiting the band in their New York hotel suite, Dylan introduced them to cannabis. Gould points out the musical and cultural significance of this meeting, before which the musicians&#x27; respective fanbases were &quot;perceived as inhabiting two separate subcultural worlds&quot;: Dylan&#x27;s audience of &quot;college kids with artistic or intellectual leanings, a dawning political and social idealism, and a mildly bohemian style&quot; contrasted with their fans, &quot;veritable &#x27;teenyboppers&#x27; – kids in high school or grade school whose lives were totally wrapped up in the commercialised popular culture of television, radio, pop records, fan magazines and teen fashion. To many of Dylan&#x27;s followers in the folk music scene, the Beatles were seen as idolaters, not idealists.&quot;

Within six months of the meeting, according to Gould, &quot;Lennon would be making records on which he openly imitated Dylan&#x27;s nasal drone, brittle strum, and introspective vocal persona&quot;; and six months after that, Dylan began performing with a backing band and electric instrumentation, and &quot;dressed in the height of Mod fashion&quot;. As a result, Gould continues, the traditional division between folk and rock enthusiasts &quot;nearly evaporated&quot;, as the Beatles&#x27; fans began to mature in their outlook and Dylan&#x27;s audience embraced the new, youth-driven pop culture.

During the 1964 US tour, the group were confronted with racial segregation in the country at the time. When informed that the venue for their 11 September concert, the Gator Bowl in Jacksonville, Florida, was segregated, the Beatles said they would refuse to perform unless the audience was integrated. Lennon stated: &quot;We never play to segregated audiences and we aren&#x27;t going to start now ... I&#x27;d sooner lose our appearance money.&quot; City officials relented and agreed to allow an integrated show. The group also cancelled their reservations at the whites-only Hotel George Washington in Jacksonville. For their subsequent US tours in 1965 and 1966, the Beatles included clauses in contracts stipulating that shows be integrated.

==== &quot;Beatles for Sale&quot;, &quot;Help!&quot; and &quot;Rubber Soul&quot; ====
According to Gould, the Beatles&#x27; fourth studio LP, &quot;Beatles for Sale&quot;, evidenced a growing conflict between the commercial pressures of their global success and their creative ambitions. They had intended the album, recorded between August and October 1964, to continue the format established by &quot;A Hard Day&#x27;s Night&quot; which, unlike their first two LPs, contained only original songs. They had nearly exhausted their backlog of songs on the previous album, however, and given the challenges constant international touring posed to their songwriting efforts, Lennon admitted, &quot;Material&#x27;s becoming a hell of a problem&quot;. As a result, six covers from their extensive repertoire were chosen to complete the album. Released in early December, its eight original compositions stood out, demonstrating the growing maturity of the Lennon–McCartney songwriting partnership.

In early 1965, following a dinner with Lennon, Harrison and their wives, Harrison&#x27;s dentist, John Riley, secretly added LSD to their coffee. Lennon described the experience: &quot;It was just terrifying, but it was fantastic. I was pretty stunned for a month or two.&quot; He and Harrison subsequently became regular users of the drug, joined by Starr on at least one occasion. Harrison&#x27;s use of psychedelic drugs encouraged his path to meditation and Hinduism. He commented: &quot;For me, it was like a flash. The first time I had acid, it just opened up something in my head that was inside of me, and I realised a lot of things. I didn&#x27;t learn them because I already knew them, but that happened to be the key that opened the door to reveal them. From the moment I had that, I wanted to have it all the time – these thoughts about the yogis and the Himalayas, and Ravi&#x27;s music.&quot; McCartney was initially reluctant to try it, but eventually did so in late 1966. He became the first Beatle to discuss LSD publicly, declaring in a magazine interview that &quot;it opened my eyes&quot; and &quot;made me a better, more honest, more tolerant member of society&quot;.

Controversy erupted in June 1965 when Queen Elizabeth II appointed all four Beatles Members of the Order of the British Empire (MBE) after Prime Minister Harold Wilson nominated them for the award. In protest – the honour was at that time primarily bestowed upon military veterans and civic leaders – some conservative MBE recipients returned their insignia.

In July, the Beatles&#x27; second film, &quot;Help!&quot;, was released, again directed by Lester. Described as &quot;mainly a relentless spoof of Bond&quot;, it inspired a mixed response among both reviewers and the band. McCartney said: &quot;&quot;Help!&quot; was great but it wasn&#x27;t our film – we were sort of guest stars. It was fun, but basically, as an idea for a film, it was a bit wrong.&quot; The soundtrack was dominated by Lennon, who wrote and sang lead on most of its songs, including the two singles: &quot;Help!&quot; and &quot;Ticket to Ride&quot;.

The &quot;Help!&quot; album, the group&#x27;s fifth studio LP, mirrored &quot;A Hard Day&#x27;s Night&quot; by featuring soundtrack songs on side one and additional songs from the same sessions on side two. The LP contained all original material save for two covers, &quot;Act Naturally&quot; and &quot;Dizzy Miss Lizzy&quot;; they were the last covers the band would include on an album until &quot;Let It Be&quot; brief rendition of the traditional Liverpool folk song &quot;Maggie Mae&quot;. The band expanded their use of vocal overdubs on &quot;Help!&quot; and incorporated classical instruments into some arrangements, including a string quartet on the pop ballad &quot;Yesterday&quot;. Composed and sung by McCartney – none of the other Beatles perform on the recording – &quot;Yesterday&quot; has inspired the most cover versions of any song ever written. With &quot;Help!&quot;, the Beatles became the first rock group to be nominated for a Grammy Award for Album of the Year.

The group&#x27;s third US tour opened with a performance before a world-record crowd of 55,600 at New York&#x27;s Shea Stadium on 15 August – &quot;perhaps the most famous of all Beatles&#x27; concerts&quot;, in Lewisohn&#x27;s description. A further nine successful concerts followed in other American cities. At a show in Atlanta, the Beatles gave one of the first live performances ever to make use of a foldback system of on-stage monitor speakers. Towards the end of the tour, they met with Elvis Presley, a foundational musical influence on the band, who invited them to his home in Beverly Hills. Presley later said the band was an example of a trend of anti-Americanism and drug abuse.

September 1965 saw the launch of an American Saturday-morning cartoon series, &quot;The Beatles&quot;, that echoed &quot;A Hard Day&#x27;s Night&quot; slapstick antics over its two-year original run. The series was the first weekly television series to feature animated versions of real, living people.

In mid-October, the Beatles entered the recording studio; for the first time when making an album, they had an extended period without other major commitments. Until this time, according to George Martin, &quot;we had been making albums rather like a collection of singles. Now we were really beginning to think about albums as a bit of art on their own.&quot; Released in December, &quot;Rubber Soul&quot; was hailed by critics as a major step forward in the maturity and complexity of the band&#x27;s music. Their thematic reach was beginning to expand as they embraced deeper aspects of romance and philosophy, a development that NEMS executive Peter Brown attributed to the band members&#x27; &quot;now habitual use of marijuana&quot;. Lennon referred to &quot;Rubber Soul&quot; as &quot;the pot album&quot; and Starr said: &quot;Grass was really influential in a lot of our changes, especially with the writers. And because they were writing different material, we were playing differently.&quot; After &quot;Help!&quot;″s foray into classical music with flutes and strings, Harrison&#x27;s introduction of a sitar on &quot;Norwegian Wood (This Bird Has Flown)&quot; marked a further progression outside the traditional boundaries of popular music. As the lyrics grew more artful, fans began to study them for deeper meaning.
While some of &quot;Rubber Soul&quot;″s songs were the product of Lennon and McCartney&#x27;s collaborative songwriting, the album also included distinct compositions from each, though they continued to share official credit. &quot;In My Life&quot;, of which each later claimed lead authorship, is considered a highlight of the entire Lennon–McCartney catalogue. Harrison called &quot;Rubber Soul&quot; his &quot;favourite album&quot;, and Starr referred to it as &quot;the departure record&quot;. McCartney has said, &quot;We&#x27;d had our cute period, and now it was time to expand.&quot; However, recording engineer Norman Smith later stated that the studio sessions revealed signs of growing conflict within the group – &quot;the clash between John and Paul was becoming obvious&quot;, he wrote, and &quot;as far as Paul was concerned, George could do no right&quot;.

==== Controversies, &quot;Revolver&quot; and final tour ====
Capitol Records, from December 1963 when it began issuing Beatles recordings for the US market, exercised complete control over format, compiling distinct US albums from the band&#x27;s recordings and issuing songs of their choosing as singles. In June 1966, the Capitol LP &quot;Yesterday and Today&quot; caused an uproar with its cover, which portrayed the grinning Beatles dressed in butcher&#x27;s overalls, accompanied by raw meat and mutilated plastic baby dolls. According to Beatles biographer Bill Harry, it has been incorrectly suggested that this was meant as a satirical response to the way Capitol had &quot;butchered&quot; the US versions of the band&#x27;s albums. Thousands of copies of the LP had a new cover pasted over the original; an unpeeled &quot;first-state&quot; copy fetched $10,500 at a December 2005 auction. In England, meanwhile, Harrison met sitar maestro Ravi Shankar, who agreed to train him on the instrument.

During a tour of the Philippines the month after the &quot;Yesterday and Today&quot; furore, the Beatles unintentionally snubbed the nation&#x27;s first lady, Imelda Marcos, who had expected them to attend a breakfast reception at the Presidential Palace. When presented with the invitation, Epstein politely declined on the band members&#x27; behalf, as it had never been his policy to accept such official invitations. They soon found that the Marcos regime was unaccustomed to taking no for an answer. The resulting riots endangered the group and they escaped the country with difficulty. Immediately afterwards, the band members visited India for the first time.

Almost as soon as they returned home, the Beatles faced a fierce backlash from US religious and social conservatives (as well as the Ku Klux Klan) over a comment Lennon had made in a March interview with British reporter Maureen Cleave. &quot;Christianity will go&quot;, Lennon had said. &quot;It will vanish and shrink. I needn&#x27;t argue about that; I&#x27;m right and I will be proved right ... Jesus was alright but his disciples were thick and ordinary. It&#x27;s them twisting it that ruins it for me.&quot; His comments went virtually unnoticed in England, but when US teenage fan magazine &quot;Datebook&quot; printed them five months later, it sparked a controversy with Christians in America&#x27;s conservative Bible Belt region. The Vatican issued a protest, and bans on Beatles records were imposed by Spanish and Dutch stations and South Africa&#x27;s national broadcasting service. Epstein accused &quot;Datebook&quot; of having taken Lennon&#x27;s words out of context. At a press conference, Lennon pointed out, &quot;If I&#x27;d said television was more popular than Jesus, I might have got away with it.&quot; He claimed that he was referring to how other people viewed their success, but at the prompting of reporters, he concluded: &quot;If you want me to apologise, if that will make you happy, then okay, I&#x27;m sorry.&quot;
Released in August 1966, a week before the Beatles&#x27; final tour, &quot;Revolver&quot; marked another artistic step forward for the group. The album featured sophisticated songwriting, studio experimentation and a greatly expanded repertoire of musical styles, ranging from innovative classical string arrangements to psychedelia. Abandoning the customary group photograph, its Aubrey Beardsley-inspired cover – designed by Klaus Voormann, a friend of the band since their Hamburg days – was a monochrome collage and line drawing caricature of the group. The album was preceded by the single &quot;Paperback Writer&quot;, backed by &quot;Rain&quot;. Short promotional films were made for both songs; described by cultural historian Saul Austerlitz as &quot;among the first true music videos&quot;, they aired on &quot;The Ed Sullivan Show&quot; and &quot;Top of the Pops&quot; in June.

Among the experimental songs on &quot;Revolver&quot; was &quot;Tomorrow Never Knows&quot;, the lyrics for which Lennon drew from Timothy Leary&#x27;s &quot;The Psychedelic Experience: A Manual Based on the Tibetan Book of the Dead&quot;. Its creation involved eight tape decks distributed about the EMI building, each staffed by an engineer or band member, who randomly varied the movement of a tape loop while Martin created a composite recording by sampling the incoming data. McCartney&#x27;s &quot;Eleanor Rigby&quot; made prominent use of a string octet; Gould describes it as &quot;a true hybrid, conforming to no recognisable style or genre of song&quot;. Harrison&#x27;s emergence as a songwriter was reflected in three of his compositions appearing on the record. Among these, &quot;Taxman&quot;, which opened the album, marked the first example of the Beatles making a political statement through their music.

As preparations were made for a tour of the US, the Beatles knew that their music would hardly be heard. Having originally used Vox AC30 amplifiers, they later acquired more powerful 100-watt amplifiers, specially designed for them by Vox, as they moved into larger venues in 1964; however, these were still inadequate. Struggling to compete with the volume of sound generated by screaming fans, the band had grown increasingly bored with the routine of performing live. Recognising that their shows were no longer about the music, they decided to make the August tour their last.

The band performed none of their new songs on the tour. In Chris Ingham&#x27;s description, they were very much &quot;studio creations ... and there was no way a four-piece rock &#x27;n&#x27; roll group could do them justice, particularly through the desensitising wall of the fans&#x27; screams. &#x27;Live Beatles&#x27; and &#x27;Studio Beatles&#x27; had become entirely different beasts.&quot; The band&#x27;s concert at San Francisco&#x27;s Candlestick Park on 29 August was their last commercial concert. It marked the end of four years dominated by almost non-stop touring that included over 1,400 concert appearances internationally.

=== 1966–1970: Studio years ===
==== &quot;Sgt. Pepper&#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band&quot; ====

Freed from the burden of touring, the Beatles embraced an increasingly experimental approach as they recorded &quot;Sgt. Pepper&#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band&quot;, beginning in late November 1966. According to engineer Geoff Emerick, the album&#x27;s recording took over 700 hours. He recalled the band&#x27;s insistence &quot;that everything on &quot;Sgt. Pepper&quot; had to be different. We had microphones right down in the bells of brass instruments and headphones turned into microphones attached to violins. We used giant primitive oscillators to vary the speed of instruments and vocals and we had tapes chopped to pieces and stuck together upside down and the wrong way around.&quot; Parts of &quot;A Day in the Life&quot; featured a 40-piece orchestra. The sessions initially yielded the non-album double A-side single &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot;/&quot;Penny Lane&quot; in February 1967; the &quot;Sgt. Pepper&quot; LP followed with a rush-release in May. The musical complexity of the records, created using relatively primitive four-track recording technology, astounded contemporary artists. Among music critics, acclaim for the album was virtually universal. Gould writes:

In the wake of &quot;Sgt. Pepper&quot;, the underground and mainstream press widely publicised the Beatles as leaders of youth culture, as well as &quot;lifestyle revolutionaries&quot;. The album was the first major pop/rock LP to include its complete lyrics, which appeared on the back cover. Those lyrics were the subject of critical analysis; for instance, in late 1967 the album was the subject of a scholarly inquiry by American literary critic and professor of English Richard Poirier, who observed that his students were &quot;listening to the group&#x27;s music with a degree of engagement that he, as a teacher of literature, could only envy&quot;. The elaborate cover also attracted considerable interest and study. A collage designed by pop artists Peter Blake and Jann Haworth, it depicted the group as the fictional band referred to in the album&#x27;s title track standing in front of a crowd of famous people. The heavy moustaches worn by the group reflected the growing influence of the hippie movement, while cultural historian Jonathan Harris describes their &quot;brightly coloured parodies of military uniforms&quot; as a knowingly &quot;anti-authoritarian and anti-establishment&quot; display.

&quot;Sgt. Pepper&quot; topped the UK charts for 23 consecutive weeks, with a further four weeks at number one in the period through to February 1968. With 2.5 million copies sold within three months of its release, &quot;Sgt. Pepper&quot;″s initial commercial success exceeded that of all previous Beatles albums. It was the first rock album to win the Grammy Award for Album of the Year. It sustained its immense popularity into the 21st century while breaking numerous sales records.

==== &quot;Magical Mystery Tour&quot; and &quot;Yellow Submarine&quot; ====

Two Beatles film projects were conceived within weeks of completing &quot;Sgt. Pepper&quot;: &quot;Magical Mystery Tour&quot;, a one-hour television film, and &quot;Yellow Submarine&quot;, an animated feature-length film produced by United Artists. The group began recording music for the former in late April 1967, but the project then lay dormant as they focused on recording songs for the latter. On 25 June, the Beatles performed their forthcoming single &quot;All You Need Is Love&quot; to an estimated 350 million viewers on &quot;Our World&quot;, the first live global television link. Released a week later, during the Summer of Love, the song was adopted as a flower power anthem. The Beatles&#x27; use of psychedelic drugs was at its height during that summer. In July and August, the group pursued interests related to similar utopian-based ideology, including a week-long investigation into the possibility of starting an island-based commune off the coast of Greece.

On 24 August, the group were introduced to Maharishi Mahesh Yogi in London. The next day, they travelled to Bangor for his Transcendental Meditation retreat. On 27 August, their manager&#x27;s assistant, Peter Brown, phoned to inform them that Epstein had died. The coroner ruled the death an accidental carbitol overdose, although it was widely rumoured to be a suicide. His death left the group disoriented and fearful about the future. Lennon recalled: &quot;We collapsed. I knew that we were in trouble then. I didn&#x27;t really have any misconceptions about our ability to do anything other than play music, and I was scared. I thought, &#x27;We&#x27;ve fuckin&#x27; had it now. Harrison&#x27;s then-wife Pattie Boyd remembered that &quot;Paul and George were in complete shock. I don&#x27;t think it could have been worse if they had heard that their own fathers had dropped dead.&quot; During a band meeting in September, McCartney recommended that the band proceed with &quot;Magical Mystery Tour&quot;.

The &quot;Magical Mystery Tour&quot; soundtrack was released in the UK as a six-track double extended play (EP) in early December 1967. It was the first example of a double EP in the UK. The record carried on the psychedelic vein of &quot;Sgt. Pepper&quot;, though in line with the band&#x27;s wishes, the packaging reinforced the idea that the release was a film soundtrack rather than a follow-up to &quot;Sgt. Pepper&quot;. In the US, the soundtrack appeared as an identically titled LP that also included five tracks from the band&#x27;s recent singles. In its first three weeks, the album set a record for the highest initial sales of any Capitol LP and is the only Capitol compilation later to be adopted in the band&#x27;s official canon of studio albums.

&quot;Magical Mystery Tour&quot; first aired on Boxing Day to an audience of approximately 15 million. Largely directed by McCartney, the film was the band&#x27;s first critical failure in the UK. It was dismissed as &quot;blatant rubbish&quot; by the &quot;Daily Express&quot;, the &quot;Daily Mail&quot; called it &quot;a colossal conceit&quot; and &quot;The Guardian&quot; labelled the film &quot;a kind of fantasy morality play about the grossness and warmth and stupidity of the audience&quot;. Gould describes it as &quot;a great deal of raw footage showing a group of people getting on, getting off, and riding on a bus&quot;. Although the viewership figures were respectable, its slating in the press led US television networks to lose interest in broadcasting the film.

The group were less involved with &quot;Yellow Submarine&quot;, which featured the band appearing as themselves for only a short live-action segment. Premiering in July 1968, the film featured cartoon versions of the band members and a soundtrack with eleven of their songs, including four unreleased studio recordings that made their debut in the film. Critics praised the film for its music, humour and innovative visual style. A soundtrack LP was issued seven months later; it contained those four new songs, the title track (already issued on &quot;Revolver&quot;), &quot;All You Need Is Love&quot; (already issued as a single and on the US &quot;Magical Mystery Tour&quot; LP) and seven instrumental pieces composed by Martin.

==== India retreat, Apple Corps and the White Album ====

In February 1968, the Beatles travelled to Maharishi Mahesh Yogi&#x27;s ashram in Rishikesh, India, to take part in a three-month meditation &quot;Guide Course&quot;. Their time in India marked one of the band&#x27;s most prolific periods, yielding numerous songs, including a majority of those on their next album. However, Starr left after only ten days, unable to stomach the food, and McCartney eventually grew bored and departed a month later. For Lennon and Harrison, creativity turned to question when an electronics technician known as Magic Alex suggested that the Maharishi was attempting to manipulate them. When he alleged that the Maharishi had made sexual advances to women attendees, a persuaded Lennon left abruptly just two months into the course, bringing an unconvinced Harrison and the remainder of the group&#x27;s entourage with him. In anger, Lennon wrote a scathing song titled &quot;Maharishi&quot;, renamed &quot;Sexy Sadie&quot; to avoid potential legal issues. McCartney said, &quot;We made a mistake. We thought there was more to him than there was.&quot;

In May, Lennon and McCartney travelled to New York for the public unveiling of the Beatles&#x27; new business venture, Apple Corps. It was initially formed several months earlier as part of a plan to create a tax-effective business structure, but the band then desired to extend the corporation to other pursuits, including record distribution, peace activism and education. McCartney described Apple as &quot;rather like a Western communism&quot;. The enterprise drained the group financially with a series of unsuccessful projects handled largely by members of the Beatles&#x27; entourage, who were given their jobs regardless of talent and experience. Among its numerous subsidiaries were Apple Electronics, established to foster technological innovations with Magic Alex at the head, and Apple Retailing, which opened the short-lived Apple Boutique in London. Harrison later said, &quot;Basically, it was chaos ... John and Paul got carried away with the idea and blew millions, and Ringo and I just had to go along with it.&quot;

From late May to mid-October 1968, the group recorded what became &quot;The Beatles&quot;, a double LP commonly known as &quot;the White Album&quot; for its virtually featureless cover. During this time, relations between the members grew openly divisive. Starr quit for two weeks, leaving his bandmates to record &quot;Back in the U.S.S.R.&quot; and &quot;Dear Prudence&quot; as a trio, with McCartney filling in on drums. Lennon had lost interest in collaborating with McCartney, whose contribution &quot;Ob-La-Di, Ob-La-Da&quot; he scorned as &quot;granny music shit&quot;. Tensions were further aggravated by Lennon&#x27;s romantic preoccupation with avant-garde artist Yoko Ono, whom he insisted on bringing to the sessions despite the group&#x27;s well-established understanding that girlfriends were not allowed in the studio. McCartney has recalled that the album &quot;wasn&#x27;t a pleasant one to make&quot;. He and Lennon identified the sessions as the start of the band&#x27;s break-up.

With the record, the band executed a wider range of musical styles and broke with their recent tradition of incorporating several musical styles in one song by keeping each piece of music consistently faithful to a select genre. During the sessions, the group upgraded to an eight-track tape console, which made it easier for them to layer tracks piecemeal, while the members often recorded independently of each other, affording the album a reputation as a collection of solo recordings rather than a unified group effort. Describing the double album, Lennon later said: &quot;Every track is an individual track; there isn&#x27;t any Beatle music on it. [It&#x27;s] John and the band, Paul and the band, George and the band.&quot; The sessions also produced the Beatles&#x27; longest song yet, &quot;Hey Jude&quot;, released in August as a non-album single with &quot;Revolution&quot;.

Issued in November, the White Album was the band&#x27;s first Apple Records album release, although EMI continued to own their recordings. The record attracted more than 2 million advance orders, selling nearly 4 million copies in the US in little over a month, and its tracks dominated the playlists of American radio stations. Its lyrical content was the focus of much analysis by the counterculture. Despite its popularity, reviewers were largely confused by the album&#x27;s content and it failed to inspire the level of critical writing that &quot;Sgt. Pepper&quot; had.

==== &quot;Abbey Road&quot;, &quot;Let It Be&quot; and separation ====

Although &quot;Let It Be&quot; was the Beatles&#x27; final album release, it was largely recorded before &quot;Abbey Road&quot;. The project&#x27;s impetus came from an idea Martin attributes to McCartney, who suggested they &quot;record an album of new material and rehearse it, then perform it before a live audience for the very first time – on record and on film&quot;. Originally intended for a one-hour television programme to be called &quot;Beatles at Work&quot;, in the event much of the album&#x27;s content came from studio work beginning in January 1969, many hours of which were captured on film by director Michael Lindsay-Hogg. Martin said that the project was &quot;not at all a happy recording experience. It was a time when relations between the Beatles were at their lowest ebb.&quot; Lennon described the largely impromptu sessions as &quot;hell ... the most miserable ... on Earth&quot;, and Harrison, &quot;the low of all-time&quot;. Irritated by McCartney and Lennon, Harrison walked out for five days. Upon returning, he threatened to leave the band unless they &quot;abandon[ed] all talk of live performance&quot; and instead focused on finishing a new album, initially titled &quot;Get Back&quot;, using songs recorded for the TV special. He also demanded they cease work at Twickenham Film Studios, where the sessions had begun, and relocate to the newly finished Apple Studio. His bandmates agreed and it was decided to salvage the footage shot for the TV production for use in a feature film.

To alleviate tensions within the band and improve the quality of their live sound, Harrison invited keyboardist Billy Preston to participate in the last nine days of sessions. Preston received label billing on the &quot;Get Back&quot; single – the only musician ever to receive that acknowledgment on an official Beatles release. After the rehearsals, the band could not agree on a location to film a concert, rejecting several ideas, including a boat at sea, a lunatic asylum, the Libyan desert and the Colosseum. Ultimately, what would be their final live performance was filmed on the rooftop of the Apple Corps building at 3 Savile Row, London, on 30 January 1969. Five weeks later, engineer Glyn Johns, whom Lewisohn describes as &quot;Get Back&quot;″s &quot;uncredited producer&quot;, began work assembling an album, given &quot;free rein&quot; as the band &quot;all but washed their hands of the entire project&quot;.

New strains developed between the band members regarding the appointment of a financial adviser, the need for which had become evident without Epstein to manage business affairs. Lennon, Harrison and Starr favoured Allen Klein, who had managed the Rolling Stones and Sam Cooke; McCartney wanted Lee and John Eastman – father and brother, respectively, of Linda Eastman, whom McCartney married on 12 March. Agreement could not be reached, so both Klein and the Eastmans were temporarily appointed: Klein as the Beatles&#x27; business manager and the Eastmans as their lawyers. Further conflict ensued, however, and financial opportunities were lost. On 8 May, Klein was named sole manager of the band, the Eastmans having previously been dismissed as the Beatles&#x27; lawyers. McCartney refused to sign the management contract with Klein, but he was out-voted by the other Beatles.

Martin stated that he was surprised when McCartney asked him to produce another album, as the &quot;Get Back&quot; sessions had been &quot;a miserable experience&quot; and he had &quot;thought it was the end of the road for all of us&quot;. The primary recording sessions for &quot;Abbey Road&quot; began on 2 July. Lennon, who rejected Martin&#x27;s proposed format of a &quot;continuously moving piece of music&quot;, wanted his and McCartney&#x27;s songs to occupy separate sides of the album. The eventual format, with individually composed songs on the first side and the second consisting largely of a medley, was McCartney&#x27;s suggested compromise. Emerick noted that the replacement of the studio&#x27;s valve-based mixing console with a transistorised one yielded a less punchy sound, leaving the group frustrated at the thinner tone and lack of impact and contributing to its &quot;kinder, gentler&quot; feel relative to their previous albums.

On 4 July, the first solo single by a Beatle was released: Lennon&#x27;s &quot;Give Peace a Chance&quot;, credited to the Plastic Ono Band. The completion and mixing of &quot;I Want You (She&#x27;s So Heavy)&quot; on 20 August was the last occasion on which all four Beatles were together in the same studio. On 8 September, while Starr was in hospital, the other band members met to discuss recording a new album. They considered a different approach to songwriting by ending the Lennon–McCartney pretence and having four compositions apiece from Lennon, McCartney and Harrison, with two from Starr and a lead single around Christmas. On 20 September, Lennon announced his departure to the rest of the group but agreed to withhold a public announcement to avoid undermining sales of the forthcoming album.

Released on 26 September, &quot;Abbey Road&quot; sold four million copies within three months and topped the UK charts for a total of seventeen weeks. Its second track, the ballad &quot;Something&quot;, was issued as a single – the only Harrison composition that appeared as a Beatles A-side. &quot;Abbey Road&quot; received mixed reviews, although the medley met with general acclaim. Unterberger considers it &quot;a fitting swan song for the group&quot;, containing &quot;some of the greatest harmonies to be heard on any rock record&quot;. Musicologist and author Ian MacDonald calls the album &quot;erratic and often hollow&quot;, despite the &quot;semblance of unity and coherence&quot; offered by the medley. Martin singled it out as his favourite Beatles album; Lennon said it was &quot;competent&quot; but had &quot;no life in it&quot;.

For the still unfinished &quot;Get Back&quot; album, one last song, Harrison&#x27;s &quot;I Me Mine&quot;, was recorded on 3 January 1970. Lennon, in Denmark at the time, did not participate. In March, rejecting the work Johns had done on the project, now retitled &quot;Let It Be&quot;, Klein gave the session tapes to American producer Phil Spector, who had recently produced Lennon&#x27;s solo single &quot;Instant Karma!&quot; In addition to remixing the material, Spector edited, spliced and overdubbed several of the recordings that had been intended as &quot;live&quot;. McCartney was unhappy with the producer&#x27;s approach and particularly dissatisfied with the lavish orchestration on &quot;The Long and Winding Road&quot;, which involved a fourteen-voice choir and 36-piece instrumental ensemble. McCartney&#x27;s demands that the alterations to the song be reverted were ignored, and he publicly announced his departure from the band on 10 April, a week before the release of his first self-titled solo album.

On 8 May 1970, &quot;Let It Be&quot; was released. Its accompanying single, &quot;The Long and Winding Road&quot;, was expected to be the Beatles&#x27; last; it was released in the US, but not in the UK. The &quot;Let It Be&quot; documentary film followed later that month and would win the 1970 Academy Award for Best Original Song Score. &quot;Sunday Telegraph&quot; critic Penelope Gilliatt called it &quot;a very bad film and a touching one ... about the breaking apart of this reassuring, geometrically perfect, once apparently ageless family of siblings&quot;. Several reviewers stated that some of the performances in the film sounded better than their analogous album tracks. Describing &quot;Let It Be&quot; as the &quot;only Beatles album to occasion negative, even hostile reviews&quot;, Unterberger calls it &quot;on the whole underrated&quot;; he singles out &quot;some good moments of straight hard rock in &#x27;I&#x27;ve Got a Feeling&#x27; and &#x27;Dig a Pony&#x27;&quot; and praises &quot;Let It Be&quot;, &quot;Get Back&quot; and &quot;the folky &#x27;Two of Us&#x27;, with John and Paul harmonising together&quot;.

McCartney filed suit for the dissolution of the Beatles&#x27; contractual partnership on 31 December 1970. Legal disputes continued long after their break-up and the dissolution was not formalised until 29 December 1974, when Lennon signed the paperwork terminating the partnership while on vacation with his family at Walt Disney World Resort in Florida.

=== After the breakup ===
==== 1970s ====
Lennon, McCartney, Harrison and Starr all released solo albums in 1970. Their solo records sometimes involved one or more of the other members; Starr&#x27;s &quot;Ringo&quot; (1973) was the only album to include compositions and performances by all four ex-Beatles, albeit on separate songs. With Starr&#x27;s participation, Harrison staged the Concert for Bangladesh in New York City in August 1971. Other than an unreleased jam session in 1974, later bootlegged as &quot;A Toot and a Snore in &#x27;74&quot;, Lennon and McCartney never recorded together again.

Two double-LP sets of the Beatles&#x27; greatest hits, compiled by Klein, &quot;1962–1966&quot; and &quot;1967–1970&quot;, were released in 1973, at first under the Apple Records imprint. Commonly known as the &quot;Red Album&quot; and &quot;Blue Album&quot;, respectively, each has earned a Multi-Platinum certification in the US and a Platinum certification in the UK. Between 1976 and 1982, EMI/Capitol released a wave of compilation albums without input from the ex-Beatles, starting with the double-disc compilation &quot;Rock &#x27;n&#x27; Roll Music&quot;. The only one to feature previously unreleased material was &quot;The Beatles at the Hollywood Bowl&quot; (1977); the first officially issued concert recordings by the group, it contained selections from two shows they played during their 1964 and 1965 US tours.

The music and enduring fame of the Beatles were commercially exploited in various other ways, again often outside their creative control. In April 1974, the musical &quot;John, Paul, George, Ringo ... and Bert&quot;, written by Willy Russell and featuring singer Barbara Dickson, opened in London. It included, with permission from Northern Songs, eleven Lennon–McCartney compositions and one by Harrison, &quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot;. Displeased with the production&#x27;s use of his song, Harrison withdrew his permission to use it. Later that year, the off-Broadway musical &quot;Sgt. Pepper&#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band on the Road&quot; opened. &quot;All This and World War II&quot; (1976) was an unorthodox nonfiction film that combined newsreel footage with covers of Beatles songs by performers ranging from Elton John and Keith Moon to the London Symphony Orchestra. The Broadway musical &quot;Beatlemania&quot;, an unauthorised nostalgia revue, opened in early 1977 and proved popular, spinning off five separate touring productions. In 1979, the band sued the producers, settling for several million dollars in damages. &quot;Sgt. Pepper&#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band&quot; (1978), a musical film starring the Bee Gees and Peter Frampton, was a commercial failure and an &quot;artistic fiasco&quot;, according to Ingham.

Accompanying the wave of Beatles nostalgia and persistent reunion rumours in the US during the 1970s, several entrepreneurs made public offers to the Beatles for a reunion concert. Promoter Bill Sargent first offered the Beatles $10 million for a reunion concert in 1974. He raised his offer to $30 million in January 1976 and then to $50 million the following month. On 24 April 1976, during a broadcast of &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot;, producer Lorne Michaels jokingly offered the Beatles $3,000 to reunite on the show. Lennon and McCartney were watching the live broadcast at Lennon&#x27;s apartment at the Dakota in New York, which was within driving distance of the NBC studio where the show was being broadcast. The former bandmates briefly entertained the idea of going to the studio and surprising Michaels by accepting his offer, but decided not to.

==== 1980s ====
In December 1980, Lennon was shot and killed outside his New York City apartment by Mark David Chapman, an American Beatles fan. Harrison rewrote the lyrics of his song &quot;All Those Years Ago&quot; in Lennon&#x27;s honour. With Starr on drums and McCartney and his wife, Linda, contributing backing vocals, the song was released as a single in May 1981. McCartney&#x27;s own tribute, &quot;Here Today&quot;, appeared on his &quot;Tug of War&quot; album in April 1982. In 1984, Starr co-starred in McCartney&#x27;s film &quot;Give My Regards to Broad Street&quot;, and played with McCartney on several of the songs on the soundtrack. In 1987, Harrison&#x27;s &quot;Cloud Nine&quot; album included &quot;When We Was Fab&quot;, a song about the Beatlemania era.

When the Beatles&#x27; studio albums were released on CD by EMI and Apple Corps in 1987, their catalogue was standardised throughout the world, establishing a canon of the twelve original studio LPs as issued in the UK plus the US LP version of &quot;Magical Mystery Tour&quot;. All the remaining material from the singles and EPs that had not appeared on these thirteen studio albums was gathered on the two-volume compilation &quot;Past Masters&quot; (1988). Except for the &quot;Red&quot; and &quot;Blue&quot; albums, EMI deleted all its other Beatles compilations – including the &quot;Hollywood Bowl&quot; record – from its catalogue.

In 1988, the Beatles were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, their first year of eligibility. Harrison and Starr attended the ceremony with Lennon&#x27;s widow, Yoko Ono, and his two sons, Julian and Sean. McCartney declined to attend, citing unresolved &quot;business differences&quot; that would make him &quot;feel like a complete hypocrite waving and smiling with them at a fake reunion&quot;. The following year, EMI/Capitol settled a decade-long lawsuit filed by the band over royalties, clearing the way to commercially package previously unreleased material.

==== 1990s ====
&quot;Live at the BBC&quot;, the first official release of unissued Beatles performances in 17 years, appeared in 1994. That same year McCartney, Harrison and Starr collaborated on the &quot;Anthology&quot; project. &quot;Anthology&quot; was the culmination of work begun in 1970, when Apple Corps director Neil Aspinall, their former road manager and personal assistant, had started to gather material for a documentary with the working title &quot;The Long and Winding Road&quot;.

During 1995–96, the project yielded a television miniseries, an eight-volume video set and three two-CD/three-LP box sets featuring artwork by Klaus Voormann. Documenting their history in the band&#x27;s own words, the &quot;Anthology&quot; project included the release of several unissued Beatles recordings. Alongside producer Jeff Lynne, McCartney, Harrison and Starr also added new instrumental and vocal parts to songs recorded as demos by Lennon in the late 1970s, resulting in the release of two &quot;new&quot; Beatles singles, &quot;Free as a Bird&quot; and &quot;Real Love&quot;. A third Lennon demo, &quot;Now and Then&quot;, was also attempted, but abandoned due to the low quality of the recording. The &quot;Anthology&quot; releases were commercially successful and the television series was viewed by an estimated 400 million people. A book, &quot;The Beatles Anthology&quot;, followed in October 2000. In 1999, to coincide with the re-release of the 1968 film &quot;Yellow Submarine&quot;, an expanded soundtrack album, &quot;Yellow Submarine Songtrack&quot;, was issued.

==== 2000s ====
The Beatles&#x27; &quot;1&quot;, a compilation album of the band&#x27;s British and American number-one hits, was released on 13 November 2000. It became the fastest-selling album of all time, with 3.6 million sold in its first week and 13 million within a month. It topped albums charts in at least 28 countries. The compilation had sold 31 million copies globally by April 2009.

Harrison died from metastatic lung cancer in November 2001. McCartney and Starr were among the musicians who performed at the Concert for George, organised by Eric Clapton and Harrison&#x27;s widow, Olivia. The tribute event took place at the Royal Albert Hall on the first anniversary of Harrison&#x27;s death.

In 2003, &quot;Let It Be... Naked&quot;, a reconceived version of the &quot;Let It Be&quot; album, with McCartney supervising production, was released. One of the main differences from the Spector-produced version was the omission of the original string arrangements. It was a top-ten hit in both Britain and America. The US album configurations from 1964 to 1965 were released as box sets in 2004 and 2006; &quot;The Capitol Albums, Volume 1&quot; and &quot;Volume 2&quot; included both stereo and mono versions based on the mixes that were prepared for vinyl at the time of the music&#x27;s original American release.

As a soundtrack for Cirque du Soleil&#x27;s Las Vegas Beatles stage revue, &quot;Love&quot;, George Martin and his son Giles remixed and blended 130 of the band&#x27;s recordings to create what Martin called &quot;a way of re-living the whole Beatles musical lifespan in a very condensed period&quot;. The show premiered in June 2006 and the &quot;Love&quot; album was released that November. In April 2009, Starr performed three songs with McCartney at a benefit concert held at New York&#x27;s Radio City Music Hall and organised by McCartney.

On 9 September 2009, the Beatles&#x27; entire back catalogue was reissued following an extensive digital remastering process that lasted four years. Stereo editions of all twelve original UK studio albums, along with &quot;Magical Mystery Tour&quot; and the &quot;Past Masters&quot; compilation, were released on compact disc both individually and as a box set. A second collection, &quot;The Beatles in Mono&quot;, included remastered versions of every Beatles album released in true mono along with the original 1965 stereo mixes of &quot;Help!&quot; and &quot;Rubber Soul&quot; (both of which Martin had remixed for the 1987 editions). &quot;The Beatles: Rock Band&quot;, a music video game in the &quot;Rock Band&quot; series, was issued on the same day. In December 2009, the band&#x27;s catalogue was officially released in FLAC and MP3 format in a limited edition of 30,000 USB flash drives.

==== 2010s ====
Owing to a long-running royalty disagreement, the Beatles were among the last major artists to sign deals with online music services. Residual disagreement emanating from Apple Corps&#x27; dispute with Apple, Inc., iTunes&#x27; owners, over the use of the name &quot;Apple&quot; was also partly responsible for the delay, although in 2008, McCartney stated that the main obstacle to making the Beatles&#x27; catalogue available online was that EMI &quot;want[s] something we&#x27;re not prepared to give them&quot;. In 2010, the official canon of thirteen Beatles studio albums, &quot;Past Masters&quot; and the &quot;Red&quot; and &quot;Blue&quot; greatest-hits albums were made available on iTunes.

In 2012, EMI&#x27;s recorded music operations were sold to Universal Music Group. In order for Universal Music to acquire EMI, the European Union, for antitrust reasons, forced EMI to spin off assets including Parlophone. Universal was allowed to keep the Beatles&#x27; recorded music catalogue, managed by Capitol Records under its Capitol Music Group division. The entire original Beatles album catalogue was also reissued on vinyl in 2012; available either individually or as a box set.

In 2013, a second volume of BBC recordings, &quot;On Air – Live at the BBC Volume 2&quot;, was released. That December saw the release of another 59 Beatles recordings on iTunes. The set, titled &quot;The Beatles Bootleg Recordings 1963&quot;, had the opportunity to gain a 70-year copyright extension conditional on the songs being published at least once before the end of 2013. Apple Records released the recordings on 17 December to prevent them from going into the public domain and had them taken down from iTunes later that same day. Fan reactions to the release were mixed, with one blogger saying &quot;the hardcore Beatles collectors who are trying to obtain everything will already have these.&quot;

On 26 January 2014, McCartney and Starr performed together at the 56th Annual Grammy Awards, held at the Staples Center in Los Angeles. The following day, &quot;The Night That Changed America: A Grammy Salute to the Beatles&quot; television special was taped in the Los Angeles Convention Center&#x27;s West Hall. It aired on 9 February, the exact date of – and at the same time and on the same network as – the original broadcast of the Beatles&#x27; first US television appearance on &quot;The Ed Sullivan Show&quot;, 50 years earlier. The special included performances of Beatles songs by current artists as well as by McCartney and Starr, archival footage and interviews with the two surviving ex-Beatles carried out by David Letterman at the Ed Sullivan Theater. In December 2015, the Beatles released their catalogue for streaming on various streaming music services including Spotify and Apple Music.

In September 2016, the documentary film &quot;The Beatles: Eight Days a Week&quot; was released. Directed by Ron Howard, it chronicled the Beatles&#x27; career during their touring years from 1961 to 1966, from their performances in Liverpool&#x27;s the Cavern Club in 1961 to their final concert in San Francisco in 1966. The film was released theatrically on 15 September in the UK and the US, and started streaming on Hulu on 17 September. It received several awards and nominations, including for Best Documentary at the 70th British Academy Film Awards and the Outstanding Documentary or Nonfiction Special at the 69th Primetime Creative Arts Emmy Awards. An expanded, remixed and remastered version of &quot;The Beatles at the Hollywood Bowl&quot; was released on 9 September, to coincide with the release of the film.

On 18 May 2017, Sirius XM Radio launched a 24/7 radio channel, The Beatles Channel. A week later, &quot;Sgt. Pepper&#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band&quot; was reissued with new stereo mixes and unreleased material for the album&#x27;s 50th anniversary. Similar box sets were released for &quot;The Beatles&quot; in November 2018, and &quot;Abbey Road&quot; in September 2019. In October 2019, &quot;Abbey Road&quot; returned to number one on the UK Albums Chart. The Beatles broke their own record for the album with the longest gap between topping the charts as &quot;Abbey Road&quot; hit the top spot 50 years after its original release.

==== 2020s ====
In November 2021, &quot;The Beatles: Get Back&quot;, a documentary directed by Peter Jackson using footage captured for the &quot;Let It Be&quot; film, was released on Disney+ as a three-part miniseries. A book by the same title was released on 12 October. A super deluxe version of the &quot;Let It Be&quot; album was released on 15 October. In January 2022, the album &quot;Get Back (Rooftop Performance)&quot;, consisting of newly mixed audio of the Beatles&#x27; rooftop performance, was released on streaming services.

In 2022, McCartney and Starr collaborated on a new recording of &quot;Let It Be&quot; with Dolly Parton, Peter Frampton and Mick Fleetwood, which was released on Parton&#x27;s album &quot;Rockstar&quot; in November 2023. In October, a of &quot;Revolver&quot; was released, featuring unreleased demos, studio outtakes, the original mono mix and a new stereo remix using AI de-mixing technology developed by Peter Jackson&#x27;s WingNut Films, which had previously been used to restore audio for the documentary &quot;Get Back&quot;. New music videos were produced for &quot;Here, There and Everywhere&quot; and &quot;I&#x27;m Only Sleeping&quot;, the latter of which won the Grammy Award for Best Music Video at the 66th Annual Grammy Awards.
In June 2023, McCartney announced plans to release &quot;the final Beatles record&quot; later in the year, using Jackson&#x27;s de-mixing technology to extract Lennon&#x27;s voice from an old demo of a song that he had written as a solo artist. In October 2023, the song was revealed to be &quot;Now and Then&quot;, with a physical and digital release date of 2 November 2023. The official music video for &quot;Now and Then&quot; was released the following day, garnering upwards of 8 million views in its first 12 hours, as the song arrived on Spotify&#x27;s rankings as one of the most-streamed current songs. &quot;Now and Then&quot; debuted simultaneously across music, alternative, news/talk and sports stations. The song&#x27;s premiere achieved the record for the most radio stations to simulcast a music track. The song became their first UK number-one single since 1969. It won the Grammy Award for Best Rock Performance at the 67th Annual Grammy Awards, and was also nominated for Record of the Year. The nominations were also historically significant for making &quot;Now and Then&quot; the first Artificial Intelligence-assisted track to be nominated for a Grammy award, and first to win.

On 8 May 2024, the 1970 film &quot;Let It Be&quot; was released on Disney+, following a digital restoration by Jackson&#x27;s Park Road Post; it was the first time it was publicly screened since its original theatrical release.

== Artistry ==
=== Development ===
In &quot;Icons of Rock: An Encyclopedia of the Legends Who Changed Music Forever&quot;, Scott Schinder and Andy Schwartz describe the Beatles&#x27; musical evolution:

In &quot;The Beatles as Musicians&quot;, Walter Everett describes Lennon and McCartney&#x27;s contrasting motivations and approaches to composition: &quot;McCartney may be said to have constantly developed – as a means to entertain – a focused musical talent with an ear for counterpoint and other aspects of craft in the demonstration of a universally agreed-upon common language that he did much to enrich. Conversely, Lennon&#x27;s mature music is best appreciated as the daring product of a largely unconscious, searching but undisciplined artistic sensibility.&quot;

Ian MacDonald describes McCartney as &quot;a natural melodist – a creator of tunes capable of existing apart from their harmony&quot;. His melody lines are characterised as primarily &quot;vertical&quot;, employing wide, consonant intervals which express his &quot;extrovert energy and optimism&quot;. Conversely, Lennon&#x27;s &quot;sedentary, ironic personality&quot; is reflected in a &quot;horizontal&quot; approach featuring minimal, dissonant intervals and repetitive melodies which rely on their harmonic accompaniment for interest: &quot;Basically a realist, he instinctively kept his melodies close to the rhythms and cadences of speech, colouring his lyrics with bluesy tone and harmony rather than creating tunes that made striking shapes of their own.&quot; MacDonald praises Harrison&#x27;s lead guitar work for the role his &quot;characterful lines and textural colourings&quot; play in supporting Lennon and McCartney&#x27;s parts and describes Starr as &quot;the father of modern pop/rock drumming&quot;.

=== Influences ===
The Beatles&#x27; earliest influences include Elvis Presley, Carl Perkins, Little Richard, Chuck Berry and Gene Vincent. During the Beatles&#x27; co-residency with Little Richard at the Star-Club in Hamburg, from April to May 1962, he advised them on the proper technique for performing his songs. Of Presley, Lennon said, &quot;Nothing really affected me until I heard Elvis. If there hadn&#x27;t been Elvis, there would not have been the Beatles.&quot; Chuck Berry was particularly influential in terms of songwriting and lyrics. Lennon noted, &quot;He was well advanced of his time lyric-wise. We all owe a lot to him.&quot; Other early influences include Buddy Holly, Eddie Cochran, Roy Orbison, the Everly Brothers and Jerry Lee Lewis.

The Beatles continued to absorb influences long after their initial success, often finding new musical and lyrical avenues by listening to their contemporaries, including Bob Dylan, Smokey Robinson and the Miracles, the Who, Frank Zappa, the Lovin&#x27; Spoonful, the Byrds and the Beach Boys, whose 1966 album &quot;Pet Sounds&quot; amazed and inspired McCartney. Referring to the Beach Boys&#x27; creative leader, Martin later stated: &quot;No one made a greater impact on the Beatles than Brian [Wilson].&quot; Ravi Shankar, with whom Harrison studied for six weeks in India in late 1966, had a significant effect on his musical development during the band&#x27;s later years.

=== Genres ===
Originating as a skiffle group, the Beatles quickly embraced 1950s rock and roll and helped pioneer the Merseybeat genre, and their repertoire ultimately expanded to include a broad variety of pop music. Reflecting the range of styles they explored, Lennon said of &quot;Beatles for Sale&quot;, &quot;You could call our new one a Beatles country-and-western LP&quot;, while Gould credits &quot;Rubber Soul&quot; as &quot;the instrument by which legions of folk-music enthusiasts were coaxed into the camp of pop&quot;.

Although the 1965 song &quot;Yesterday&quot; was not the first pop record to employ orchestral strings, it marked the group&#x27;s first recorded use of classical music elements. Gould observes, &quot;The more traditional sound of strings allowed for a fresh appreciation of their talent as composers by listeners who were otherwise allergic to the din of drums and electric guitars.&quot; They continued to experiment with string arrangements to various effect; &quot;Sgt. Pepper&quot;″s &quot;She&#x27;s Leaving Home&quot;, for instance, is &quot;cast in the of a sentimental Victorian ballad&quot;, Gould writes, &quot;its words and music filled with the clichés of musical melodrama&quot;.

The band&#x27;s stylistic range expanded in another direction with their 1966 B-side &quot;Rain&quot;, described by Martin Strong as &quot;the first overtly psychedelic Beatles record&quot;. Other psychedelic numbers followed, such as &quot;Tomorrow Never Knows&quot; (recorded before &quot;Rain&quot;), &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot;, &quot;Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds&quot; and &quot;I Am the Walrus&quot;. The influence of Indian classical music was evident in Harrison&#x27;s &quot;The Inner Light&quot;, &quot;Love You To&quot; and &quot;Within You Without You&quot; – Gould describes the latter two as attempts &quot;to replicate the raga form in miniature&quot;.

Innovation was the most striking feature of their creative evolution, according to music historian and pianist Michael Campbell: &#x27;A Day in the Life&#x27; encapsulates the art and achievement of the Beatles as well as any single track can. It highlights key features of their music: the sound imagination, the persistence of tuneful melody and the close coordination between words and music. It represents a new category of song – more sophisticated than pop ... and uniquely innovative. There literally had never before been a song – classical or vernacular – that had blended so many disparate elements so imaginatively. Philosophy professor Bruce Ellis Benson agrees: &quot;The Beatles ... give us a wonderful example of how such far-ranging influences as Celtic music, rhythm and blues, and country and western could be put together in a new way.&quot;

Author Dominic Pedler describes the way they crossed musical styles: Far from moving sequentially from one genre to another (as is sometimes conveniently suggested) the group maintained &quot;in parallel&quot; their mastery of the traditional, catchy chart hit while simultaneously forging rock and dabbling with a wide range of peripheral influences from country to vaudeville. One of these threads was their take on folk music, which would form such essential groundwork for their later collisions with Indian music and philosophy. As the personal relationships between the band members grew increasingly strained, their individual tastes became more apparent. The minimalistic cover artwork for the White Album contrasted with the complexity and diversity of its music, which encompassed Lennon&#x27;s &quot;Revolution 9&quot; (whose musique concrète approach was influenced by Yoko Ono), Starr&#x27;s country song &quot;Don&#x27;t Pass Me By&quot;, Harrison&#x27;s rock ballad &quot;While My Guitar Gently Weeps&quot; and the &quot;proto-metal roar&quot; of McCartney&#x27;s &quot;Helter Skelter&quot;.

=== Contribution of George Martin ===

George Martin&#x27;s close involvement in his role as producer made him one of the leading candidates for the informal title of the &quot;fifth Beatle&quot;. He applied his classical musical training in various ways and functioned as &quot;an informal music teacher&quot; to the progressing songwriters, according to Gould. Martin suggested to a sceptical McCartney that the arrangement of &quot;Yesterday&quot; should feature a string quartet accompaniment, thereby introducing the Beatles to a &quot;hitherto unsuspected world of classical instrumental colour&quot;, in MacDonald&#x27;s description. Their creative development was also facilitated by Martin&#x27;s willingness to experiment in response to their suggestions, such as adding &quot;something baroque&quot; to a particular recording. In addition to scoring orchestral arrangements for recordings, Martin often performed on them, playing instruments including piano, organ and brass.

Collaborating with Lennon and McCartney required Martin to adapt to their different approaches to songwriting and recording. MacDonald comments, &quot;while [he] worked more naturally with the conventionally articulate McCartney, the challenge of catering to Lennon&#x27;s intuitive approach generally spurred him to his more original arrangements&quot;. Martin said of the two composers&#x27; distinct songwriting styles and his stabilising influence:

Harrison echoed Martin&#x27;s description of his stabilising role: I think we just grew through those years together, him as the straight man and us as the loonies; but he was always there for us to interpret our madness – we used to be slightly avant-garde on certain days of the week, and he would be there as the anchor person, to communicate that through the engineers and on to the tape.

=== In the studio ===
Making innovative use of technology while expanding the possibilities of recorded music, the Beatles urged experimentation by Martin and his recording engineers. Seeking ways to put chance occurrences to creative use, accidental guitar feedback, a resonating glass bottle, a tape loaded the wrong way round so that it played backwards – any of these might be incorporated into their music. Their desire to create new sounds on every new recording, combined with Martin&#x27;s arranging abilities and the studio expertise of EMI staff engineers Norman Smith, Ken Townsend and Geoff Emerick, all contributed significantly to their records from &quot;Rubber Soul&quot; and, especially, &quot;Revolver&quot; onwards.

Along with innovative studio techniques such as sound effects, unconventional microphone placements, tape loops, double tracking and vari-speed recording, the Beatles augmented their songs with instruments that were unconventional in rock music at the time. These included string and brass ensembles as well as Indian instruments such as the sitar in &quot;Norwegian Wood&quot; and the swarmandal in &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot;. They also used novel electronic instruments such as the Mellotron, with which McCartney supplied the flute voices on the &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; intro, and the clavioline, an electronic keyboard that created the unusual oboe-like sound on &quot;Baby, You&#x27;re a Rich Man&quot;.

== Legacy ==

Former &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; magazine associate editor Robert Greenfield compared the Beatles to Picasso, as &quot;artists who broke through the constraints of their time period to come up with something that was unique and original ... [I]n the form of popular music, no one will ever be more revolutionary, more creative and more distinctive ...&quot; The British poet Philip Larkin described their work as &quot;an enchanting and intoxicating hybrid of Negro rock-and-roll with their own adolescent romanticism&quot; and &quot;the first advance in popular music since the War&quot;.

In 1964, the Beatles&#x27; arrival in the U.S. is credited with initiating the album era; the music historian Joel Whitburn says that LP sales soon &quot;exploded and eventually outpaced the sales and releases of singles&quot; in the music industry. They not only sparked the British Invasion of the US, they became a globally influential phenomenon as well. From the 1920s, the US had dominated popular entertainment culture throughout much of the world, via Hollywood films, jazz, the music of Broadway and Tin Pan Alley, and later, the rock and roll that first emerged in Memphis, Tennessee. The Beatles are regarded as British cultural icons, with young adults from abroad naming the band among a group of people whom they most associated with UK culture.

Their musical innovations and commercial success inspired musicians worldwide. Many artists have acknowledged the Beatles&#x27; influence and enjoyed chart success with covers of their songs. On radio, their arrival marked the beginning of a new era; in 1968 the programme director of New York&#x27;s WABC radio station forbade his DJs from playing any &quot;pre-Beatles&quot; music, marking the defining line of what would be considered oldies on American radio. They helped to redefine the album as something more than just a few hits padded out with &quot;filler&quot;, and they were primary innovators of the modern music video. The Shea Stadium show with which they opened their 1965 North American tour attracted an estimated 55,600 people, then the largest audience in concert history; Spitz describes the event as a &quot;major breakthrough ... a giant step toward reshaping the concert business&quot;. Emulation of their clothing and especially their hairstyles, which became a mark of rebellion, had a global impact on fashion.

According to Gould, the Beatles changed the way people listened to popular music and experienced its role in their lives. From what began as the Beatlemania fad, the group&#x27;s popularity grew into what was seen as an embodiment of sociocultural movements of the decade. As icons of the 1960s counterculture, Gould continues, they became a catalyst for bohemianism and activism in various social and political arenas, fuelling movements such as women&#x27;s liberation, gay liberation and environmentalism. According to Peter Lavezzoli, after the &quot;more popular than Jesus&quot; controversy in 1966, the Beatles felt considerable pressure to say the right things and &quot;began a concerted effort to spread a message of wisdom and higher consciousness&quot;.

Other commentators such as Mikal Gilmore and Todd Leopold have traced the inception of their sociocultural impact earlier, interpreting even the Beatlemania period, particularly on their first visit to the US, as a key moment in the development of generational awareness.&lt;ref name=&quot;Leopold (Beatlemania/CNN)&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Referring to their appearance on &quot;the Ed Sullivan Show&quot; Leopold states: &quot;In many ways, the Sullivan appearance marked the beginning of a cultural revolution ... The Beatles were like aliens dropped into the United States of 1964.&quot; According to Gilmore:
Established in 2009, Global Beatles Day is an annual holiday on 25 June each year that honours and celebrates the ideals of the Beatles. The date was chosen to commemorate the date the group participated in the BBC programme &quot;Our World&quot; in 1967, performing &quot;All You Need Is Love&quot; broadcast to an international audience.

== Awards and achievements ==

In 1965, Queen Elizabeth II appointed Lennon, McCartney, Harrison and Starr Members of the Order of the British Empire (MBE). The Beatles won the 1971 Academy Award for Best Original Song Score for the film &quot;Let It Be&quot; (1970). The recipients of seven Grammy Awards and fifteen Ivor Novello Awards, the Beatles have six Diamond albums, as well as 20 Multi-Platinum albums, 16 Platinum albums and six Gold albums in the US. In the UK, the Beatles have four Multi-Platinum albums, four Platinum albums, eight Gold albums and one Silver album. They were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1988.

The best-selling band in history, the Beatles have sold more than 600 million units . From 1991 to 2009 the Beatles sold 57 million albums in United States, according to Nielsen Soundscan. They have had more number-one albums on the UK charts, fifteen, and sold more singles in the UK, 21.9 million, than any other act. In 2004, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; ranked the Beatles as the most significant and influential rock music artists of the last 50 years. They ranked number one on &quot;Billboard&quot; magazine&#x27;s list of the all-time most successful Hot 100 artists, released in 2008 to celebrate the US singles chart&#x27;s 50th anniversary. , they hold the record for most number-one hits on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100, with twenty. The Recording Industry Association of America certifies that the Beatles have sold 183 million units in the US, more than any other artist. They were collectively included in &quot;Time&quot; magazine&#x27;s compilation of the 20th century&#x27;s 100 most influential people. In 2014, they received the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award. In 2004 and 2011, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; named them the greatest artist of all time.

On 16 January each year, beginning in 2001, people celebrate World Beatles Day under UNESCO. In 2007, the Beatles became the first band to feature on a series of UK postage stamps issued by the Royal Mail. Earlier in 1999, the United States Postal Service issued a stamp dedicated to the Beatles and &quot;Yellow Submarine&quot;.

== Personnel ==
Principal members
* John Lennon – vocals, guitars, keyboards, harmonica, bass 
* Paul McCartney – vocals, bass, guitars, keyboards, drums 
* George Harrison – guitars, vocals, sitar, keyboards, bass 
* Ringo Starr – drums, percussion, vocals 

Early members
* Stuart Sutcliffe – bass, vocals 
* Tommy Moore – drums 
* Norman Chapman – drums 
* Pete Best – drums, vocals 
* Chas Newby – bass 

Touring musicians
* Jimmie Nicol – drums 
=== Timeline ===
== Discography ==
The Beatles&#x27; core catalogue consists of thirteen studio albums and one compilation album which collects all the UK non-album singles and EP tracks:

* &quot;Please Please Me&quot; (1963)
* &quot;With the Beatles&quot; (1963)
* &quot;A Hard Day&#x27;s Night&quot; (1964)
* &quot;Beatles for Sale&quot; (1964)
* &quot;Help!&quot; (1965)
* &quot;Rubber Soul&quot; (1965)
* &quot;Revolver&quot; (1966)
* &quot;Sgt. Pepper&#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band&quot; (1967)
* &quot;Magical Mystery Tour&quot; (1967)
* &quot;The Beatles&quot; (&quot;The White Album&quot;) (1968)
* &quot;Yellow Submarine&quot; (1969)
* &quot;Abbey Road&quot; (1969)
* &quot;Let It Be&quot; (1970)
* &quot;Past Masters&quot; (1988, compilation)
== Song catalogue ==
Until 1969, the Beatles&#x27; catalogue was published almost exclusively by Northern Songs, formed in February 1963 by music publisher Dick James specifically for Lennon and McCartney, though it later acquired songs by other artists. The company was organised with James and his partner, Emmanuel Silver, owning a controlling interest, variously described as 51% or 50% plus one share. McCartney had 20%. Reports again vary concerning Lennon&#x27;s portion – 19 or 20% – and Brian Epstein&#x27;s – 9 or 10% – which he received in lieu of a 25% band management fee. In 1965, the company went public. 5 million shares were created, of which the original principals retained 3.75 million. James and Silver each received 937,500 shares (18.75% of 5 million); Lennon and McCartney each received 750,000 shares (15%); and Epstein&#x27;s management company, NEMS Enterprises, received 375,000 shares (7.5%). Of the 1.25 million shares put up for sale, Harrison and Starr each acquired 40,000. At the time of the stock offering, Lennon and McCartney renewed their three-year publishing contracts, binding them to Northern Songs until 1973.

Harrison created Harrisongs to represent his Beatles compositions, but signed a three-year contract with Northern Songs that gave it the copyright to his work until March 1968, which included &quot;Taxman&quot; and &quot;Within You Without You&quot;. The songs on which Starr received co-writing credit before 1968, such as &quot;What Goes On&quot; and &quot;Flying&quot;, were also Northern Songs copyrights. Harrison did not renew his contract with Northern Songs when it ended, signing instead with Apple Publishing while retaining the copyright to his work from that point on. Harrison thus owned the rights to his later Beatles songs such as &quot;While My Guitar Gently Weeps&quot; and &quot;Something&quot;. That year, as well, Starr created Startling Music, which holds the rights to his Beatles compositions, &quot;Don&#x27;t Pass Me By&quot; and &quot;Octopus&#x27;s Garden&quot;.

In March 1969, James arranged to sell his and his partner&#x27;s shares of Northern Songs to the British broadcasting company Associated Television (ATV), founded by impresario Lew Grade, without first informing the Beatles. The band then made a bid to gain a controlling interest by attempting to work out a deal with a consortium of London brokerage firms that had accumulated a 14% holding. The deal collapsed over the objections of Lennon, who declared, &quot;I&#x27;m sick of being fucked about by men in suits sitting on their fat arses in the City&quot;. By the end of May, ATV had acquired a majority stake in Northern Songs, controlling nearly the entire Lennon–McCartney catalogue, as well as any future material until 1973. In frustration, Lennon and McCartney sold their shares to ATV in late October 1969.

In 1981, financial losses by ATV&#x27;s parent company, Associated Communications Corporation (ACC), led it to attempt to sell its music division. According to authors Brian Southall and Rupert Perry, Grade contacted McCartney, offering ATV Music and Northern Songs for $30 million. According to an account McCartney gave in 1995, he met with Grade and explained he was interested solely in the Northern Songs catalogue if Grade were ever willing to &quot;separate off&quot; that portion of ATV Music. Soon afterwards, Grade offered to sell him Northern Songs for £20 million, giving the ex-Beatle &quot;a week or so&quot; to decide. By McCartney&#x27;s account, he and Ono countered with a £5 million bid that was rejected. According to reports at the time, Grade refused to separate Northern Songs and turned down an offer of £21–25 million from McCartney and Ono for Northern Songs. In 1982, ACC was acquired in a takeover by Australian business magnate Robert Holmes à Court for £60 million.

In 1985, Michael Jackson purchased ATV for a reported $47.5 million. The acquisition gave him control over the publishing rights to more than 200 Beatles songs, as well as 40,000 other copyrights. In 1995, in a deal that earned him a reported $110 million, Jackson merged his music publishing business with Sony, creating a new company, Sony/ATV Music Publishing, in which he held a 50% stake. The merger made the new company, then valued at over half a billion dollars, the third-largest music publisher in the world. In 2016, Sony acquired Jackson&#x27;s share of Sony/ATV from the Jackson estate for $750 million.

Despite the lack of publishing rights to most of their songs, Lennon&#x27;s estate and McCartney continue to receive their respective shares of the writers&#x27; royalties, which together are 33% of total commercial proceeds in the US and which vary elsewhere around the world between 50 and 55%. Two of Lennon and McCartney&#x27;s earliest songs – &quot;Love Me Do&quot; and &quot;P.S. I Love You&quot; – were published by an EMI subsidiary, Ardmore &amp; Beechwood, before they signed with James. McCartney acquired their publishing rights from Ardmore in 1978, and they are the only two Beatles songs owned by McCartney&#x27;s company MPL Communications. On 18 January 2017, McCartney filed a suit in the United States district court against Sony/ATV Music Publishing seeking to reclaim ownership of his share of the Lennon–McCartney song catalogue beginning in 2018. Under US copyright law, for works published before 1978 the author can reclaim copyrights assigned to a publisher after 56 years. McCartney and Sony agreed to a confidential settlement in June 2017.

== Selected filmography ==
Fictionalised
* &quot;A Hard Day&#x27;s Night&quot; (1964)
* &quot;Help!&quot; (1965)
* &quot;Magical Mystery Tour&quot; (1967)
* &quot;Yellow Submarine&quot; (1968) (brief cameo)

Documentaries and filmed performances
* &quot;The Beatles at Shea Stadium&quot; (1966)
* &quot;Let It Be&quot; (1970)
* &quot;The Compleat Beatles&quot; (1982)
* &quot;It Was Twenty Years Ago Today&quot; (1987) (about &quot;Sgt. Pepper&quot;)
* &quot;The Beatles Anthology&quot; (1995)
* &quot;The Beatles: 1+&quot; (2015) (collection of digitally restored music videos)
* &quot;The Beatles: Eight Days a Week&quot; (2016) (about Beatlemania and touring years)
* &quot;The Beatles: Get Back&quot; (2021)
* &quot;Now and Then: The Last Beatles Song&quot; (2023) (short film about the creation of &quot;Now and Then&quot;)

== Concert tours ==
Headlining
* 1963 UK tours (winter–autumn)
* Autumn 1963 Sweden tour
* Winter 1964 North American tour
* Spring 1964 UK tour
* 1964 world tour
* 1964 North American tour
* 1965 European tour
* 1965 US tour
* 1965 UK tour
* 1966 tour of Germany, Japan and the Philippines
* 1966 US tour

Co-headlining
* Winter 1963 Helen Shapiro Tour
* Spring 1963 Tommy Roe/Chris Montez UK tour
* Roy Orbison/The Beatles Tour
== See also ==
* Outline of the Beatles
* The Beatles timeline
* Grammy Award records – most Grammys won by a group
* List of songs recorded by the Beatles

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== External links ==
* 
* 
* The Beatles on the Internet Archive
* The Beatles – FBI file</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="0" end="11" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="28" end="32" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="48" end="57" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="105" end="116" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="118" end="132" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="134" end="149" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632" start="154" end="165" title="Ringo Starr" label="Ringo Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q64878691" start="199" end="220" title="Cultural impact of the Beatles" label="most influential band"/>
<link wikidata="Q373342" start="232" end="245" title="popular music" label="popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995893" start="286" end="306" title="Counterculture of the 1960s" label="1960s counterculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q606089" start="370" end="377" title="skiffle" label="skiffle"/>
<link wikidata="Q546264" start="379" end="383" title="beat music" label="beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="394" end="417" title="rock and roll" label="rock &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="456" end="471" title="classical music" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196752" start="476" end="491" title="traditional pop" label="traditional pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="561" end="565" title="Folk music" label="folk"/>
<link wikidata="Q531426" start="570" end="582" title="Music of India" label="Indian music"/>
<link wikidata="Q846119" start="586" end="597" title="Psychedelic music" label="psychedelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83270" start="602" end="611" title="hard rock" label="hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716117" start="616" end="637" title="Recording practices of the Beatles" label="pioneers in recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q797819" start="784" end="800" title="Baby boomers" label="era&amp;#x27;s youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q239177" start="858" end="878" title="Lennon–McCartney" label="Lennon and McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q384664" start="935" end="948" title="the Quarrymen" label="the Quarrymen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="1011" end="1018" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q204218" start="1062" end="1078" title="Stuart Sutcliffe" label="Stuart Sutcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="1087" end="1091" title="Bass guitar" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q207335" start="1212" end="1221" title="Pete Best" label="Pete Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q203690" start="1275" end="1288" title="Brian Epstein" label="Brian Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q191819" start="1340" end="1353" title="George Martin" label="George Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="1446" end="1449" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q754877" start="1486" end="1496" title="Love Me Do" label="Love Me Do"/>
<link wikidata="Q549544" start="1584" end="1595" title="Beatlemania" label="Beatlemania"/>
<link wikidata="Q786447" start="1771" end="1783" title="fifth Beatle" label="fifth Beatle"/>
<link wikidata="Q211418" start="2001" end="2017" title="British Invasion" label="British Invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q913311" start="2094" end="2117" title="A Hard Day&amp;#x27;s Night (film)" label="A Hard Day&amp;#x27;s Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q190640" start="2389" end="2400" title="Rubber Soul" label="Rubber Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q185121" start="2421" end="2429" title="Revolver (Beatles album)" label="Revolver"/>
<link wikidata="Q169226" start="2453" end="2495" title="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band" label="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295515" start="2561" end="2572" title="The Beatles (album)" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q173643" start="2639" end="2649" title="Abbey Road" label="Abbey Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q16960681" start="2706" end="2715" title="album era" label="album era"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314176" start="2746" end="2762" title="psychedelic drug" label="psychedelic drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="2820" end="2836" title="electronic music" label="electronic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333350" start="2838" end="2847" title="album art" label="album art"/>
<link wikidata="Q193977" start="2852" end="2863" title="music video" label="music video"/>
<link wikidata="Q621231" start="2888" end="2899" title="Apple Corps" label="Apple Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139144" start="3014" end="3039" title="Break-up of the Beatles" label="the group&amp;#x27;s break-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145812" start="3120" end="3136" title="Collaborations between ex-Beatles" label="partial reunions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341090" start="3154" end="3166" title="Murder of John Lennon" label="was murdered"/>
<link wikidata="Q859266" start="3284" end="3318" title="List of best-selling music artists" label="best-selling music act of all time"/>
<link wikidata="Q19754079" start="3431" end="3459" title="Billboard charts" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; charts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3470" end="3490" title="List of Billboard Hot 100 chart achievements and milestones#" label="most number-one hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="3501" end="3530" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="3602" end="3617" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606989" start="3689" end="3703" title="List of awards and nominations received by the Beatles" label="many accolades"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="3721" end="3734" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q223313" start="3741" end="3752" title="Brit Awards" label="Brit Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="3757" end="3770" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3776" end="3800" title="Academy Award for Best Original Score#1970s" label="Best Original Song Score"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352613" start="3837" end="3846" title="Let It Be (1970 film)" label="Let It Be"/>
<link wikidata="Q61116" start="3866" end="3885" title="Ivor Novello Awards" label="Ivor Novello Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="3915" end="3941" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="4100" end="4113" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3833781" start="4131" end="4162" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 100 Greatest Artists of All Time" label="the greatest artists in history"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="4170" end="4174" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4211" end="4256" title="Time 100: The Most Important People of the Century" label="20th century&amp;#x27;s 100 most important people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="4379" end="4390" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q606089" start="4400" end="4407" title="skiffle" label="skiffle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019068" start="4440" end="4463" title="Calderstones School" label="Quarry Bank High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="4467" end="4476" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q384664" start="4501" end="4514" title="the Quarrymen" label="the Quarrymen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="4617" end="4631" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q670969" start="4674" end="4687" title="rhythm guitar" label="rhythm guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="4753" end="4768" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2133439" start="5080" end="5087" title="Raunchy (instrumental)" label="Raunchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q61046048" start="5157" end="5168" title="lead guitar" label="lead guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3835519" start="5276" end="5300" title="Liverpool College of Art" label="Liverpool College of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="5384" end="5397" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q204218" start="5704" end="5720" title="Stuart Sutcliffe" label="Stuart Sutcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977" start="5931" end="5942" title="Buddy Holly" label="Buddy Holly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143703" start="5947" end="5959" title="the Crickets" label="the Crickets"/>
<link wikidata="Q19865297" start="6068" end="6084" title="The Beat Ballad Show Tour" label="tour of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="6132" end="6144" title="Liverpudlian" label="Liverpudlian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6266730" start="6145" end="6158" title="Johnny Gentle" label="Johnny Gentle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411607" start="6348" end="6362" title="Allan Williams" label="Allan Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716135" start="6413" end="6442" title="The Beatles in Hamburg" label="residency for them in Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q207335" start="6478" end="6487" title="Pete Best" label="Pete Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q4979274" start="6609" end="6625" title="Bruno Koschmider" label="Bruno Koschmider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780375" start="6685" end="6698" title="Mark Lewisohn" label="Mark Lewisohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3976" start="6778" end="6792" title="Reeperbahn" label="red-light area"/>
<link wikidata="Q272888" start="7036" end="7045" title="Red-light district" label="Red light"/>
<link wikidata="Q3976" start="7046" end="7056" title="Reeperbahn" label="Reeperbahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1556" start="7069" end="7078" title="St. Pauli" label="St. Pauli"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7137" end="7147" title="The Beatles in Hamburg#The Indra and Kaiserkeller" label="Indra Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q834519" start="7215" end="7227" title="Kaiserkeller" label="Kaiserkeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769600" start="7294" end="7306" title="Top Ten Club" label="Top Ten Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q268748" start="7878" end="7894" title="Astrid Kirchherr" label="Astrid Kirchherr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716135" start="8002" end="8033" title="The Beatles in Hamburg" label="resident for periods in Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329406" start="8051" end="8059" title="Phenmetrazine" label="Preludin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420250" start="8239" end="8242" title="exi (subculture)" label="exi"/>
<link wikidata="Q506360" start="8445" end="8459" title="Bert Kaempfert" label="Bert Kaempfert"/>
<link wikidata="Q506453" start="8540" end="8553" title="Tony Sheridan" label="Tony Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q814344" start="8561" end="8573" title="backup band" label="backing band"/>
<link wikidata="Q155152" start="8604" end="8619" title="Polydor Records" label="Polydor Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449622" start="8775" end="8784" title="My Bonnie" label="My Bonnie"/>
<link wikidata="Q609727" start="8877" end="8887" title="Musikmarkt" label="Musikmarkt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716135" start="8943" end="8960" title="The Beatles in Hamburg" label="Hamburg residency"/>
<link wikidata="Q546264" start="9027" end="9037" title="beat music" label="Merseybeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q909845" start="9232" end="9247" title="the Cavern Club" label="the Cavern Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q203690" start="9266" end="9279" title="Brian Epstein" label="Brian Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368943" start="10034" end="10051" title="intracerebral hemorrhage" label="brain haemorrhage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275227" start="10324" end="10355" title="The Beatles&amp;#x27; Decca audition" label="Decca Records rejected the band"/>
<link wikidata="Q191819" start="10462" end="10475" title="George Martin" label="George Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="10498" end="10501" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q208909" start="10509" end="10519" title="Parlophone" label="Parlophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q209651" start="10597" end="10618" title="Abbey Road Studios" label="EMI Recording Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q10666486" start="10761" end="10776" title="session musician" label="session drummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632" start="10880" end="10891" title="Ringo Starr" label="Ringo Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q16509396" start="10902" end="10931" title="Rory Storm and the Hurricanes" label="Rory Storm and the Hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q754877" start="11004" end="11014" title="Love Me Do" label="Love Me Do"/>
<link wikidata="Q528036" start="11087" end="11097" title="Andy White (drummer)" label="Andy White"/>
<link wikidata="Q736799" start="11205" end="11221" title="Please Please Me (song)" label="Please Please Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419151" start="11238" end="11253" title="P.S. I Love You (Beatles song)" label="P.S. I Love You"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302843" start="11541" end="11556" title="Record Retailer" label="Record Retailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594101" start="11676" end="11693" title="Granada Reports" label="People and Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q456140" start="12020" end="12029" title="Star-Club" label="Star-Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q239177" start="12254" end="12279" title="Lennon–McCartney" label="a songwriting partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045845" start="12390" end="12403" title="lead vocalist" label="lead vocalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q181826" start="12950" end="12966" title="Please Please Me" label="Please Please Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="13702" end="13710" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q976031" start="13718" end="13741" title="Stephen Thomas Erlewine" label="Stephen Thomas Erlewine"/>
<link wikidata="Q690138" start="13986" end="14001" title="The Everly Brothers" label="Everly Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764806" start="14339" end="14353" title="From Me to You" label="From Me to You"/>
<link wikidata="Q931491" start="14578" end="14591" title="She Loves You" label="She Loves You"/>
<link wikidata="Q7639501" start="15363" end="15399" title="Tonight at the London Palladium" label="Sunday Night at the London Palladium"/>
<link wikidata="Q549544" start="15591" end="15602" title="Beatlemania" label="Beatlemania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335207" start="15775" end="15784" title="Tommy Roe" label="Tommy Roe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077577" start="15789" end="15801" title="Chris Montez" label="Chris Montez"/>
<link wikidata="Q19881496" start="16031" end="16052" title="Roy Orbison/The Beatles Tour" label="tour with Roy Orbison"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="16296" end="16312" title="Heathrow Airport" label="Heathrow Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q261492" start="16398" end="16401" title="BBC Television" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q10633" start="16774" end="16790" title="Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother" label="The Queen Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q153815" start="16795" end="16812" title="Princess Margaret, Countess of Snowdon" label="Princess Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16824" end="16849" title="List of Royal Variety Performances#1960s" label="Royal Variety Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q587234" start="16857" end="16880" title="Prince of Wales Theatre" label="Prince of Wales Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q182389" start="17040" end="17056" title="With the Beatles" label="With the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q609104" start="17600" end="17624" title="I Want to Hold Your Hand" label="I Want to Hold Your Hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015092" start="17739" end="17751" title="William Mann (critic)" label="William Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="17761" end="17770" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568099" start="18148" end="18184" title="South Pacific (soundtrack)" label="&amp;quot;South Pacific&amp;quot; soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263757" start="18203" end="18215" title="liner notes" label="sleeve notes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821844" start="18262" end="18273" title="Tony Barrow" label="Tony Barrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q193023" start="18492" end="18507" title="Capitol Records" label="Capitol Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q679007" start="18723" end="18730" title="Vee-Jay" label="Vee-Jay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929603" start="18843" end="18869" title="Introducing... The Beatles" label="Introducing... The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003258" start="19183" end="19187" title="Swan Records" label="Swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800894" start="19276" end="19290" title="Tidewater region" label="Tidewater area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949777" start="19337" end="19340" title="WGH (AM)" label="WGH"/>
<link wikidata="Q463447" start="19408" end="19426" title="American Bandstand" label="American Bandstand"/>
<link wikidata="Q609104" start="19509" end="19533" title="I Want to Hold Your Hand" label="I Want to Hold Your Hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q99639010" start="19558" end="19569" title="Brown Meggs" label="Brown Meggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957441" start="19722" end="19726" title="WQOF" label="WWDC"/>
<link wikidata="Q913616" start="20414" end="20431" title="Meet the Beatles!" label="Meet the Beatles!"/>
<link wikidata="Q8685" start="20666" end="20689" title="John F. Kennedy International Airport" label="John F. Kennedy Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q89409349" start="20821" end="20841" title="The Beatles on The Ed Sullivan Show" label="The Ed Sullivan Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q699413" start="21023" end="21030" title="Nielsen ratings" label="Nielsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971729" start="21302" end="21321" title="Washington Coliseum" label="Washington Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q200959" start="21425" end="21438" title="Carnegie Hall" label="Carnegie Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q193484" start="21704" end="21746" title="assassination of John F. Kennedy" label="assassination of President John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q211418" start="22481" end="22497" title="British Invasion" label="British Invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q546264" start="22586" end="22597" title="Beat music" label="beat groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="22602" end="22605" title="Pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141454" start="22619" end="22638" title="the Dave Clark Five" label="the Dave Clark Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q131422" start="22640" end="22651" title="the Animals" label="the Animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q693597" start="22653" end="22674" title="Herman&amp;#x27;s Hermits" label="Herman&amp;#x27;s Hermits"/>
<link wikidata="Q236212" start="22676" end="22688" title="Petula Clark" label="Petula Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q188713" start="22690" end="22699" title="the Kinks" label="the Kinks"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="22704" end="22722" title="the Rolling Stones" label="the Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="22828" end="22857" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542119" start="23040" end="23062" title="United Artists Records" label="United Artists Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q219400" start="23075" end="23092" title="United Artists" label="its film division"/>
<link wikidata="Q346508" start="23224" end="23238" title="Richard Lester" label="Richard Lester"/>
<link wikidata="Q913311" start="23246" end="23269" title="A Hard Day&amp;#x27;s Night (film)" label="A Hard Day&amp;#x27;s Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q64450" start="23533" end="23546" title="Marx Brothers" label="Marx Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23575" end="23596" title="A Hard Day&amp;#x27;s Night (album)#North American release" label="full soundtrack album"/>
<link wikidata="Q182518" start="23739" end="23762" title="A Hard Day&amp;#x27;s Night (album)" label="A Hard Day&amp;#x27;s Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135543" start="24188" end="24219" title="Rickenbacker 360/12" label="12-string electric Rickenbacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q322581" start="24810" end="24822" title="Al Aronowitz" label="Al Aronowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="24856" end="24865" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="24941" end="24949" title="cannabis (drug)" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4938123" start="25288" end="25302" title="bohemian style" label="bohemian style"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773376" start="25359" end="25370" title="teenybopper" label="teenybopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="25598" end="25608" title="folk music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357365" start="25947" end="25971" title="Electric Dylan controversy" label="electric instrumentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535486" start="26284" end="26300" title="The Beatles&amp;#x27; 1964 North American tour" label="the 1964 US tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652357" start="26333" end="26351" title="Racial segregation in the United States" label="racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527471" start="26445" end="26455" title="Gator Bowl Stadium" label="Gator Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q16568" start="26459" end="26480" title="Jacksonville, Florida" label="Jacksonville, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q5911521" start="26857" end="26880" title="Hotel George Washington (Jacksonville)" label="Hotel George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q207336" start="27175" end="27191" title="Beatles for Sale" label="Beatles for Sale"/>
<link wikidata="Q239177" start="27978" end="27994" title="Lennon–McCartney" label="Lennon–McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q23118" start="28146" end="28149" title="lysergic acid diethylamide" label="LSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314176" start="28427" end="28443" title="psychedelic drug" label="psychedelic drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q23118" start="28563" end="28567" title="Lysergic acid diethylamide" label="acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q103774" start="28903" end="28907" title="Ravi Shankar" label="Ravi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="29255" end="29267" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="29310" end="29337" title="Order of the British Empire" label="Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q128956" start="29365" end="29378" title="Harold Wilson" label="Harold Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131815" start="29617" end="29622" title="Help! (film)" label="Help!"/>
<link wikidata="Q95686467" start="29718" end="29722" title="Production of the James Bond films" label="Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q839842" start="30098" end="30103" title="Help! (song)" label="Help!"/>
<link wikidata="Q959812" start="30120" end="30134" title="Ticket to Ride (song)" label="Ticket to Ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q201816" start="30153" end="30158" title="Help!" label="Help!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374767" start="30416" end="30429" title="Act Naturally" label="Act Naturally"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580072" start="30446" end="30462" title="Dizzy, Miss Lizzy" label="Dizzy Miss Lizzy"/>
<link wikidata="Q199585" start="30543" end="30552" title="Let It Be (album)" label="Let It Be"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932553" start="30620" end="30630" title="Maggie May (folk song)" label="Maggie Mae"/>
<link wikidata="Q202698" start="30819" end="30828" title="Yesterday (Beatles song)" label="Yesterday"/>
<link wikidata="Q904528" start="31093" end="31127" title="Grammy Award for Album of the Year" label="Grammy Award for Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056326" start="31244" end="31256" title="Shea Stadium" label="Shea Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757223" start="31537" end="31545" title="foldback (sound engineering)" label="foldback"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="31626" end="31639" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q127856" start="31719" end="31732" title="Beverly Hills, California" label="Beverly Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543107" start="31870" end="31894" title="Saturday-morning cartoon" label="Saturday-morning cartoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112872" start="31909" end="31920" title="The Beatles (TV series)" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q190640" start="32518" end="32529" title="Rubber Soul" label="Rubber Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172998" start="32777" end="32788" title="Peter Brown (music industry)" label="Peter Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q229205" start="33243" end="33248" title="sitar" label="sitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q965926" start="33258" end="33294" title="Norwegian Wood (This Bird Has Flown)" label="Norwegian Wood (This Bird Has Flown)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324384" start="33692" end="33702" title="In My Life" label="In My Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q361940" start="34080" end="34092" title="Norman Smith (record producer)" label="Norman Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445837" start="34675" end="34694" title="Yesterday and Today" label="Yesterday and Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903237" start="34897" end="34907" title="Bill Harry" label="Bill Harry"/>
<link wikidata="Q103774" start="35282" end="35294" title="Ravi Shankar" label="Ravi Shankar"/>
<link wikidata="Q285536" start="35499" end="35512" title="Imelda Marcos" label="Imelda Marcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q942688" start="35575" end="35594" title="Malacañang Palace" label="Presidential Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q16843875" start="35786" end="35799" title="History of the Philippines (1965–1986)" label="Marcos regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="36141" end="36153" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300241" start="36229" end="36243" title="Maureen Cleave" label="Maureen Cleave"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="36408" end="36413" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11241519" start="36434" end="36443" title="Disciples (Christianity)" label="disciples"/>
<link wikidata="Q210181" start="36732" end="36742" title="Bible Belt" label="Bible Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="36755" end="36762" title="Holy See" label="Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419926" start="36876" end="36905" title="South African Broadcasting Corporation" label="national broadcasting service"/>
<link wikidata="Q185121" start="37435" end="37443" title="Revolver (Beatles album)" label="Revolver"/>
<link wikidata="Q846119" start="37681" end="37692" title="psychedelic music" label="psychedelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q272566" start="37741" end="37757" title="Aubrey Beardsley" label="Aubrey Beardsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q366700" start="37787" end="37801" title="Klaus Voormann" label="Klaus Voormann"/>
<link wikidata="Q929637" start="37961" end="37977" title="Paperback Writer" label="Paperback Writer"/>
<link wikidata="Q600839" start="38001" end="38005" title="Rain (Beatles song)" label="Rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q930414" start="38218" end="38233" title="Top of the Pops" label="Top of the Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q630338" start="38313" end="38333" title="Tomorrow Never Knows" label="Tomorrow Never Knows"/>
<link wikidata="Q211731" start="38379" end="38392" title="Timothy Leary" label="Timothy Leary"/>
<link wikidata="" start="38406" end="38480" title="The Psychedelic Experience: A Manual Based on the Tibetan Book of the Dead" label="The Psychedelic Experience: A Manual Based on the Tibetan Book of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274615" start="38645" end="38654" title="tape loop" label="tape loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q200799" start="38752" end="38765" title="Eleanor Rigby" label="Eleanor Rigby"/>
<link wikidata="Q373712" start="38796" end="38808" title="octet (music)" label="string octet"/>
<link wikidata="Q182537" start="39042" end="39048" title="Taxman" label="Taxman"/>
<link wikidata="Q430501" start="39299" end="39307" title="Vox AC30" label="Vox AC30"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122899" start="39406" end="39409" title="Vox (musical equipment)" label="Vox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033076" start="40198" end="40214" title="Candlestick Park" label="Candlestick Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q169226" start="40609" end="40651" title="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band" label="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q468612" start="40714" end="40727" title="Geoff Emerick" label="Geoff Emerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q300385" start="41203" end="41220" title="A Day in the Life" label="A Day in the Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q215233" start="41303" end="41316" title="double A-side" label="double A-side"/>
<link wikidata="Q213718" start="41330" end="41355" title="Strawberry Fields Forever" label="Strawberry Fields Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q842168" start="41368" end="41378" title="Penny Lane" label="Penny Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552913" start="41545" end="41555" title="Multitrack recording" label="four-track"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328465" start="42168" end="42183" title="Richard Poirier" label="Richard Poirier"/>
<link wikidata="Q134147" start="42441" end="42448" title="pop art" label="pop art"/>
<link wikidata="Q504611" start="42453" end="42464" title="Peter Blake (artist)" label="Peter Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3162050" start="42469" end="42481" title="Jann Haworth" label="Jann Haworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326986" start="42559" end="42570" title="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band (song)" label="title track"/>
<link wikidata="Q461394" start="42592" end="42616" title="List of images on the cover of Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band" label="a crowd of famous people"/>
<link wikidata="Q339747" start="42696" end="42702" title="hippie" label="hippie"/>
<link wikidata="Q904528" start="43263" end="43297" title="Grammy Award for Album of the Year" label="Grammy Award for Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q901203" start="43573" end="43593" title="Magical Mystery Tour (film)" label="Magical Mystery Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131791" start="43639" end="43655" title="Yellow Submarine (film)" label="Yellow Submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q219400" start="43707" end="43721" title="United Artists" label="United Artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q176098" start="43939" end="43959" title="All You Need Is Love" label="All You Need Is Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041743" start="44011" end="44020" title="Our World (1967 TV program)" label="Our World"/>
<link wikidata="Q932701" start="44101" end="44115" title="Summer of Love" label="Summer of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254661" start="44143" end="44155" title="flower power" label="flower power"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373919" start="44421" end="44428" title="Intentional community" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q244968" start="44498" end="44519" title="Maharishi Mahesh Yogi" label="Maharishi Mahesh Yogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q234178" start="44563" end="44569" title="Bangor, Gwynedd" label="Bangor"/>
<link wikidata="Q558571" start="44578" end="44603" title="Transcendental Meditation" label="Transcendental Meditation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973744" start="44759" end="44767" title="Bromoureide" label="carbitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q234074" start="45166" end="45177" title="Pattie Boyd" label="Pattie Boyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q60676411" start="45473" end="45516" title="Magical Mystery Tour" label="&amp;quot;Magical Mystery Tour&amp;quot; soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q169930" start="45562" end="45575" title="extended play" label="extended play"/>
<link wikidata="Q956699" start="46281" end="46291" title="Boxing Day" label="Boxing Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q610190" start="46491" end="46504" title="Daily Express" label="Daily Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q210534" start="46522" end="46532" title="Daily Mail" label="Daily Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="46590" end="46602" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q206097" start="47445" end="47458" title="Yellow Submarine (album)" label="soundtrack LP"/>
<link wikidata="Q466449" start="47876" end="47882" title="ashram" label="ashram"/>
<link wikidata="Q502141" start="47886" end="47895" title="Rishikesh" label="Rishikesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q379208" start="47977" end="47990" title="The Beatles in India" label="time in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730626" start="48348" end="48358" title="Magic Alex" label="Magic Alex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080335" start="48743" end="48753" title="Sexy Sadie" label="Sexy Sadie"/>
<link wikidata="Q621231" start="49009" end="49020" title="Apple Corps" label="Apple Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q621231" start="49582" end="49599" title="Apple Electronics" label="Apple Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780477" start="49728" end="49742" title="Apple Boutique" label="Apple Boutique"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295515" start="49998" end="50009" title="The Beatles (album)" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783176" start="50246" end="50266" title="Back in the U.S.S.R." label="Back in the U.S.S.R."/>
<link wikidata="Q637470" start="50283" end="50296" title="Dear Prudence" label="Dear Prudence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135588" start="50433" end="50451" title="Ob-La-Di, Ob-La-Da" label="Ob-La-Di, Ob-La-Da"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="50581" end="50592" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q117012" start="50600" end="50608" title="Yoko Ono" label="Yoko Ono"/>
<link wikidata="Q607742" start="51728" end="51736" title="Hey Jude" label="Hey Jude"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619535" start="51796" end="51806" title="Revolution (Beatles song)" label="Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q213710" start="51877" end="51890" title="Apple Records" label="Apple Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q199585" start="52479" end="52488" title="Let It Be (album)" label="Let It Be"/>
<link wikidata="Q173643" start="52575" end="52585" title="Abbey Road" label="Abbey Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308337" start="53085" end="53105" title="Michael Lindsay-Hogg" label="Michael Lindsay-Hogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454107" start="53765" end="53788" title="Twickenham Film Studios" label="Twickenham Film Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q621231" start="53855" end="53867" title="Apple Studios (recording studio)" label="Apple Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q311450" start="54099" end="54112" title="Billy Preston" label="Billy Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426279" start="54207" end="54215" title="Get Back" label="Get Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q10285" start="54491" end="54500" title="Colosseum" label="Colosseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11349248" start="54534" end="54556" title="The Beatles&amp;#x27; rooftop concert" label="final live performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631609" start="54616" end="54626" title="Savile Row" label="Savile Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q956126" start="54683" end="54693" title="Glyn Johns" label="Glyn Johns"/>
<link wikidata="Q324737" start="55128" end="55139" title="Allen Klein" label="Allen Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="55157" end="55175" title="the Rolling Stones" label="the Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q295919" start="55180" end="55189" title="Sam Cooke" label="Sam Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6513517" start="55208" end="55211" title="Lee Eastman" label="Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q228899" start="55268" end="55281" title="Linda McCartney" label="Linda Eastman"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582719" start="56404" end="56410" title="List of musical medleys" label="medley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="56511" end="56516" title="Vacuum tube" label="valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q836681" start="56833" end="56852" title="Give Peace a Chance" label="Give Peace a Chance"/>
<link wikidata="Q731721" start="56876" end="56892" title="Plastic Ono Band" label="Plastic Ono Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q210409" start="56929" end="56961" title="I Want You (She&amp;#x27;s So Heavy)" label="I Want You (She&amp;#x27;s So Heavy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q239177" start="57235" end="57251" title="Lennon–McCartney" label="Lennon–McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q210485" start="57748" end="57757" title="Something (Beatles song)" label="Something"/>
<link wikidata="Q164204" start="58106" end="58118" title="Musicologist" label="Musicologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630321" start="58130" end="58143" title="Ian MacDonald" label="Ian MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q369809" start="58499" end="58508" title="I Me Mine" label="I Me Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q213793" start="58747" end="58759" title="Phil Spector" label="Phil Spector"/>
<link wikidata="Q545718" start="58819" end="58833" title="Instant Karma!" label="Instant Karma!"/>
<link wikidata="Q640978" start="59112" end="59137" title="The Long and Winding Road" label="The Long and Winding Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q836684" start="59409" end="59431" title="McCartney (album)" label="self-titled solo album"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352613" start="59648" end="59657" title="Let It Be (1970 film)" label="Let It Be"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59748" end="59772" title="Academy Award for Best Original Score#1970s" label="Best Original Song Score"/>
<link wikidata="Q12741725" start="59780" end="59796" title="Sunday Telegraph" label="Sunday Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q3209551" start="59810" end="59827" title="Penelope Gilliatt" label="Penelope Gilliatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272704" start="60361" end="60384" title="I&amp;#x27;ve Got a Feeling" label="I&amp;#x27;ve Got a Feeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072824" start="60401" end="60411" title="Dig a Pony" label="Dig a Pony"/>
<link wikidata="Q184259" start="60442" end="60451" title="Let It Be (song)" label="Let It Be"/>
<link wikidata="Q937141" start="60506" end="60515" title="Two of Us (Beatles song)" label="Two of Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q206859" start="60890" end="60907" title="Walt Disney World" label="Walt Disney World"/>
<link wikidata="Q204571" start="61133" end="61138" title="Ringo (album)" label="Ringo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164558" start="61311" end="61337" title="the Concert for Bangladesh" label="the Concert for Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q558325" start="61423" end="61433" title="Bootleg recording" label="bootlegged"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424334" start="61443" end="61473" title="A Toot and a Snore in &amp;#x27;74" label="A Toot and a Snore in &amp;#x27;74"/>
<link wikidata="Q664064" start="61614" end="61623" title="1962–1966" label="1962–1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950377" start="61640" end="61649" title="1967–1970" label="1967–1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="61826" end="61854" title="Music recording certification" label="Multi-Platinum certification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931958" start="62061" end="62090" title="Rock &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Roll Music (album)" label="Rock &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Roll Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753511" start="62163" end="62196" title="The Beatles at the Hollywood Bowl" label="The Beatles at the Hollywood Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6217325" start="62532" end="62570" title="John, Paul, George, Ringo ... and Bert" label="John, Paul, George, Ringo ... and Bert"/>
<link wikidata="Q761466" start="62589" end="62602" title="Willy Russell" label="Willy Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q807398" start="62624" end="62639" title="Barbara Dickson" label="Barbara Dickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q210401" start="62773" end="62791" title="Here Comes the Sun" label="Here Comes the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7459778" start="62946" end="63000" title="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band on the Road" label="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band on the Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q654160" start="63021" end="63046" title="All This and World War II" label="All This and World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="63181" end="63191" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q211696" start="63196" end="63206" title="Keith Moon" label="Keith Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q155805" start="63214" end="63239" title="London Symphony Orchestra" label="London Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892971" start="63268" end="63279" title="Beatlemania (musical)" label="Beatlemania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532586" start="63502" end="63544" title="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band (film)" label="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q133405" start="63587" end="63595" title="Bee Gees" label="Bee Gees"/>
<link wikidata="Q337089" start="63600" end="63614" title="Peter Frampton" label="Peter Frampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="64113" end="64132" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q521221" start="64149" end="64163" title="Lorne Michaels" label="Lorne Michaels"/>
<link wikidata="Q829806" start="64308" end="64318" title="the Dakota" label="the Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q25004498" start="64373" end="64383" title="Studio 8H" label="NBC studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341090" start="64607" end="64622" title="murder of John Lennon" label="shot and killed"/>
<link wikidata="Q80462" start="64662" end="64680" title="Mark David Chapman" label="Mark David Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q672299" start="64753" end="64772" title="All Those Years Ago" label="All Those Years Ago"/>
<link wikidata="Q228899" start="64852" end="64857" title="Linda McCartney" label="Linda"/>
<link wikidata="Q891765" start="64971" end="64981" title="Here Today (Paul McCartney song)" label="Here Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q525160" start="65011" end="65021" title="Tug of War (Paul McCartney album)" label="Tug of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5565745" start="65106" end="65137" title="Give My Regards to Broad Street (film)" label="Give My Regards to Broad Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753884" start="65202" end="65212" title="Give My Regards to Broad Street" label="soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q514298" start="65245" end="65255" title="Cloud Nine (George Harrison album)" label="Cloud Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078785" start="65283" end="65298" title="When We Was Fab" label="When We Was Fab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473159" start="65775" end="65787" title="Past Masters" label="Past Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="66026" end="66052" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q357974" start="66182" end="66188" title="Julian Lennon" label="Julian"/>
<link wikidata="Q311238" start="66193" end="66197" title="Sean Lennon" label="Sean"/>
<link wikidata="Q934340" start="66583" end="66598" title="Live at the BBC (Beatles album)" label="Live at the BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q572541" start="66768" end="66777" title="The Beatles Anthology" label="Anthology"/>
<link wikidata="Q380912" start="66884" end="66897" title="Neil Aspinall" label="Neil Aspinall"/>
<link wikidata="Q366700" start="67204" end="67218" title="Klaus Voormann" label="Klaus Voormann"/>
<link wikidata="Q314358" start="67390" end="67400" title="Jeff Lynne" label="Jeff Lynne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253825" start="67603" end="67617" title="Free as a Bird" label="Free as a Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1698590" start="67634" end="67643" title="Real Love (Beatles song)" label="Real Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293037" start="67678" end="67690" title="Now and Then (Beatles song)" label="Now and Then"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716123" start="67924" end="67945" title="The Beatles Anthology (book)" label="The Beatles Anthology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423277" start="68103" end="68129" title="Yellow Submarine Songtrack" label="Yellow Submarine Songtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q208994" start="68190" end="68191" title="1 (Beatles album)" label="1"/>
<link wikidata="Q181876" start="68567" end="68577" title="Metastasis" label="metastatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q868678" start="68674" end="68692" title="Concert for George" label="Concert for George"/>
<link wikidata="Q48187" start="68707" end="68719" title="Eric Clapton" label="Eric Clapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q442991" start="68747" end="68753" title="Olivia Harrison" label="Olivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193639" start="68791" end="68808" title="Royal Albert Hall" label="Royal Albert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507902" start="68876" end="68894" title="Let It Be... Naked" label="Let It Be... Naked"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610388" start="69275" end="69303" title="The Capitol Albums, Volume 1" label="The Capitol Albums, Volume 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q733296" start="69320" end="69328" title="The Capitol Albums, Volume 2" label="Volume 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q504715" start="69502" end="69518" title="Cirque du Soleil" label="Cirque du Soleil"/>
<link wikidata="Q745608" start="69526" end="69535" title="Las Vegas Strip" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511457" start="69563" end="69567" title="Love (Cirque du Soleil)" label="Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q723009" start="69601" end="69606" title="Giles Martin" label="Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q48445" start="69619" end="69626" title="Mashup (music)" label="blended"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324743" start="69830" end="69834" title="Love (Beatles album)" label="Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q753437" start="69978" end="69999" title="Radio City Music Hall" label="Radio City Music Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q603122" start="70377" end="70389" title="The Beatles (The Original Studio Recordings)" label="as a box set"/>
<link wikidata="Q370822" start="70418" end="70437" title="The Beatles in Mono" label="The Beatles in Mono"/>
<link wikidata="" start="70674" end="70696" title="The Beatles: Rock Band" label="The Beatles: Rock Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323659" start="70736" end="70745" title="Rock Band" label="Rock Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q219848" start="70859" end="70863" title="FLAC" label="FLAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q42591" start="70868" end="70871" title="MP3" label="MP3"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="70882" end="70926" title="The Beatles (The Original Studio Recordings)#Limited edition USB flash drive" label="a limited edition of 30,000 USB flash drives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995539" start="71116" end="71158" title="Apple Corps v Apple Computer" label="Apple Corps&amp;#x27; dispute with Apple, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q9589" start="71160" end="71166" title="iTunes" label="iTunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q38903" start="71706" end="71727" title="Universal Music Group" label="Universal Music Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="71778" end="71792" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q326498" start="71798" end="71807" title="antitrust" label="antitrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q193023" start="71954" end="71969" title="Capitol Records" label="Capitol Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937480" start="71980" end="71999" title="Capitol Music Group" label="Capitol Music Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q14915212" start="72188" end="72221" title="On Air – Live at the BBC Volume 2" label="On Air – Live at the BBC Volume 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q15394009" start="72339" end="72374" title="The Beatles Bootleg Recordings 1963" label="The Beatles Bootleg Recordings 1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q15285041" start="72916" end="72941" title="56th Annual Grammy Awards" label="56th Annual Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q186080" start="72955" end="72969" title="Staples Center" label="Staples Center"/>
<link wikidata="" start="73011" end="73073" title="The Night That Changed America: A Grammy Salute to the Beatles" label="The Night That Changed America: A Grammy Salute to the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q564589" start="73116" end="73145" title="Los Angeles Convention Center" label="Los Angeles Convention Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q217298" start="73574" end="73589" title="David Letterman" label="David Letterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268242" start="73597" end="73616" title="Ed Sullivan Theater" label="Ed Sullivan Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q689141" start="73733" end="73740" title="Spotify" label="Spotify"/>
<link wikidata="Q20056642" start="73745" end="73756" title="Apple Music" label="Apple Music"/>
<link wikidata="" start="73805" end="73835" title="The Beatles: Eight Days a Week" label="The Beatles: Eight Days a Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q103646" start="73868" end="73878" title="Ron Howard" label="Ron Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630304" start="74180" end="74184" title="Hulu" label="Hulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277465" start="74601" end="74616" title="Sirius XM Radio" label="Sirius XM Radio"/>
<link wikidata="" start="74689" end="74731" title="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band: 50th Anniversary Edition" label="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band"/>
<link wikidata="" start="74877" end="74888" title="The Beatles: 50th Anniversary Edition" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="" start="74923" end="74933" title="Abbey Road: 50th Anniversary Edition" label="Abbey Road"/>
<link wikidata="" start="75264" end="75285" title="The Beatles: Get Back" label="The Beatles: Get Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q4465" start="75319" end="75332" title="Peter Jackson" label="Peter Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q54958752" start="75408" end="75415" title="Disney+" label="Disney+"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259759" start="75432" end="75442" title="miniseries" label="miniseries"/>
<link wikidata="" start="75499" end="75519" title="Let It Be: Special Edition" label="super deluxe version"/>
<link wikidata="Q199585" start="75533" end="75542" title="Let It Be (album)" label="Let It Be"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75616" end="75646" title="The Beatles&amp;#x27; rooftop concert#Set list" label="Get Back (Rooftop Performance)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11349248" start="75689" end="75726" title="The Beatles&amp;#x27; rooftop concert" label="the Beatles&amp;#x27; rooftop performance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75810" end="75825" title="Let It Be (song)#Dolly Parton version" label="a new recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q184259" start="75835" end="75844" title="Let It Be (song)" label="Let It Be"/>
<link wikidata="Q180453" start="75856" end="75868" title="Dolly Parton" label="Dolly Parton"/>
<link wikidata="Q337089" start="75870" end="75884" title="Peter Frampton" label="Peter Frampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q508439" start="75889" end="75903" title="Mick Fleetwood" label="Mick Fleetwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q118252062" start="75953" end="75961" title="Rockstar (Dolly Parton album)" label="Rockstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="76134" end="76136" title="Artificial intelligence" label="AI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569323" start="76192" end="76205" title="WingNut Films" label="WingNut Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343063" start="76338" end="76364" title="Here, There and Everywhere" label="Here, There and Everywhere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035545" start="76381" end="76403" title="I&amp;#x27;m Only Sleeping" label="I&amp;#x27;m Only Sleeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976730" start="76439" end="76472" title="Grammy Award for Best Music Video" label="Grammy Award for Best Music Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q119580062" start="76480" end="76505" title="66th Annual Grammy Awards" label="66th Annual Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293037" start="76803" end="76815" title="Now and Then (Beatles song)" label="Now and Then"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542182" start="77399" end="77437" title="Grammy Award for Best Rock Performance" label="Grammy Award for Best Rock Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q126367232" start="77445" end="77470" title="67th Annual Grammy Awards" label="67th Annual Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q843219" start="77499" end="77517" title="Grammy Award for Record of the Year" label="Record of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="77616" end="77639" title="Artificial intelligence" label="Artificial Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352613" start="77745" end="77754" title="Let It Be (1970 film)" label="Let It Be"/>
<link wikidata="Q17056539" start="77836" end="77850" title="Park Road Post" label="Park Road Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q16210942" start="78183" end="78197" title="Walter Everett (musicologist)" label="Walter Everett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029382" start="78936" end="78945" title="Consonance and dissonance" label="consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q310339" start="79817" end="79829" title="Carl Perkins" label="Carl Perkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q82222" start="79831" end="79845" title="Little Richard" label="Little Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921" start="79847" end="79858" title="Chuck Berry" label="Chuck Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q82311" start="79863" end="79875" title="Gene Vincent" label="Gene Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q456140" start="79942" end="79951" title="Star-Club" label="Star-Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969" start="80428" end="80441" title="Eddie Cochran" label="Eddie Cochran"/>
<link wikidata="Q188426" start="80443" end="80454" title="Roy Orbison" label="Roy Orbison"/>
<link wikidata="Q690138" start="80456" end="80475" title="the Everly Brothers" label="the Everly Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q202729" start="80480" end="80495" title="Jerry Lee Lewis" label="Jerry Lee Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="80669" end="80678" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761222" start="80680" end="80712" title="Smokey Robinson and the Miracles" label="Smokey Robinson and the Miracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="80714" end="80721" title="the Who" label="the Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q127330" start="80723" end="80734" title="Frank Zappa" label="Frank Zappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053608" start="80736" end="80760" title="the Lovin&amp;#x27; Spoonful" label="the Lovin&amp;#x27; Spoonful"/>
<link wikidata="Q211526" start="80762" end="80771" title="the Byrds" label="the Byrds"/>
<link wikidata="Q183048" start="80776" end="80790" title="the Beach Boys" label="the Beach Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q212863" start="80815" end="80825" title="Pet Sounds" label="Pet Sounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q513179" start="82209" end="82232" title="She&amp;#x27;s Leaving Home" label="She&amp;#x27;s Leaving Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q6775107" start="82525" end="82538" title="Martin C. Strong" label="Martin Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q723178" start="82758" end="82787" title="Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds" label="Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138639" start="82804" end="82819" title="I Am the Walrus" label="I Am the Walrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323698" start="82844" end="82866" title="Indian classical music" label="Indian classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q670989" start="82904" end="82919" title="The Inner Light (song)" label="The Inner Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935345" start="82933" end="82944" title="Love You To" label="Love You To"/>
<link wikidata="Q541835" start="82961" end="82983" title="Within You Without You" label="Within You Without You"/>
<link wikidata="Q216926" start="83058" end="83062" title="raga" label="raga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346881" start="84762" end="84774" title="Revolution 9" label="Revolution 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q823560" start="84788" end="84804" title="musique concrète" label="musique concrète"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="84856" end="84863" title="country music" label="country"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319841" start="84875" end="84896" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Pass Me By" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Pass Me By"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077388" start="84920" end="84931" title="rock ballad" label="rock ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q548046" start="84938" end="84966" title="While My Guitar Gently Weeps" label="While My Guitar Gently Weeps"/>
<link wikidata="" start="84987" end="84998" title="Heavy metal music#Origins: late 1960s and early 1970s" label="proto-metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057533" start="85036" end="85050" title="Helter Skelter (song)" label="Helter Skelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q191819" start="85098" end="85111" title="George Martin" label="George Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q786447" start="85236" end="85248" title="fifth Beatle" label="fifth Beatle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8361" start="85856" end="85863" title="baroque music" label="baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q180744" start="86039" end="86044" title="Brass instrument" label="brass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388620" start="87475" end="87487" title="Ken Townsend" label="Ken Townsend"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719318" start="87679" end="87692" title="audio signal processing" label="sound effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300113" start="87744" end="87759" title="double tracking" label="double tracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027065" start="87764" end="87774" title="vari-speed" label="vari-speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q627110" start="88017" end="88027" title="swarmandal" label="swarmandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978687" start="88244" end="88254" title="clavioline" label="clavioline"/>
<link wikidata="Q241554" start="88329" end="88357" title="Baby, You&amp;#x27;re a Rich Man" label="Baby, You&amp;#x27;re a Rich Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="88393" end="88406" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344936" start="88439" end="88456" title="Robert Greenfield" label="Robert Greenfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593" start="88481" end="88488" title="Pablo Picasso" label="Picasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q313758" start="88755" end="88768" title="Philip Larkin" label="Philip Larkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16960681" start="89050" end="89059" title="album era" label="album era"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251475" start="89081" end="89094" title="Joel Whitburn" label="Joel Whitburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="89431" end="89440" title="Cinema of the United States" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="89448" end="89452" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121111" start="89480" end="89493" title="Tin Pan Alley" label="Tin Pan Alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="89546" end="89564" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833628" start="89901" end="89922" title="List of cover versions of Beatles songs" label="covers of their songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322074" start="90033" end="90037" title="WABC (AM)" label="WABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852647" start="90170" end="90176" title="oldies" label="oldies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358248" start="90291" end="90297" title="filler (media)" label="filler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535444" start="90416" end="90440" title="The Beatles&amp;#x27; 1965 US tour" label="1965 North American tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995893" start="91060" end="91080" title="Counterculture of the 1960s" label="1960s counterculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q207175" start="91126" end="91137" title="bohemianism" label="bohemianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15580856" start="91218" end="91241" title="feminist movement" label="women&amp;#x27;s liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11076311" start="91243" end="91257" title="gay liberation" label="gay liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8189417" start="91262" end="91278" title="environmental movement" label="environmentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q65046239" start="92170" end="92188" title="Global Beatles Day" label="Global Beatles Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="92360" end="92363" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041743" start="92380" end="92389" title="Our World (1967 TV program)" label="Our World"/>
<link wikidata="Q176098" start="92422" end="92442" title="All You Need Is Love" label="All You Need Is Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="92612" end="92639" title="Order of the British Empire" label="Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92690" end="92714" title="Academy Award for Best Original Score#1970s" label="Best Original Song Score"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352613" start="92734" end="92743" title="Let It Be (1970 film)" label="Let It Be"/>
<link wikidata="Q61116" start="92808" end="92827" title="Ivor Novello Awards" label="Ivor Novello Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="92850" end="92864" title="Music recording certification" label="Diamond albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="92986" end="93007" title="Music recording certification" label="Multi-Platinum albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="93014" end="93029" title="Music recording certification" label="Platinum albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="93037" end="93048" title="Music recording certification" label="Gold albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="93057" end="93069" title="Music recording certification" label="Silver album"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="93099" end="93125" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q859266" start="93140" end="93157" title="List of best-selling music artists" label="best-selling band"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606190" start="93344" end="93378" title="List of artists by number of UK Albums Chart number ones" label="number-one albums on the UK charts"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="93623" end="93632" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="93888" end="93929" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="94065" end="94069" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="" start="94111" end="94158" title="Time 100: The Most Important People of the Century" label="20th century&amp;#x27;s 100 most influential people"/>
<link wikidata="Q935843" start="94187" end="94220" title="Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award" label="Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="94246" end="94259" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="94396" end="94402" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598867" start="94463" end="94490" title="Great Britain commemorative stamps 2000–2009" label="series of UK postage stamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q638098" start="94505" end="94515" title="Royal Mail" label="Royal Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="94538" end="94566" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="94678" end="94689" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="94739" end="94753" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="94799" end="94814" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632" start="94860" end="94871" title="Ringo Starr" label="Ringo Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q204218" start="94918" end="94934" title="Stuart Sutcliffe" label="Stuart Sutcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5992927" start="94953" end="94964" title="Tommy Moore (musician)" label="Tommy Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q30593643" start="94976" end="94990" title="Norman Chapman" label="Norman Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q207335" start="95002" end="95011" title="Pete Best" label="Pete Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087041" start="95031" end="95041" title="Chas Newby" label="Chas Newby"/>
<link wikidata="Q602031" start="95071" end="95083" title="Jimmie Nicol" label="Jimmie Nicol"/>
<link wikidata="Q169930" start="95270" end="95272" title="Extended play" label="EP"/>
<link wikidata="Q181826" start="95290" end="95306" title="Please Please Me" label="Please Please Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q182389" start="95328" end="95344" title="With the Beatles" label="With the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q182518" start="95366" end="95389" title="A Hard Day&amp;#x27;s Night (album)" label="A Hard Day&amp;#x27;s Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q207336" start="95411" end="95427" title="Beatles for Sale" label="Beatles for Sale"/>
<link wikidata="Q201816" start="95449" end="95454" title="Help!" label="Help!"/>
<link wikidata="Q190640" start="95476" end="95487" title="Rubber Soul" label="Rubber Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q185121" start="95509" end="95517" title="Revolver (Beatles album)" label="Revolver"/>
<link wikidata="Q169226" start="95539" end="95581" title="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band" label="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q60676411" start="95603" end="95623" title="Magical Mystery Tour" label="Magical Mystery Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295515" start="95645" end="95656" title="The Beatles (album)" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q206097" start="95708" end="95724" title="Yellow Submarine (album)" label="Yellow Submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q173643" start="95746" end="95756" title="Abbey Road" label="Abbey Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q199585" start="95778" end="95787" title="Let It Be (album)" label="Let It Be"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473159" start="95809" end="95821" title="Past Masters" label="Past Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499404" start="95945" end="95959" title="Northern Songs" label="Northern Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q956426" start="96004" end="96014" title="Dick James" label="Dick James"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813803" start="97019" end="97029" title="Harrisongs" label="Harrisongs"/>
<link wikidata="Q182537" start="97200" end="97206" title="Taxman" label="Taxman"/>
<link wikidata="Q541835" start="97223" end="97245" title="Within You Without You" label="Within You Without You"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367685" start="97332" end="97344" title="What Goes On (Beatles song)" label="What Goes On"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072064" start="97361" end="97367" title="Flying (Beatles instrumental)" label="Flying"/>
<link wikidata="Q621231" start="97504" end="97520" title="Apple Corps" label="Apple Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q548046" start="97655" end="97683" title="While My Guitar Gently Weeps" label="While My Guitar Gently Weeps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7602607" start="97751" end="97766" title="Startling Music" label="Startling Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q210389" start="97864" end="97885" title="Octopus&amp;#x27;s Garden" label="Octopus&amp;#x27;s Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399070" start="98020" end="98041" title="Associated Television" label="Associated Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q336801" start="98071" end="98080" title="Lew Grade" label="Lew Grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="98440" end="98448" title="City of London" label="the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399070" start="98770" end="98807" title="Associated Communications Corporation" label="Associated Communications Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416898" start="99631" end="99639" title="takeover" label="takeover"/>
<link wikidata="Q7345588" start="99671" end="99692" title="Robert Holmes à Court" label="Robert Holmes à Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831" start="99720" end="99735" title="Michael Jackson" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="100018" end="100022" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q333040" start="100048" end="100073" title="Sony/ATV Music Publishing" label="Sony/ATV Music Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614849" start="101037" end="101065" title="United States district court" label="United States district court"/>
<link wikidata="Q913311" start="101449" end="101472" title="A Hard Day&amp;#x27;s Night (film)" label="A Hard Day&amp;#x27;s Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131815" start="101494" end="101499" title="Help! (film)" label="Help!"/>
<link wikidata="Q901203" start="101521" end="101541" title="Magical Mystery Tour (film)" label="Magical Mystery Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131791" start="101563" end="101579" title="Yellow Submarine (film)" label="Yellow Submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248643" start="101654" end="101681" title="The Beatles at Shea Stadium" label="The Beatles at Shea Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352613" start="101703" end="101712" title="Let It Be (1970 film)" label="Let It Be"/>
<link wikidata="Q3986379" start="101734" end="101754" title="The Compleat Beatles" label="The Compleat Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q54829134" start="101776" end="101805" title="It Was Twenty Years Ago Today (film)" label="It Was Twenty Years Ago Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716124" start="101859" end="101880" title="The Beatles Anthology (TV series)" label="The Beatles Anthology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="101902" end="101917" title="1 (Beatles album)#1+" label="The Beatles: 1+"/>
<link wikidata="" start="101987" end="102017" title="The Beatles: Eight Days a Week" label="The Beatles: Eight Days a Week"/>
<link wikidata="" start="102077" end="102098" title="The Beatles: Get Back" label="The Beatles: Get Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293037" start="102209" end="102221" title="Now and Then (Beatles song)" label="Now and Then"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716112" start="102377" end="102392" title="The Beatles&amp;#x27; 1964 world tour" label="1964 world tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535486" start="102395" end="102419" title="The Beatles&amp;#x27; 1964 North American tour" label="1964 North American tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q535591" start="102422" end="102440" title="The Beatles&amp;#x27; 1965 European tour" label="1965 European tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535444" start="102443" end="102455" title="The Beatles&amp;#x27; 1965 US tour" label="1965 US tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q24970699" start="102458" end="102470" title="The Beatles&amp;#x27; 1965 UK tour" label="1965 UK tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q30590532" start="102473" end="102520" title="The Beatles&amp;#x27; 1966 tour of Germany, Japan and the Philippines" label="1966 tour of Germany, Japan and the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716113" start="102523" end="102535" title="The Beatles&amp;#x27; 1966 US tour" label="1966 US tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716132" start="102553" end="102583" title="The Beatles Winter 1963 Helen Shapiro Tour" label="Winter 1963 Helen Shapiro Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335207" start="102598" end="102607" title="Tommy Roe" label="Tommy Roe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077577" start="102608" end="102620" title="Chris Montez" label="Chris Montez"/>
<link wikidata="Q19881496" start="102631" end="102659" title="Roy Orbison/The Beatles Tour" label="Roy Orbison/The Beatles Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q123431918" start="102677" end="102699" title="Outline of the Beatles" label="Outline of the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716139" start="102702" end="102722" title="The Beatles timeline" label="The Beatles timeline"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="102725" end="102775" title="Grammy Award records#Most Grammys won by a group" label="Grammy Award records – most Grammys won by a group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395468" start="102778" end="102815" title="List of songs recorded by the Beatles" label="List of songs recorded by the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="103061" end="103077" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="103094" end="103097" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29813" wikidata="Q158970" url="?curid=29813" title="Tort">
<text>A tort is a civil wrong, other than breach of contract, that causes a claimant to suffer loss or harm, resulting in legal liability for the person who commits the tortious act. Tort law can be contrasted with criminal law, which deals with criminal wrongs that are punishable by the state. While criminal law aims to punish individuals who commit crimes, tort law aims to compensate individuals who suffer harm as a result of the actions of others. Some wrongful acts, such as assault and battery, can result in both a civil lawsuit and a criminal prosecution in countries where the civil and criminal legal systems are separate. Tort law may also be contrasted with contract law, which provides civil remedies after breach of a duty that arises from a contract. Obligations in both tort and criminal law are more fundamental and are imposed regardless of whether the parties have a contract.

While tort law in civil law jurisdictions largely derives from Roman law, common law jurisdictions derive their tort law from customary English tort law. In civil law jurisdictions based on civil codes, both contractual and tortious or delictual liability is typically outlined in a civil code based on Roman Law principles. Tort law is referred to as the law of delict in Scots and Roman Dutch law, and resembles tort law in common law jurisdictions in that rules regarding civil liability are established primarily by precedent and theory rather than an exhaustive code. However, like other civil law jurisdictions, the underlying principles are drawn from Roman law. A handful of jurisdictions have codified a mixture of common and civil law jurisprudence either due to their colonial past (e.g. Québec, St Lucia, Mauritius) or due to influence from multiple legal traditions when their civil codes were drafted (e.g. Mainland China, the Philippines, and Thailand). Furthermore, Israel essentially codifies common law provisions on tort.

==Overview==
In common, civil, and mixed law jurisdictions alike, the main remedy available to plaintiffs under tort law is compensation in damages, or money. Further, in the case of a continuing tort, or even where harm is merely threatened, the courts will sometimes grant an injunction, such as in the English case of &quot;Miller v Jackson&quot;. Usually injunctions will not impose positive obligations on , but some jurisdictions, such as those in Australia, can make an order for specific performance to ensure that the defendant carries out certain legal obligations, especially in relation to nuisance matters. At the same time, each legal system provides for a variety of defences for defendants in tort claims which, partially or fully, shield defendants from liability. In a limited range of cases varying between jurisdictions, tort law will tolerate self-help as an appropriate remedy for certain torts. One example of this is the toleration of the use of reasonable force to expel a trespasser, which is typically also a defence against the tort of battery.

In some, but not all, civil and mixed law jurisdictions, the term delict is used to refer to this category of civil wrong, though it can also refer to criminal offences. Other jurisdictions may use terms such as extracontractual responsibility (France) or civil responsibility (Québec). In comparative law, the term tort is generally used. The word &#x27;tort&#x27; was first used in a legal context in the 1580s, although different words were used for similar concepts prior to this time. A person who commits a tortious act is called a tortfeasor. Although crimes may be torts, the cause of legal action in civil torts is not necessarily the result of criminal action. A victim of harm, commonly called the injured party or plaintiff, can recover their losses as damages in a lawsuit. To prevail, the plaintiff in the lawsuit must generally show that the tortfeasor&#x27;s actions or lack of action was the proximate cause of the harm, though the specific requirements vary between jurisdictions.

==Common law==
===History===
Torts and crimes in common law originate in the Germanic system of compensatory fines for wrongs, with no clear distinction between crimes and other wrongs. In Anglo-Saxon law, most wrongs required payment in money paid to the wronged person or their clan. Fines in the form of &quot;wīte&quot; () were paid to the king or holder of a court for disturbances of public order, while the fine of &quot;weregild&quot; was imposed on those who committed murder with the intention of preventing blood feuds. Some wrongs in later law codes were &quot;botleas&quot; &#x27;without remedy&#x27; (e.g. theft, open murder, arson, treason against one&#x27;s lord), that is, unable to be compensated, and those convicted of a &quot;botleas&quot; crime were at the king&#x27;s mercy. Items or creatures which caused death were also destroyed as deodands. Alfred the Great&#x27;s Doom Book distinguished unintentional injuries from intentional ones, and defined culpability based on status, age, and gender. After the Norman Conquest, fines were paid only to courts or the king, and quickly became a revenue source. A wrong became known as a &quot;tort&quot; or &quot;trespass&quot;, and there arose a division between civil pleas and pleas of the crown. The petty assizes (i.e. of novel disseisin, of mort d&#x27;ancestor, and of darrein presentment) were established in 1166 as a remedy for interference with possession of freehold land. The trespass action was an early civil plea in which damages were paid to the victim; if no payment was made, the defendant was imprisoned. It arose in local courts for slander, breach of contract, or interference with land, goods, or persons. Although the details of its exact origin are unclear, it became popular in royal courts so that in the 1250s the writ of trespass was created and made &quot;de cursu&quot; (available by right, not fee); however, it was restricted to interference with land and forcible breaches of the king&#x27;s peace. It may have arisen either out of the &quot;appeal of felony&quot;, or assize of novel disseisin, or replevin. Later, after the Statute of Westminster 1285, in the 1360s, the &quot;trespass on the case&quot; action arose for when the defendant did not direct force. As its scope increased, it became simply &quot;action on the case&quot;. The English Judicature Act passed 1873 through 1875 abolished the separate actions of trespass and trespass on the case.

In 1401, the English case &quot;Beaulieu v Finglam&quot; imposed strict liability for the escape of fire; additionally, strict liability was imposed for the release of cattle. Negligently handling fire was of particular importance in these societies given capacity for destruction and relatively limited firefighting resources. Liability for common carrier, which arose around 1400, was also emphasised in the medieval period. Unintentional injuries were relatively infrequent in the medieval period. As transportation improved and carriages became popular in the 18th and 19th centuries, however, collisions and carelessness became more prominent in court records. In general, scholars of England such as William Blackstone took a hostile view to litigation, and rules against champerty and maintenance and vexatious litigation existed. The right of victims to receive was regarded by later English scholars as one of the rights of Englishmen. Blackstone&#x27;s &quot;Commentaries on the Laws of England&quot;, which was published in the late 18th century, contained a volume on &quot;private wrongs&quot; as torts and even used the word &quot;tort&quot; in a few places.

In contemporary common law jurisdictions, successful claimants in both tort and contract law must show that they have suffered foreseeable loss or harm as a direct result of the breach of duty. Legal injuries addressable under tort law in common law jurisdictions are not limited to physical injuries and may include emotional, economic, or reputational injuries as well as violations of privacy, property, or constitutional rights. Torts comprise such varied topics as automobile accidents, false imprisonment, defamation, product liability, copyright infringement, and environmental pollution (toxic torts). Modern torts are heavily affected by insurance and insurance law, as many cases are settled through claims adjustment rather than by trial, and are defended by insurance lawyers, with the insurance policy setting a ceiling on the possible payment.

=== Liability ===
While individuals and corporations are typically only liable for their own actions, indirect liability for the tortious acts of others may arise by operation of law, notably through joint and several liability doctrines as well as forms of secondary liability. Liability may arise through enterprise liability or, in product liability cases in the United States, market share liability. In certain cases, a person might hold vicarious liability for their employee or child under the law of agency through the doctrine of respondeat superior. For example, if a shop employee spilled cleaning liquid on the supermarket floor and a victim fell and suffered injuries, the plaintiff might be able to sue either the employee or the employer. There is considerable academic debate about whether vicarious liability is justified on no better basis than the search for a solvent defendant, or whether it is well founded on the theory of efficient risk allocation.

Absolute liability, under the rule in M. C. Mehta v. Union of India, in Indian tort law is a unique outgrowth of the doctrine of strict liability for ultrahazardous activities. Under the precedent established in the English case of Rylands v Fletcher, upon which the Indian doctrine of absolute liability is based, anyone who in the course of &quot;non-natural&quot; use of his land &quot;accumulates&quot; thereon for his own purposes anything likely to cause mischief if it escapes is answerable for all direct damage thereby caused. While, in England and many other common law jurisdictions, this precedent is used to impose strict liability on certain areas of nuisance law and is strictly &quot;a remedy for damage to land or interests in land&quot; under which &quot;damages for personal injuries are not recoverable&quot;, Indian courts have developed this rule into a distinct principle of absolute liability, where an enterprise is absolutely liable, without exceptions, to compensate everyone affected by any accident resulting from the operation of hazardous activity. This differs greatly from the English approach as it includes all kinds of resulting liability, rather than being limited to damage to land.

In New Zealand, the tort system for the majority of personal injuries was scrapped with the establishment of the Accident Compensation Corporation, a universal system of no-fault insurance. The rationale underlying New Zealand&#x27;s elimination of personal injury torts was securing equality of treatment for victims regardless of whether or the extent to which they or any other party was at fault. This was the basis for much of Professor Patrick Atiyah&#x27;s scholarship as articulated in &quot;Accidents, Compensation and the Law&quot; (1970). Originally his proposal was the gradual abolition of tort actions, and its replacement with schemes like those for industrial injuries to cover for all illness, disability and disease, whether caused by people or nature. In addition to the development of the Accident Compensation Corporation to eliminate personal injury lawsuits, the tort system for medical malpractice was scrapped in New Zealand, both following recommendations from the Royal Commission in 1967 for &#x27;no fault&#x27; compensation scheme (see The Woodhouse Report).

In the case of the United States, a survey of trial lawyers identified several modern innovations that developed after the divergence of English and American tort law, including strict liability for products based on &quot;Greenman v. Yuba Power Products&quot;, the limitation of various immunities (e.g. sovereign immunity, charitable immunity), comparative negligence, broader rules for admitting evidence, increased damages for emotional distress, and toxic torts and class action lawsuits. However, there has also been a reaction in terms of tort reform, which in some cases have been struck down as violating state constitutions, and federal preemption of state laws.

===Categories of torts in common law jurisdictions===

Torts may be categorised in several ways, with a particularly common division between negligent and intentional torts. Quasi-torts are unusual tort actions. Particularly in the United States, &quot;collateral tort&quot; is used to refer to torts in labour law such as intentional infliction of emotional distress (&quot;outrage&quot;); or wrongful dismissal; these evolving causes of action are debated and overlap with contract law or other legal areas to some degree. In some cases, the development of tort law has spurred lawmakers to create alternative solutions to disputes. For example, in some areas, workers&#x27; compensation laws arose as a legislative response to court rulings restricting the extent to which employees could sue their employers in respect of injuries sustained during employment. In other cases, legal commentary has led to the development of new causes of action outside the traditional common law torts. These are loosely grouped into quasi-torts or liability torts.

====Negligence====

The tort of negligence is a cause of action leading to relief designed to protect legal rights from actions which, although unintentional, nevertheless cause some form of legal harm to the plaintiff. In order to win an action for negligence, a plaintiff must prove: duty, breach of duty, causation, scope of liability, and damages. Further, a defendant may assert various defences to a plaintiff&#x27;s case, including comparative fault and assumption of risk. Negligence is a tort which arises from the breach of the duty of care owed by one person to another from the perspective of a reasonable person. Although credited as appearing in the United States in &quot;Brown v. Kendall&quot;, the later Scottish case of &quot;Donoghue v Stevenson&quot; [1932] AC 562, followed in England, brought England into line with the United States and established the &#x27;tort of negligence&#x27; as opposed to negligence as a component in specific actions. In &quot;Donoghue&quot;, Mrs. Donoghue drank from an opaque bottle containing a decomposed snail and claimed that it had made her ill. She could not sue Mr. Stevenson for damages for breach of contract and instead sued for negligence. The majority determined that the definition of negligence can be divided into four component parts that the plaintiff must prove to establish negligence.

In most common law jurisdictions, there are four elements to a negligence action:
#duty: the defendant has a duty to others, including the plaintiff, to exercise reasonable care
#breach: the defendant breaches that duty through an act or culpable omission
#damages: as a result of that act or omission, the plaintiff suffers an injury
#causation: the injury to the plaintiff is a reasonably foreseeable consequence of the defendant&#x27;s act or omission under the proximate cause doctrine.

Some jurisdictions narrow the definition down to three elements: duty, breach and proximately caused harm. Some jurisdictions recognize five elements, duty, breach, actual cause, proximate cause, and damages. However, at their heart, the various definitions of what constitutes negligent conduct are very similar. Depending on jurisdiction, product liability cases such as those involving warranties may be considered negligence actions or fall under a separate category of strict liability torts. Similarly, cases involving environmental or consumer health torts which other countries treat as negligence or strict liability torts are treated in India as absolute liability torts.

In establishing whether a duty of care exists, different common law jurisdictions have developed a variety of distinct but related approaches, with many jurisdictions building on the test established in &quot;Anns v Merton LBC&quot;. In Singapore, the current leading case is &quot;Spandeck Engineering v Defence Science and Technology Agency&quot;, which builds on &quot;Anns&quot; by establishing a two step test comprising an analysis of proximate cause and public policy as a universal test, independent from the individual circumstances of a given case, for determining the existence of a duty of care. The Supreme Court of Canada established a similar test in the context of assessing damages for pure economic loss owing to negligence derived from &quot;Anns&quot; which consists of a two step examination of the existence of a sufficiently proximate relationship between the parties and public policy considerations; however, the Canadian test is more sensitive to the individual circumstances of a given case and the first step is generally deemed to be met where a case falls into one of three sets of circumstances recognised by precedent while the Singaporean test is independent of precedent. In English tort law, &quot;Caparo Industries plc v Dickman&quot; established a tripartite test for the existence of a duty of care per which harm must be reasonably foreseeable as a potential result of the defendant&#x27;s conduct; the parties must be in a relationship of proximity; and it must be fair, just, and reasonable to impose such a duty.

====Intentional torts====

Intentional torts are any intentional acts that are reasonably foreseeable to cause harm to an individual, and that do so. Intentional torts have several subcategories:
*Torts against the person include assault, battery, false imprisonment, intentional infliction of emotional distress, and fraud, although the latter is also an economic tort.
*Property torts involve any intentional interference with the property rights of the claimant (plaintiff). Those commonly recognised include trespass to land, trespass to chattels (personal property), and conversion.
*Dignitary torts are a category of intentional tort affecting the honour, dignity, and reputation of an individual and include: Defamation, invasion of privacy, breach of confidence, torts related to the justice system such as malicious prosecution and abuse of process, and torts pertaining to sexual relations that are considered obsolete in most common law jurisdictions such as alienation of affection and criminal conversation.
An intentional tort requires an overt act, some form of intent, and causation. In most cases, transferred intent, which occurs when the defendant intends to injure an individual but actually ends up injuring another individual, will satisfy the intent requirement. Causation can be satisfied as long as the defendant was a substantial factor in causing the harm.

====Nuisance====

&quot;Nuisance&quot; is traditionally used to describe an activity which is harmful or annoying to others such as indecent conduct or a rubbish heap. Nuisances either affect private individuals (private nuisance) or the general public (public nuisance). The claimant can sue for most acts that interfere with their use and enjoyment of their land. In English law, whether activity was an illegal nuisance depended upon the area and whether the activity was &quot;for the benefit of the commonwealth&quot;, with richer areas subject to a greater expectation of cleanliness and quiet. The case &quot;Jones v Powell&quot; (1629) provides an early example, in which a person&#x27;s professional papers were damaged by the vapors of a neighboring brewery. Although the outcome of this case is unclear, Whitelocke of the Court of the King&#x27;s Bench is recorded as saying that since the water supply in area was already contaminated, the nuisance was not actionable as it is &quot;better that they should be spoiled than that the commonwealth stand in need of good liquor&quot;.

In English law, a related category of tort liability was created in the case of &quot;Rylands v Fletcher&quot; (1868): strict liability was established for a dangerous escape of some hazard, including water, fire, or animals as long as the cause was not remote. In &quot;Cambridge Water Co Ltd v Eastern Counties Leather plc&quot; (1994), chemicals from a factory seeped through a floor into the water table, contaminating East Anglia&#x27;s water reservoirs. The &quot;Rylands&quot; rule remains in use in England and Wales. In Australian law, it has been merged into negligence.

====Economic torts====

Economic torts typically involve commercial transactions, and include tortious interference with trade or contract, fraud, injurious falsehood, and negligent misrepresentation. Negligent misrepresentation torts are distinct from contractual cases involving misrepresentation in that there is no privity of contract; these torts are likely to involve pure economic loss which has been less-commonly recoverable in tort. One criterion for determining whether economic loss is recoverable is the &quot;foreseeability&quot; doctrine. The economic loss rule is highly confusing and inconsistently applied and began in 1965 from a California case involving strict liability for product defects; in 1986, the U.S. Supreme Court adopted the doctrine in &quot;East River S.S. Corp. v. Transamerica Deleval, Inc&quot;. In 2010, the supreme court of the U.S. state of Washington replaced the economic loss doctrine with an &quot;independent duty doctrine&quot;.

Economic antitrust torts have been somewhat submerged by modern competition law. However, in the United States, private parties are permitted in certain circumstances to sue for anticompetitive practices, including under federal or state statutes or on the basis of common law tortious interference, which may be based upon the Restatement (Second) of Torts §766.

Negligent misrepresentation as tort where no contractual privity exists was disallowed in England by &quot;Derry v Peek&quot; [1889]; however, this position was overturned in &quot;Hedley Byrne v Heller&quot; in 1964 so that such actions were allowed if a &quot;special relationship&quot; existed between the plaintiff and defendant. United States courts and scholars &quot;paid lip-service&quot; to &quot;Derry&quot;; however, scholars such as William Prosser argued that it was misinterpreted by English courts. The case of &quot;Ultramares Corporation v. Touche&quot; (1932) limited the liability of an auditor to known identified beneficiaries of the audit and this rule was widely applied in the United States until the 1960s. The Restatement (Second) of Torts expanded liability to &quot;foreseeable&quot; users rather than specifically identified &quot;foreseen&quot; users of the information, dramatically expanding liability and affecting professionals such as accountants, architects, attorneys, and surveyors. As of 1989, most U.S. jurisdictions follow either the &quot;Ultramares&quot; approach or the Restatement approach.

The tort of deceit for inducement into a contract is a tort in English law, but in practice has been replaced by actions under Misrepresentation Act 1967. In the United States, similar torts existed but have become superseded to some degree by contract law and the pure economic loss rule. Historically (and to some degree today), fraudulent (but not negligent) misrepresentation involving damages for economic loss may be awarded under the &quot;benefit-of-the-bargain&quot; rule (damages identical to expectation damages in contracts) which awards the plaintiff the difference between the value represented and the actual value. Beginning with &quot;Stiles v. White&quot; (1846) in Massachusetts, this rule spread across the country as a majority rule with the &quot;out-of-pocket damages&quot; rule as a minority rule. Although the damages under the &quot;benefit-of-the-bargain&quot; are described as compensatory, the plaintiff is left better off than before the transaction. Since the economic loss rule would eliminate these benefits if applied strictly, there is an exception to allow the misrepresentation tort if not related to a contract.

===Remedies and defences in common law jurisdictions===
The remedies and defences available in common law jurisdictions are typically similar, deriving from judicial precedent with occasional legislative intervention. Compensation by way of damages is typically the default remedy available to plaintiffs, with injunctions and specific performance being relatively rare in tort law cases. Relatively uniquely for a common law jurisdiction, Singapore&#x27;s Community Disputes Resolution Act 2015 (CDRA) alters the common law by codifying a statutory tort of &quot;interference with enjoyment or use of place of residence&quot; and provides for a variety of remedies beyond damages, ranging from injunctions and specific performance to court-ordered apologies. Where a court order providing for a remedy other than damages is awarded under the CDRA is violated, sections 5-8 of the act require that the plaintiff apply for a &#x27;special direction&#x27; to be issued in order to enforce the original remedy and section 9 provides that failure to comply with a special direction is grounds for the court to issue an order excluding the tortfeasor from their residence. Aside from legislatively created remedies such as the CDRA, courts in common law jurisdictions will typically provide for damages (which, depending on jurisdiction, may include punitive damages), but judges will issue injunctions and specific performance where they deem damages not to be a sufficient remedy. Legislatures in various common law jurisdictions have curtailed the ability of judges to award punitive or other non-economic damages through the use of non-economic damages caps and other tort reform measures.

Apart from proof that there was no breach of duty (in other words, that a tortious act was not committed in the first place), there are three principal defences to tortious liability in common law jurisdictions:

*Consent and warning: Typically, a victim cannot hold another liable if the victim has implicitly or explicitly consented to engage in a risky activity. This is frequently summarised by the maxim &quot;volenti non fit injuria&quot; (Latin: &quot;to a willing person, no injury is done&quot; or &quot;no injury is done to a person who consents&quot;). In many cases, those engaging in risky activities will be asked to sign a waiver releasing another party from liability. For example, spectators to certain sports are assumed to accept a risk of injury, such as a hockey puck or baseball striking a member of the audience. Warnings by the defendant may also provide a defence depending upon the jurisdiction and circumstances. This issue arises, for example, in the duty of care that landowners have for guests or trespasses, known as occupiers&#x27; liability.
*Comparative or contributory negligence: If the victim has contributed to causing their own harm through negligent or irresponsible actions, the damages may be reduced or eliminated. 
**Contributory negligence: The English case Butterfield v. Forrester (1809) established this defence. In England, this &quot;contributory negligence&quot; became a partial defence, but in the United States, any fault by the victim eliminated any damages. This meant that if the plaintiff was 1% at fault, the victim would lose the entire lawsuit. This was viewed as unnecessarily harsh and therefore amended to a comparative negligence system in many states; as of 2007 contributory negligence exists in only a few states such as North Carolina and Maryland. 
** Comparative negligence: In comparative negligence, the victim&#x27;s damages are reduced according to the degree of fault. Comparative negligence has been criticised as allowing a plaintiff who is recklessly 95% negligent to recover 5% of the damages from the defendant. Economists have further criticised comparative negligence as not encouraging precaution under the calculus of negligence. In response, many states now have a 50% rule where the plaintiff recovers nothing if the plaintiff is more than 50% responsible.
*Illegality: If the claimant is involved in wrongdoing at the time the alleged negligence occurred, this may extinguish or reduce the defendant&#x27;s liability. The legal maxim &quot;ex turpi causa non oritur actio&quot;, Latin for &quot;no right of action arises from a despicable cause&quot;. Thus, if a burglar is verbally challenged by the property owner and sustains injury when jumping from a second story window to escape apprehension, there is no cause of action against the property owner even though that injury would not have been sustained but for the property owner&#x27;s intervention.
* Other defences and immunities:
**Sovereign immunity
**Good Samaritan laws, especially in jurisdictions with a statutory or common law duty to rescue
**Charitable immunity

===Discovery in tort litigation===
Discovery (or disclosure), a concept unique to common law jurisdictions, is a pre-trial procedure in a lawsuit in which each party, through the law of civil procedure, can open-endedly demand evidence from the other party or parties by means of discovery devices such as interrogatories, requests for production of documents, requests for admissions and depositions. Discovery can be obtained from non-parties using subpoenas. When a discovery request is objected to, the requesting party may seek the assistance of the court by filing a motion to compel discovery. In tort litigation, the availability of discovery enables plaintiffs to essentially carry out a private investigation, subpoenaing records and documents from the defendant. Consequently, commentators in civil law jurisdictions regard discovery destructive of the rule of law and as &quot;a private inquisition.&quot; Civil law countries see the underlying objectives of discovery as properly monopolised by the state in order to maintain the rule of law: the investigative objective of discovery is the prerogative of the executive branch, and insofar as discovery may be able to facilitate the creation of new rights, that is the prerogative of the legislative branch. The availability of discovery in common law jurisdictions means that plaintiffs who, in other jurisdictions, would not have sufficient evidence upon which to file a tort claim are able to do so in the hope that they will be able to obtain sufficient evidence through discovery. The primary drawbacks of this are that, on one hand, it creates the possibility that a plaintiff filing suit in good faith may not find enough evidence to succeed and incur legal expenses driven upward due to the cost of discovery; and, on the other hand, that it enables plaintiffs arguing in bad faith to initiate frivolous tort lawsuits and coerce defendants into agreeing to legal settlements in otherwise unmeritorious actions.

===Variation between common law jurisdictions===
Among common law countries today, there are significant differences in tort law. Common law systems include United States tort law, Australian tort law, Canadian tort law, Indian tort law, and the tort law of a variety of jurisdictions in Asia and Africa. There is a more apparent split in tort law between the Commonwealth countries and the United States. Despite diverging from English common law in 1776, earlier than the other common law jurisdictions, United States tort law was influenced by English law and Blackstone&#x27;s &quot;Commentaries&quot;, with several state constitutions specifically providing for redress for torts in addition to reception statutes which adopted English law. However, tort law globally was viewed as relatively undeveloped by the mid-19th century; the first American treatise on torts was published in the 1860s but the subject became particularly established when Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr wrote on the subject in the 1880s. Holmes&#x27; writings have been described as the &quot;first serious attempt in the common law world to give torts both a coherent structure and a distinctive substantive domain&quot;, although Holmes&#x27; summary of the history of torts has been critically reviewed. The 1928 US case of Palsgraf v. Long Island Railroad Co. heavily influenced the British judges in the 1932 House of Lords case of Donoghue v Stevenson. The United States has since been perceived as particularly prone to filing tort lawsuits even relative to other common law countries, although this perception has been criticised and debated. 20th century academics have identified that class actions were relatively uncommon outside of the United States, noting that the English law was less generous to the plaintiff in the following ways: contingent fee arrangements were restricted, English judges tried more decisions and set damages rather than juries, wrongful death lawsuits were relatively restricted, punitive damages were relatively unavailable, the collateral source rule was restricted, and strict liability, such as for product liability, was relatively unavailable. The English welfare state, which provides free healthcare to victims of injury, may explain the lower tendency towards personal injury lawsuits in England. A similar observation has also been made with regard to Australia.

While Indian tort law is generally derived from English law, there are certain differences between the two systems. Indian tort law uniquely includes remedies for constitutional torts, which are actions by the government that infringe upon rights enshrined in the Constitution, as well as a system of absolute liability for businesses engaged in hazardous activity as outlined in the rule in M. C. Mehta v. Union of India. Similar to other common law jurisdictions, conduct which gives rise to a cause of action under tort law is additionally criminalised by the Indian Penal Code, which was originally enacted in 1860. As a result of the influence of its relatively early codification of criminal law, the torts of assault, battery, and false imprisonment are interpreted by Indian courts and the courts of jurisdictions that were formerly part of the British Indian Empire (e.g. Pakistan, Bangladesh) and British colonies in South East Asia which adopted the Indian Penal Code (i.e. Singapore, Malaysia, and Brunei) with reference to analogous crimes outlined in the code. For instance, assault is interpreted in the context of s.351 per which the following criteria constitute assault:
*Making of any gesture or preparation by a person in the presence of another.
*Intention or knowledge of likelihood that such gesture or preparation will cause the person present to apprehend that the person making it is about to use criminal force on them.
Similarly, battery is interpreted in the context of criminal force as outlined in s.350.

An area of tort unique to India is the constitutional tort, a public law remedy for violations of rights, generally by agents of the state, and is implicitly premised on the strict liability principle. In practice, constitutional torts in India serve the role served by administrative courts in many civil law jurisdictions and much of the function of constitutional review in other jurisdictions, thereby functioning as a branch of administrative law rather than private law. Rather than developing principles of administrative fairness as a distinct branch of law as other common law jurisdictions have, Indian courts have thus extended tort law as it applies between private parties to address unlawful administrative and legislative action.

Within Canada&#x27;s common law provinces, there is currently no consistent approach to the tort of invasion of privacy. Four provinces (British Columbia, Manitoba, Newfoundland and Saskatchewan) have created a statutory tort. Ontario has recognised the existence of the tort of &quot;intrusion upon seclusion&quot;, which has also been held to exist under tort law in the United States. British Columbia, on the other hand, has held that the tort does not exist in that province under the common law. Like the United Kingdom and British Columbia, but unlike Ontario and most jurisdictions in the United States, Indian tort law does not traditionally recognise a common law tort of invasion of privacy or intrusion on seclusion. Nevertheless, there is a shift in jurisprudence toward recognising breech of confidentiality as an actionable civil wrong. Proponents of protection for privacy under Indian tort law argue that &quot;the right to privacy is implicit&quot; in Article 21 of the Constitution of India, which guarantees protections for personal liberties. Despite the lack of a tort addressing violations of privacy by private individuals, the Supreme Court recognised privacy as a constitutional right in 2017. Similarly, neither intentional infliction of emotional distress (IIED) nor negligent infliction of emotional distress (NIED) is recognised as a tort in Indian jurisprudence. While claims seeking damages for infliction of emotional distress were historically an accessory claim in a tort action alleging another distinct tort, the doctrine has evolved in North America into a stand-alone tort while English jurisprudence has evolved to typically recognise only recognised psychiatric injuries as grounds for compensation. Indian courts, while recognising the infliction of emotional distress regardless of intention as an actionable wrong in matrimonial disputes, typically follow the English approach, although case law from both the United Kingdom and North America is frequently employed by judges ruling on cases in which damages for mental distress are sought.

==Scots and Roman-Dutch law==
Both Scots and Roman-Dutch law are uncodified, scholarship-driven, and judge-made legal systems based on Roman law as historically applied in the Netherlands and Scotland during the Enlightenment. In both legal systems, when applied in English speaking countries, the term delict is used to refer to tortious liability (unlike, for instance, in Spain where the cognate of the term delict refers to a criminal offence). Unlike in systems based on civil codes or on the English common law, Scots and Roman-Dutch law operate on broad principles of liability for wrongdoing; there is no exhaustive list of named delicts in either system; if the conduct complained of appears to be wrongful, the law will afford a remedy even in the absence of precedent pertaining to similar conduct. In South Africa and neighbouring countries, the Roman-Dutch law of delict is in force, having been preserved after the United Kingdom annexed Dutch settlements in South Africa and spread as neighbouring British colonies adopted South African law via reception statutes. Roman-Dutch law also forms the basis for the legal system of Sri Lanka.

===Elements of delict===
The elements of a delict as follows:
The elements of harm and conduct are fact-based inquiries, while causation is part-factual and part-normative, and wrongfulness and fault are entirely normative: that is, value-based, in that they articulate a wider societal policy perspective. Delict is &quot;inherently a flexible set of principles that embody social policy.&quot;
# harm sustained by the plaintiff;
# conduct on the part of the defendant which is wrongful;
# a causal connection between the conduct and the plaintiff&#x27;s harm; and
# fault or blameworthiness on the part of the defendant.

===Remedies under Scots and Roman-Dutch law of delict===
Under the Scots and Roman-Dutch law of delict, there are two main remedies available to plaintiffs:
* the &quot;actio legis Aquiliae&quot;, or Aquilian action, which relates to patrimonial loss (i.e. economic damages);
* the &quot;actio iniuriarum&quot;, which relates to injuries to non-patrimonial loss (i.e. non-economic damages);

Protected interests which can give rise to delictual liability can be broadly divided into two categories: patrimonial and non-patrimonial interests. Patrimonial interests are those which pertain to damages to an individual&#x27;s body or property, which both Scots and Roman-Dutch law approach in the context of the Roman Lex Aquilia. Non-patrimonial interests include dignitary and personality related interests (e.g. defamation, disfigurement, unjust imprisonment) which cannot be exhaustively listed which are addressed in the context of the Roman Actio iniuriarum, as well as pain and suffering which are addressed under jurisprudence that has developed in modern times. In general; where an individual violates a patrimonial interest, they will incur Aquilian liability; and, where an individual violates a non-patrimonial interest, they will incur liability stemming from the actio iniuriarum. While broadly similar due to their common origin, the nature of the remedies available under contemporary Scots and Roman-Dutch law vary slightly, although the aquilian action and actio iniuriarum are the primary remedies available under both systems. The primary difference between the two remedies is that the aquilian action serves a compensatory function (i.e. providing economic damages to restore the plaintiff to their previous state) while the actio iniuriarum provides for non-economic damages aimed at providing solace to the plaintiff. In Roman-Dutch law (but not in Scots law), there is also a distinct action for pain and suffering relating to pain and suffering and psychiatric injury, which provides for non-economic damages similar to those under the actio iniuriarum. The various delictual actions are not mutually exclusive. It is possible for a person to suffer various forms of harm at the same time, which means that a person may simultaneously claim remedies under more than one action.

The elements of liability under the &quot;actio iniuriarum&quot; are as follows:
* harm, in the form of a violation of a non-patrimonial interest (one&#x27;s &quot;corpus&quot;, &quot;dignitas&quot; and &quot;fama&quot;);
* wrongful conduct; and
* intention.

There are five essential elements for liability in terms of the &quot;actio legis Aquiliae&quot;:
# The harm must take the form of patrimonial loss.
# The conduct must take the form of a positive act or an omission or statement.
# The conduct must be wrongful: that is to say, objectively unreasonable and without lawful justification.
# One must be at fault, and one&#x27;s blameworthiness must take the form of &quot;dolus&quot; (intention) or &quot;culpa&quot; (negligence). One must, however, be accountable for one&#x27;s conduct before one can be blameworthy.
# There must be causation both factual and legal. For the former, the conduct must have been a &quot;sine qua non&quot; of the loss; for the latter, the link must not be too tenuous.

In Scots law, the aquilian action has developed more expansively and may be invoked as a remedy for both patrimonial and certain types of non-patrimonial loss, particularly with regard to personal injury. By way of a legal fiction, &#x27;personal injury&#x27; is treated as (physical) &#x27;damage done&#x27;, with the net effect that &#x27;the &quot;actio injuriarum&quot; root of Scots law infuses the [nominate] delict assault as much as any development of the &quot;lex Aquilia&quot;&#x27; and wrongdoing that results in physical harm to a person may give rise to both an aquilian action and an actio iniuriarum. Additionally, the modern Scots law pertaining to reparation for negligent wrongdoing is based on the &quot;lex Aquilia&quot; and so affords reparation in instances of &quot;damnum injuria datum&quot; - literally loss wrongfully caused - with the wrongdoing in such instances generated by the defender&#x27;s &quot;culpa&quot; (i.e., fault). In any instance in which a pursuer (A) has suffered loss at the hands of the wrongful conduct of the defender (B), B is under a legal obligation to make reparation. If B&#x27;s wrongdoing were intentional in the circumstances, or so reckless that an &#x27;intention&#x27; may be constructively inferred (on the basis that &quot;culpa lata dolo aequiparatur&quot; - &#x27;gross fault is the same as intentional wrongdoing&#x27;), then it follows axiomatically that B will be liable to repair any damage done to A&#x27;s property, person or economic interest: &#x27;wherever a defender intentionally harms the pursuer - provided the interest harmed is regarded as reparable - the defender incurs delictual liability&#x27;. If the pursuer has suffered loss as the result of the defender&#x27;s conduct, yet the defender did not intend to harm the pursuer, nor behave so recklessly that intent might be constructively inferred, the pursuer must demonstrate that the defender&#x27;s conduct was negligent in order to win their case. Negligence can be established, by the pursuer, by demonstrating that the defender owed to them a &#x27;duty of care&#x27; which they ultimately breached by failing to live up to the expected standard of care. If this can be shown, then the pursuer must also establish that the defender&#x27;s failure to live up to the expected standard of care ultimately caused the loss (damnum) complained of.

===Defences under Scots and Roman-Dutch law of delict===
There is a distinction between defences aimed at the wrongfulness element and defences which serve to exclude fault. Grounds of justification may be described as circumstances which occur typically or regularly in practice, and which indicate conclusively that interference with a person&#x27;s legally protected interests is reasonable and therefore lawful. They are practical examples of circumstances justifying a &quot;prima fade&quot; infringement of a recognised right or interest, according to the fundamental criterion of reasonableness. They are another expression of the legal convictions of the society.

Consent to injury, or &quot;Volenti non fit injuria&quot;, is a full defence; if successful, there is no delict. As a general defence, it can take two forms:
# consent to a specific harmful act of the defendant; and
# assumption of the risk of harm connected with the activity of the defendant.
There are five requirements for the defence of consent:
# capacity;
# knowledge and appreciation of harm; and
# consent, or free and voluntary assumption of risk. In addition,
# the consent must not have been socially undesirable—not seduction, or murder for insurance purposes; and
# the consent must not have been revoked.

Necessity is conduct directed at an innocent person as a result of duress or compulsion, or a threat by a third party or an outside force. Private defence (or self-defence) is conduct directed at the person responsible for the duress or compulsion or threat. There is, therefore, an important distinction between the two. In cases of necessity and private defence, the question is this: Under which circumstances would the legal convictions of the community consider it reasonable to inflict harm to prevent it? The test is objective. It requires a balancing of the parties&#x27; and of society&#x27;s interests. The role of the person against whom the defensive conduct is directed is an important factor in determining whether defence or necessity is being pled. An act of necessity is calculated to avert harm by inflicting it on an innocent person, whereas an act of defence is always directed at a wrongdoer. A person acts in &quot;private defence&quot;, and therefore lawfully, when he uses force to ward off an unlawful attack against his or someone else&#x27;s property or person. A person acts in &quot;self-defence&quot; when he defends his own body against unlawful attack by someone else. One therefore cannot invoke the justification of self-defence when acting in the interests of another person, but it is possible to invoke the justification of private defence when acting in one&#x27;s own interests. Conduct will be justified as an act in private defence or self-defence if it is
* lawful;
* directed against a wrongdoer; and
* for the protection of the actor&#x27;s or a third party&#x27;s interest, which is threatened or attacked by the wrongdoer.
The violence used in defence must not exceed what is reasonably necessary to avert the threatened danger:
* The attack must have constituted a real or imminent infringement of the defendant&#x27;s rights.
* The attack must have been unlawful.
* The defensive conduct must have been directed at the attacker.
* The defence must have been necessary to protect the threatened interests.
* It must have been reasonable: An act of defence is justified only if it was reasonably necessary for the purpose of protecting the threatened or infringed interest.
An act of necessity may be described as lawful conduct directed against an innocent person for the purpose of protecting an interest of the actor or of a third party (including the innocent person) against a dangerous situation, which may have arisen owing to the wrongful conduct of another or the behaviour of an animal, or through natural forces. Two types of emergency situations may be found:
# those caused by humans; and
# those caused by natural forces.

==Other jurisdictions==
===China===
====History====
Civil and criminal law were not clearly delineated in Ancient Chinese law as they are in modern legal systems. Therefore, while Tort Law was not a distinct area of law, concepts familiar to tort law were present in the criminal laws. However, by the late feudalism period, personal injury and property damage torts were mostly focused on compensation.

The earliest &quot;tort case&quot; known from Ancient China is from the Zhou dynasty. During a famine one person robbed another&#x27;s barn by sending his slave to steal the grain. He was sued and the court ordered double the original grain restored to the victim to compensate the damages. The Qin Code made some changes to tort liabilities introducing the concept of subjective fault (fault liability). In a case where one person borrows farm equipment, compensation would be required for damage to the equipment if the damage is caused by the condition of the equipment when it was borrowed. In addition to fault liability, some defences were developed. A person would not be liable if public property were damaged by fire or other natural forces outside the person&#x27;s control. There was no liability for killing livestock, if the livestock was about to hurt someone.

In contemporary China, however, there are four distinct legal systems in force, none of which are derived from classical Chinese law: Portuguese civil law in Macau, common law in Hong Kong, a German-style civil law system adopted by the Republic of China following Japan&#x27;s model, and a primarily civil law system in the mainland.

====Republic of China====
In areas administered by the Republic of China, the legislative basis of tort law is the Civil Code of the Republic of China whose legal system was modelled after the Japanese Six Codes system, which itself was primarily based on the German pandectist approach to law. In general, article 184 provides that a person who &quot;intentionally or negligently&quot; damages another person&#x27;s rights is required to compensate them for any resulting injury, and provides for strict liability where such harm is caused by the violation of a statutory provision aimed at protecting members of the community from harm. Additionally, tort liability exists for the owner of a defective building or structure where such building or structure causes damage, for the driver of an automobile that causes injury, and for individual&#x27;s responsible for business activities that posed a risk of harm to the plaintiff. Tort liability in the Republic of China also extends to the violation of certain non-pecuniary interests under article 195 which provides for reasonable compensation in the case of damage to the body, health, reputation, liberty, credit, privacy, or chastity of another, or to another&#x27;s personality in a severe way.

====Mainland China====
In 2021, the mainland adopted the Civil Code of the People&#x27;s Republic of China (CCPRC), Book Seven of which is titled &quot;Tort Liability&quot; and codifies a variety of torts, providing that an individual &quot;who through his fault infringes upon another person&#x27;s civil-law rights and interests shall bear tort liability&quot;. Book Seven outlines seven distinct categories of torts:

* Product Liability (Chapter IV)
* Liability for Motor Vehicle Traffic Accidents (Chapter V)
* Liability for Medical Malpractice (Chapter VI)
* Liability for Environmental Pollution and Ecological Damage (Chapter VII, comparable to toxic torts in common law jurisdictions)
* Liability for Ultra-hazardous Activities (Chapter VIII, essentially codifying the common law doctrine of the same name)
* Liability for Damage Caused by Domesticated Animals (Chapter IX)
* Liability for Damage Caused by Buildings and Objects (Chapter X)

While Book Seven (titled &quot;Tort Liability&quot;) of the CCPRC, which is influenced by a variety of common law and civil law jurisdictions, codifies the torts which exist under the law of Mainland China, Book One of the CCPRC provides a comprehensive list of remedies for torts in Article 179:
:　　(1) cessation of the infringement;
:　　(2) removal of the nuisance;
:　　(3) elimination of the danger;
:　　(4) restitution;
:　　(5) restoration;
:　　(6) repair, redoing or replacement;
:　　(7) continuance of performance;
:　　(8) compensation for losses;
:　　(9) payment of liquidated damages;
:　　(10) elimination of adverse effects and rehabilitation of reputation; and
:　　(11) extension of apologies.
These remedies apply to all categories of torts outlined in Book Seven or by any other provision of law. To this end, Book Seven specifically provides that &quot;where a tortious act endangers another person&#x27;s personal or property safety, the infringed person has the right to request the tortfeasor to bear tort liability such as cessation of the infringement, removal of the nuisance, or elimination of the danger&quot;. Book One additionally provides that force majeure constitutes a valid defence for tort liability while Article 184 in that book is a Good Samaritan law eliminating liability under tort law for individuals acting to save or rescue a potential plaintiff. Article 1176 in Book Seven provides a partial defence where an injury is caused in the course of a sport in which the plaintiff was consensually participating.

===France===
Tort liability in France (&quot;responsabilité extracontractuelle&quot;) is a distinct system which has developed over the course of history stemming from the Napoleonic Code which, together with the German Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch, forms the basis for private law in the majority of civil law countries with civil codes. French tort law is based on the principle that all injuries and other wrongs give rise to a remedy, typically in the form of damages, regardless of any other moral or equitable considerations; nevertheless, there are limits on the types of injuries which give rise to a remedy as well as the extent to which damages may be claimed. French jurisprudence has established that, in order to attract a remedy, an injury should generally be certain and direct (prohibiting speculative damages or compensation for pure economic loss) and affect a legitimate interest; however, judges do not recognise a hard and fast rule, meaning that great weight is given to the specific circumstances in each case with precedent serving to guide rather than control jurisprudence. The main principle in French tort law is that of fault, the principle that the individual who causes damage ought generally to be liable for it; however, following the Industrial Revolution, vicarious liability and strict liability have developed through both precedent and legislative action in response to the need to address damage caused by products, machines, and the actions of agents or employees.

French tort law is primarily governed by articles to of the civil code, which establish a number of distinct regimes for tort liability. Liability for one&#x27;s own actions is governed by articles 1240 and 1241, while other provisions of the code provide for vicarious and other &quot;sui generis&quot; forms of liability. In addition, liability in specific cases (e.g. product liability and defamation) have been provided for in separate statutes outside the code and in European Union directives.

===Germany===
====Outline====
German tort law is codified in Book 2 of the Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch (BGB), which provides for damages in circumstances in which there is no contractual relationship between the plaintiff and the defendant. German tort law protects plaintiffs against violations of:
* Legal interests (, literally: &quot;legal good&quot;): A legal interest is a good or interest protected by the legal system. Legal interests protected by tort are in particular life, the body, health, freedom and property. The type and number of protected legal interests are not conclusively defined and, where multiple such interests are at odds, they must be weighed against each other (e.g. human dignity versus freedom of speech in the context of the tort of defamation).
* Absolute rights (): Absolute rights provide a beneficiary with an exclusive, legally protected right to over a specific legal position (e.g. property rights), which everyone must respect.
* Protective laws (): In essence, a protective law is a provision of a written law which the Bundestag or a Landtag intended to protect individuals from some category of harm (e.g. a product liability or consumer protection law).

There are three distinct categories of liability recognised under the BGB: liability for &quot;culpable injustice&quot;, &quot;injustice in rebuttable presumed liability&quot;, and strict liability arising from &quot;endangerment&quot;. Liability for culpable injustice, the default position in German tort law, is where an individual directly violates another person&#x27;s legal interest or absolute right either intentionally or negligently. Rebuttable presumed liability is the principle that an individual is vicariously liable where a legal interest or absolute right is violated by another person (e.g. an agent, child/other person in their custody), where such a violation is committed by an animal, or where such a violation takes place on the first individual&#x27;s property. Strict liability for endangerment exists with regard to violations of protective laws (e.g. product liability, environmental laws, motor vehicle regulations) and in cases in which an individual is especially vulnerable due to the nature of a circumstance (e.g. medical or legal malpractice).

The BGB makes specific provisions for several different categories of torts pertaining to damages available, including damages and injunctions to prevent the commission of a tortious act. These provisions are supplemented by specific legislation, particularly protective laws. With regard to product liability, protective laws implementing European Union directives provide for a system of strict liability similar to that adopted in many common law jurisdictions; however, German tort law does not recognise class action lawsuits or the notion of mass torts. German tort law additionally does not permit punitive damages.

====Jurisprudence====

In terms of tort liability, the BGB represents a school of legal jurisprudence – the pandectists – heavily shaped by 19th century classical liberalism and, accordingly, places great emphasis on minimising impairment to individual freedom of action. In this regard, it can be contrasted with the Napoleonic Code, which was authored a century earlier and placed greater emphasis on the protection of individuals from the actions of others. As the two codes form the basis for private law in a variety of jurisdictions across the world, with one or the other being substantially copied by most civil law jurisdictions on every continent, the differences underpinning the BGB and the Napoleonic Code represent a major schism in jurisprudence between civil law jurisdictions. Since 1900, both the judges and German legislators decisively rejected the idea of a general principle of civil liability commonly found in civil codes inspired by the Napoleonic Code as well as in those of Japan and the Republic of China which are otherwise based primarily on the same pandectist school as the BGB and that of the Philippines.

One distinguishing feature of German law is the extent to which liability depends not just on the damage caused but on the action of the purported tortfeasor. Sometimes it is enough to prove negligence, while in other cases a more serious fault is required. Thus, anyone who unlawfully interferes, intentionally or through recklessness, with the life, body, health, freedom or property of others is liable to others to repair the resulting damage. On the other hand, less protection is granted in the event of damage to purely intangible interests, nicht-gegenständliche Interessen, that is to say when the victim only suffers purely economic or moral damage. Such is the case of a pecuniary loss caused by erroneous information or vexatious remarks. Apart from a rather marginal hypothesis provided for by article § 823 paragraph 2(9), the recourse will then suppose an intentional fault. The protection thus granted has proven to be incomplete. Consequently, over the course of the 20th century, case law has extended liability for recklessness to other cases, in particular by admitting that § 823 paragraph 1 BGB aims to protect a &quot;general right to personality&quot; and a &quot;right to the company&quot; or by recognising, alongside tort liability, the theory of culpa in contrahendo. Although Boris Starck makes no express reference to it, there are serious reasons to think that this right strongly inspired him in his elaboration of the theory of the guarantee. First, it takes up the idea of considering the event giving rise to the right to compensation, starting from the nature of the interest affected. Moreover, there is an astonishing resemblance between the respective formulations: § 823 paragraph 1 BGB is supposed to protect the integrity of property and persons by granting protection &quot;to life, body, health, freedom, to property&quot;. Starck, for his part, claims &quot;a right to life, to bodily integrity and to the material integrity of the objects belonging to us&quot;. Finally, on both sides, it is with the same arguments, such as the need to protect the freedom to act, that a less intense protection of purely economic and moral interests is justified. Nevertheless, Boris Starck departs from the German model by raising the protection of physical integrity by a notch, believing that the only breach here generates a right to compensation.

===Israel===
Israeli tort law is codified in the Tort Ordinance, originally passed under British rule, and is largely based on common law principles with influences from civil law jurisdictions. The Jewish law of rabbinic damages in Israel is another example of tort, although the Tort Ordinance is far more relevant in secular life, having been enacted by British Mandate of Palestine authorities in 1944 and taking effect in 1947. The Tort Ordinance additionally provides that any civil court may grant either or both compensation or an injunction as a remedy for a tort and codifies common law rules regarding liability and defences to tort claims. Chapter Three of the ordinance provides a list of torts recognised under Israeli law, including: 
* Assault (article one): Assault is defined as the &quot;intentional application of any kind of force&quot; either without their consent or by obtaining consent through fraud. It also includes &quot;any attempt&quot; to do so if the plaintiff reasonably feared injury. The act provides that self defence, the use of reasonable force to protect property or executing a lawful warrant constitute valid defences to the tort of assault. Additional defences apply where both the plaintiff and the defendant are members of the Israeli Defence Forces or where the plaintiff suffered from a mental illness. 
* False imprisonment (article two): False imprisonment is defined as &quot;the deprivation of the liberty of any person, unlawfully and absolutely, for any period of time by physical means or by a show of authority.&quot; 
* Trespass to moveable and immovable property (article three): Any unlawful interference with the plaintiff&#x27;s immovable or moveable property 
* Negligence (article four): The act provides that an individual is liable where they violate a duty of care owed to members of the general public. 
* &quot;Damage caused by dog&quot; (article four A), nuisance (article five): The owner of a dog is vicariously liable for tortious conduct on the part of the dog.
* Misappropriation of property (article six): This tort provides a remedy for the unlawful detention of property and for conversion. 
* Deceit (article seven): This tort provides a remedy for fraud and injurious falsities 
* Malicious prosecution (article eight) 
* Causing breach of contract (article nine), 
* Breach of statutory duty (article ten).

===Japan===
Like the French Civil Code, the Japanese Civil Code only has a single provision on tort liability. Article 709 of the Civil Code states: &quot;A person who has intentionally or negligently infringed any right of others, or legally protected interest of others, shall be liable to compensate any damages resulting in consequence.&quot; Tort liability in Japan therefore exists when three conditions are met: negligence or intentionality on the part of the tortfeasor, infringement of some legally recognised right, and a causal link between the tortfeasor&#x27;s action and the infringement in question. As this leaves room for a broad and potentially unrestricted scope of tort liability, Japanese tort law gradually developed based on case law, including cases on pollution. Statutes outside the Civil Code also regulate specific types of torts, such as the Law on the Compensation of Losses arising from Car Accidents enacted in 1955, the 1973 Law on the Remedies of Harm Caused to Human Health by Pollution, and the 1994 Law on Product Liability. The standard of proof in Japanese tort litigation is that of &quot;proof of a high degree of probability&quot;, a higher standard than the balance of probabilities utilised for tort liability in common law jurisdictions but lower than the reasonable doubt standard used in most legal systems for criminal trials, which the Japanese Supreme Court described in the leading case Miura v. Japan (a case on liability for medical malpractice):
Contemporary Japanese product liability law forms a distinct area of tort liability in which litigation may proceed under Article 709 of the Civil Code or the Product Liability Act of 1994. Under the Product Liability Act, which defines &quot;products&quot; as including any &quot;movable item that is manufactured or processed&quot;; manufacturers bear strict liability where a plaintiff proves the existence of:
* A defect in the product,
* Damage to life, body, or property, and
* A causal link between the defect and damage in question.

Under Japanese tort law, plaintiffs may seek compensation for both economic and non-economic damages, and there is no statutory cap on damages; however, punitive damages are forbidden on public policy grounds. Japanese courts regard the compensation of plaintiffs as the paramount purpose of damages under tort law, regarding punishment and deterrence as the exclusive domain of criminal law. Punitive damages awarded against tortfeasors by arbitral tribunals or foreign courts are unenforceable in Japan. Additionally, Japanese civil procedure does not allow for class actions and does not recognise mass tort liability.

As a result of the structure of Japan&#x27;s tort system, the country experiences a significantly lower litigation rate than other jurisdictions. In a 1990 article, Takao Tanase posited that the structure of Japan&#x27;s civil court system and its tort jurisprudence account for its low litigation rate, rather than any fundamental difference in culture between Japan and other countries. Indeed; present literature finds that, although Japanese jurists take a narrow view of tort law as solely serving to compensate plaintiffs for proven damages, the general Japanese public views punishment and deterrence as being just as desirable in civil litigation as the public in other countries. In Japan in 1986, fewer than 1% of automobile accidents involving death or an injury resulted in litigation, compared to 21.5% in the United States, a difference Tanase argues can be attributed to the availability of non-litigious methods of assessing fault, advising victims, determining compensation, and ensuring payment. Non-litigious dispute resolution mechanisms, mediation services, consultation centres operated by governments, the bar association, and insurance companies. The Japanese judiciary also works hard at developing clear, detailed rules that guarantee virtually automatic, predictable, moderate compensation for most accident victims. This contrasts with the tort system in common law jurisdictions, where the legal rules concerning both liability and general damages (i.e. non-economic loss) are stated in general terms, leaving a great deal to the judgment of constantly rotating lay juries—which in turn makes courtroom outcomes variable and difficult to predict. The result was a system that is vastly more efficient and reliable in delivering compensation than in common law jurisdictions, albeit without punitive or exemplary damages. Tanase estimated that legal fees comprised only 2% of the total compensation paid to injured persons. In the United States in the late 1980s, according to two big studies of motor vehicle accident tort claims (not just lawsuits), payments to lawyers equaled 47% of the total personal injury benefits paid by insurers. This expense drives up the cost of insurance to the point that huge numbers of drivers are uninsured or under-insured, which means that victims of their negligent driving will get little or nothing from the tort system.

=== New Zealand ===

In 2024, the New Zealand Supreme Court gave leave for Māori climate activist Mike Smith to sue seven corporations for their roles in causing climate change and the common law harms that resulted. Several aspects of Smith v Fonterra Co-operative Group Limited are notable. Smith argued that the principles of tikanga Māori atraditional system of obligations and recognitions of wrong can be used to inform New Zealand common law. Smith argued that the activities of the seven defendants by directly emitting greenhouse gasses or supplying fossil fuels fall under the established torts of public nuisance and negligence and a new tort of climate change damage. Smith further argued that these seven corporations are harming his tribe&#x27;s land, coastal waters, and traditional culture. Smith belongs to the Northland tribes of Ngāpuhi and Ngāti Kahu. This judgment simply allows Smith to pursue these matters in the High Court. The defendants have indicated that they will seek to convince the court that climate change responses are better left to government policy and not subject to civil litigation.

===North Korea===
North Korea&#x27;s approach to tort liability is relatively unique in the 21st century since, as a result of its Juche ideology and centralised planned economy, its legal system puts little emphasis on civil liability between private citizens; instead, it views correcting damages caused by tortious acts as the prerogative of the state through its economic intervention and criminal penalties. Nevertheless, the Law on the Compensation of Damages adopted on 22 August 2001 provides for tort liability, including vicarious liability on the part of principals for the actions of agents, employers for the actions of employees, parents or guardians for the actions of children, and owners for the actions of pets or other animals under their control. North Korean tort law also recognises capacity as an important factor in determining whether or not someone may be held liable for their own actions.

===Philippines===
The Philippines is a mixed law jurisdiction, shaped primarily by Spanish civil law and American common law as codified in the Philippine Civil Code. For the most part, the equivalent of tort law (insofar as it concerns negligence and product liability) in the Philippines is the law of quasi-delict. Article 2176 of the civil code provides that, in the absence of a contractual or quasi-contractual relationship, a person who &quot;by act or omission causes damage to another&quot; by way of fault or negligence is &quot;obliged to pay for the damage done&quot;. Article 1174 (which is made applicable by article 2178) provides that an individual is generally exempt from liability if the events giving rise to the damage were unforeseeable or inevitable.

The Philippine law of quasi-delict is largely a codification of common law principles and doctrines. For instance, the common law doctrine of comparative negligence is codified in article 2179, providing for compensation to be reduced in proportion with the plaintiff&#x27;s own fault for the damage they incurred. Similarly, the duty of care established in Donoghue v Stevenson is codified by article 2187 with regard to &quot;manufacturers and processors of foodstuffs, drinks, toilet articles and similar goods&quot;, and is extended by article 2189 to provincial and local governments responsible for defective public amenities. Similarly, article 2190 establishes liability for the owners of defective buildings or structures that cause damage. Additionally, case law in the Philippines recognises the common law doctrine of res ipsa loquitur.

Outside the law of quasi-delicts, the civil code also codifies other provisions of tort law in Chapter 2 of the Preliminary Title under the heading &quot;Human Relations&quot;. This chapter provides that &quot;every person must, in the exercise of his rights and in the performance of his duties, act with justice, give everyone his due, and observe honesty and good faith&quot; and that &quot;every person who, contrary to law, wilfully or negligently causes damage to another, shall indemnify the latter for the same&quot;. While negligence and product liability are primarily covered by the law of quasi-delicts, this chapter covers intentional wrongs in article 21, which provides that &quot;any person who wilfully causes loss or injury to another in manner that is contrary to morals, good customs or public policy shall compensate the latter for the damage&quot;. This chapter makes several other provisions in the realm of tortious liability, including: liability for defamation (article 33); violations of another person&#x27;s privacy, causing humiliation on account of religion or economic status, causing another person to be alienated from their friends (article 26); benefitting from (without causing) damage to another person&#x27;s property (article 23).

Damages under Philippine law are provided for in the Philippine Civil Code, which establishes harmonised rules for damages arising under any kind of obligation.In addition to pecuniary or economic damages, the code provides for two categories of non-economic damages with regard to quasi-delicts. Firstly, moral damages (i.e. damages for &quot;physical suffering, mental anguish, fright, serious anxiety, besmirched reputation, wounded feelings, moral shock, social humiliation, and similar injury&quot; resulting from a quasi-delict) may be awarded under article 2217. Secondly, exemplary damages may be awarded under article 2231 if there was &quot;gross negligence&quot; on the part of the defendant. In special cases, a court may choose to award nominal damages under article 2221 if it finds that, although it is unnecessary to compensate the plaintiff, it is nevertheless desirable to &quot;vindicate&quot; or &quot;recognise&quot; the violation of their right. Additionally, where a court cannot determine the value of damage incurred with sufficient certainty to award economic damages, it may instead award &quot;temperate or moderate damages&quot; under article 2224, which are higher than purely nominal damages but less than compensatory economic damages.

===Québec===
Private law in the Canadian province of Québec derives from the pre-Napoleonic French law then in force, but was eventually codified in the Civil Code of Lower Canada and later the present Code Civil du Québec (CCQ). While tort law in Canada&#x27;s other provinces follows common law jurisprudence under which distinct nominate torts are recognised by precedent or statute, CCQ provides for a general and open-ended concept of &quot;civil liability&quot; or &quot;la responsabilité civile&quot; in article 1457:
The CCQ provides for and defines the scope of civil liability for damages caused by inanimate objects. Article 1465 makes the general provision that the custodian of a thing or object (&quot;bien&quot;) is liable for any damage caused by it, while article 1466 provides that the owner of an animal is liable for damage or injury caused by it even if it had escaped from their custody at the time of the incident. Similarly, article 1467 imposes liability for damages caused by the ruin of an immovable (i.e. a building or other fixed structure) upon its owner even if construction defects are the ultimate cause of the ruin. Strict liability is imposed upon the manufacturers of moveable things (i.e. product liability) by article 1468 for injuries caused by safety defects. An individual is exempt from civil liability in cases of force majeure (article 1470), harm caused in the process of assisting or rescuing another (article 1471), and in certain other cases prescribed by law.

In general, there are four conditions necessary for a finding of civil liability under the CCQ:
* Imputability: The capacity of a tortfeasor to &quot;discern right from wrong&quot;, and to understand the consequences of their actions.
* Fault: The failure of a tortfeasor to act as &quot;a normally prudent and reasonable person&quot; would have in similar circumstances.
* Damage: Harm or injury suffered by the plaintiff
* Causation: A causal link between the fault of the tortfeasor and the damage incurred by the plaintiff.

===Thailand===
Thai tort law, as with contemporary Thai law in general, is a codified admixture of principles derived from common law and civil law systems. Title V of the Civil and Commercial Code of Thailand (CCT) establishes the principles of Thai tort law, with section 420 enshrining the basic doctrine that:

This is analogous to Article 709 of the Japanese Civil Code which establishes three criteria for tort liability: negligence or intentionality on the part of the tortfeasor, infringement of some legally recognised right and a causal link between the tortfeasor&#x27;s action and the infringement in question.

The CCT comprehensively outlines rules for tort liability and the burden of proof. In general, section 429 provides the default rule that everyone is liable for their own tortious acts and that the guardians of a child or other person lacking capacity are jointly liable. While the burden of proof under Thai tort law is on the plaintiff by default, section 422 of the CCT provides that an individual who infringes &quot;a statutory provision intended for the protection of others&quot; is presumed to be liable. Sections 425 through 327 provide for vicarious liability in employer-employee and principal-agent relationships while providing that an employer or principal found vicariously liable may seek compensation from the employee or agent, respectively. Similarly, section 433 provides that the owner or caretaker of an animal is liable for any tortious conduct it may commit, with the caveat that the owner or caretaker may seek compensation for such liability from anyone who &quot;wrongfully excited or provoked the animal&quot; or from &quot;the owner of another animal&quot; which did so. Sections 434 to 436 provide special rules for liability for the owners and possessors/occupiers (e.g. tenants/lessees) of defective buildings and structures, whereby: 1) the possessor is liable for damage caused by defective construction or poor maintenance except if they exercised proper care to prevent the damage, 2) if the possessor exercised proper care, the owner is liable, 3) the occupier of a building is liable for damage caused by items that fall from the building, and 4) an individual who is at risk of damage or injury from such a building may require its owner or possessor to take preventive action. Certain provisions of the CCT also provide for strict liability with regard to specific categories of tortious conduct; for example, section 437 provides for strict liability for an individual in charge of a vehicle or conveyance which causes injury and for individuals possessing items which are &quot;dangerous by nature&quot; or &quot;on account of their mechanical action&quot;, except where the individual demonstrates that the injury resulted from force majeure. Additionally, the CCT provides that self-defence, the aversion of a common danger, the use of reasonable and necessary force, and (where the thing or person damaged was the source of such danger) the aversion of an individual danger are defences against tort claims.

The rules regarding compensation under Thai tort law are prescribed by the CCT. In general, section 438 provides that courts may award such compensation as appears necessary with regard to &quot;the circumstances and gravity of the act&quot;; and that, in addition to damages, &quot;compensation may include restitution&quot; of any property of which the plaintiff has been deprived or which has decreased in value as a result of the tortious act. Per section 439, an individual who defaults on an obligation to return property they had wrongly deprived another individual of is liable to compensate the other individual for &quot;the accidental destruction&quot; or &quot;accidental impossibility of returning&quot; the property in question, except where such destruction or impossibility would have occurred regardless of the wrongful deprivation. Section 440 provides that compensation may additionally include interest for lost time. Where the tortious act contributed to an individual&#x27;s death, compensation must include funerary expenses; and, where the act resulted in damage to an individual&#x27;s health or body, compensation must include reimbursement of medical expenses and lost wages, and may additionally include non-pecuniary damages. Where the tortious act involves harm to an individual&#x27;s reputation, the court may order &quot;proper measures to be taken&quot; to restore the individual&#x27;s reputation either together with or in lieu of damages.

===European Union===

The legal framework of the European Union consists of the treaties, regulations, directives and case law. Specifically in the area of tort law, a number of rules can be found in tort law directives. Examples of directives include the Product Liability Directive and the Directive on Unfair Commercial Practices. A directives can be either a maximum harmonisation directives, which means member states are not allowed to deviate from it, or a minimum harmonisation directive, which only provide a general framework. Article 288 of the TFEU, however, concedes that a directive &#x27;shall be binding as to the result to be achieved, upon each member State to which it is addressed, but shall leave to national authorities the choice of form and methods&#x27;. Liability can also be based on the violation of community provisions. Article 288 of the TFEU explicitly regulates the liability of Community Institutions for damage caused by the breach of Union Law. This article does not give precise liability rules but refers to the general principles common to the laws of Member States. It does not mean that &#x27;the Community judicature must search for a solution favoured by a majority of Member States ... It simply means that the Community judicature must look to the national systems for inspiration in devising a regime of non-contractual liability adapted to the specific circumstances of the Community.&#x27;

The development of a general principle of liability for breach of Union Law is also in the Francovich case law of the ECJ. In this 1991 decision, the ECJ acknowledged liability of the Member States towards individuals for violation of Union law as being inherent in the system of the Treaty and being necessary for the effectiveness of Community of law. On the basis of the general principles to which Article 288 refers, the ECJ developed three requirements for liability:
#The rule of law infringed must be intended to confer rights on individuals
#The breach must be sufficiently serious
#There must be a direct causal link between the breach of the obligation resting on the State and the damage sustained by the injured parties.
The fulfilment of these requirements is sufficient for a right to compensation, which is directly based in Union Law.

Within the European Union and neighbouring countries, the European Group on Tort Law promotes the harmonisation of tort law within the region. The group meets regularly to discuss fundamental issues of tort law liability as well as recent developments and the future directions of the law of tort. The Group has founded the European Centre of Tort and Insurance Law in Vienna. The Group has drafted a collection of Principles of European Tort Law similar to the Principles of European Contract Law drafted by the European Contract Law Commission. The &quot;Principles of European Tort Law&quot; are a compilation of guidelines by the European Group on Tort Law aiming at the harmonisation of European tort law. They are not intended to serve as a model code, even though their wording may resemble statutory texts. At least with respect to form and structure, they resemble an American &quot;Restatement of the Law&quot;. The &quot;Principles of European Tort Law&quot; are intended to serve as a common framework for the further development of national tort laws and also of singular European legislation, which could avoid a further drifting-apart of piecemeal rule-making both on a national and on the European level.

==Conflict of laws==

In certain instances, different jurisdictions&#x27; law may apply to a tort, in which case rules have developed for which law to apply. In common law jurisdictions, the traditional approach to determine which jurisdiction&#x27;s tort law is applicable is the &quot;proper law&quot; test. When the jurisdiction is in dispute, one or more state laws will be relevant to the decision-making process. If the laws are the same, this will cause no problems, but if there are substantive differences, the choice of which law to apply will produce a different judgment. Each state, therefore, produces a set of rules to guide the choice of law, and one of the most significant rules is that the law to be applied in any given situation will be the &quot;proper law&quot;. This is the law which seems to have the closest and most real connection to the facts of the case, and so has the best claim to be applied. The general rule is that the &quot;proper law&quot; is the primary system of law that governs most aspects of the factual situation giving rise to the dispute. This does not imply that all the aspects of the factual circumstances are necessarily governed by the same system of law, but there is a strong presumption that this will be the case (see characterisation). Traditionally, common law jurisdictions such as England required &quot;double actionability&quot; for torts, effectively requiring the conduct to be considered tortious both in England and in the jurisdiction whose law is to apply under the proper law rule.

Over time, the proper law test has been refined or replaced in many common law jurisdictions either with reference to all instances of conflict of laws or specifically in the case of tort law. In English law, with the exception of defamation which continues to apply the &quot;proper law&quot; test, s10 Private International Law (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1995 abolishes the &quot;double actionability&quot; test, and s11 applies the &quot;lex loci delicti&quot; rule subject to an exception under s12 derived from &quot;Boys v Chaplin&quot; [1971] AC 356 and &quot;Red Sea Insurance Co Ltd v Bouygues SA&quot; [1995] 1 AC 190. Thus, it is no longer necessary for the case to be based on a tort actionable in England. The English courts must apply wider international tests and respect any remedies available under the &quot;Applicable Law&quot; or &quot;lex causae&quot; including any rules on who may claim (e.g. whether a personal representative may claim for a fatal accident) and who the relevant defendant may be (i.e. the English court would have to apply the applicable law&#x27;s rules on vicarious liability or the identity of an &quot;occupier&quot; of land). The first step is for the court to decide where the tort occurred, which may be complicated if relevant events took place in more than one state. s11(2) distinguishes between:
*actions for personal injuries: it is the law of the place where the individual sustained the injury;
*damage to property: it is the law of the place where the property was damaged;
*in any other case, it is the law of the place in which the most significant element or elements occurred.
In exceptional circumstances, the &quot;lex loci delicti&quot; rule is displaced in favour of another law, if the &quot;factors relating to the parties&quot; or &quot;any of the events which constitute the tort&quot; show that this other law will be &quot;substantially&quot; more appropriate.

Within the European Union, there have been efforts to harmonise conflict of tort laws rules between member states. Under Article 3 of the proposed &quot;Rome II Regulation&quot; on the &quot;Law Applicable to Non-Contractual Obligations&quot; (22 July 2003), there would be a general presumption that the &quot;lex loci delicti&quot; will apply subject to either: an exception in Paragraph 2 for the application of the law to any common habitual residence between the parties, or an exception in Paragraph 3 for cases in which &quot;the non-contractual obligation is manifestly more closely connected with another country. . .&quot; the so-called &quot;proximity criterion&quot;. In effect, where other specific rules of the regulation are not applied, these general rules replicate the effect of the English rules outlined above. In product liability cases, Article 4 selects the law of the injured party&#x27;s habitual residence if the product was marketed there with the consent of the defendant. The rationale is that if a defendant knows of, and is benefiting from, sales in the plaintiff&#x27;s state, the choice of that state&#x27;s law is reasonable. Article 6 specifies the &quot;lex fori&quot; for actions arising out of breach of privacy or defamation, a rule that may increase the risk of forum shopping. Whether the plaintiff has any right of reply in a defamation case will be determined under the law of the state where the broadcaster or publisher is established. In cases where contract and tort issues overlap, Article 9 states that the same law should govern both sets of issues, thus applying contractual choice of law clauses to related tort litigation.

In the United States, where each state constitutes a distinct jurisdiction for the purposes of tort law, different jurisdictions take different approaches to conflict of laws, and rules regarding conflict of tort laws apply equally to conflicts between the tort laws of two American states and conflicts between an American state and a foreign jurisdiction. Until the 20th century, traditional choice of law rules were based on the principle that legal rights vest automatically at legally significant and ascertainable times and places. For example, a dispute regarding property would be decided by the law of the place the property was located. Disputes in tort would be decided by the place where the injury occurred. During the first half of the 20th century, the traditional conflict of laws approach came under criticism from some members of the American legal community who saw it as rigid and arbitrary; the traditional method sometimes forced the application of the laws of a state with no connection to either party, except that a tort or contract claim arose between the parties in that state. This period of intellectual ferment (which coincided with the rise of the legal realism movement) introduced a number of innovative approaches to American choice of laws jurisprudence:
*Renvoi: Under this approach, courts look for a provision in the law of the choice of the law state that permits the court to use the lex fori, i.e. law of the forum state.
*Significant contacts test: This test evaluates the contacts between the states and each party to the case, and determines which state has the most significant contacts with the litigation as a whole.
*Seat of the relationship test: This test specifically examines the relationship between the parties to the lawsuit, and uses the law of the state in which the relationship between the parties was most significant.
*Balance of interests test: This test examines the interests of the states themselves, and the reasons for which the laws in question were passed. It is the brainchild of University of Chicago law professor Brainerd Currie, who outlined the doctrine in a series of articles from the 1950s and 60s. Under this form of analysis, the court must determine whether any conflict between the laws of the states is a true conflict, a false conflict, or an unprovided-for case. A true conflict occurs when one state offers a protection to a particular party that another state does not, and the court of the state that offers no such protection is asked to apply the law of the state offering the protection. In such a case, if the interests are balanced, the law of the forum will prevail. A false or apparent conflict occurs when the state offering the protection has no actual interest in the endorsement of that protection against the particular parties to the case. In this case, since neither party is from the forum state, it has no interest in the application of the law to these persons. An unprovided-for case is one in which each party is seeking to apply the law of the &quot;other&quot; state. In such a case, the law of the forum will prevail.
*Comparative impairment test: This test asks which state&#x27;s policies would suffer more if their law was not applied. This is similar to interest analysis, in that the interests of the state are taken into account - however, this test does not look to see which state benefits more from the application of its laws, but rather for situations in which the other state&#x27;s interests will actually be harmed by the application of the laws of the forum state.
*Better rule test: The better rule test presupposes that, between the laws presented by the two or more states in which the action arose, there is one set of laws that is empirically better, and which is therefore more meritorious of application by the forum court. Use of the &quot;better rule&quot; test, like renvoi, is frowned upon because it appears to be little more than a gimmick to allow a court to apply the law of its own state.

== Theory and reform ==

Scholars and lawyers have identified conflicting aims for the law of tort, to some extent reflected in the different types of damages awarded by the courts: compensatory, aggravated, and punitive. British scholar Glanville Williams notes four possible bases on which different torts rested: appeasement, justice, deterrence, and compensation.

William M. Landes, Richard A. Posner, and Steven Shavell have initiated a line of research in the law and economics literature that is focused on identifying the effects of tort law on people&#x27;s behavior. These studies often make use of concepts that were developed in the field of game theory. Law and economic scholars characterise law in terms of incentives and deterrence, and identified the aim of tort as being the efficient distribution of risk. Ronald Coase, a principal proponent, argued in &quot;The Problem of Social Cost&quot; (1960) that the aim of tort law, when transaction costs are high, should be to reflect as closely as possible the allocation of risk and liability at which private parties arrive when transaction costs are low.

Since the mid-to-late 20th century, calls for reform of tort law have come from various perspectives. Some calls for reform stress the difficulties encountered by potential claimants. For example, because not all people who have accidents can find solvent defendants from which to recover damages in the courts, P. S. Atiyah has called the situation a &quot;damages lottery&quot;. Consequently, in New Zealand, the government in the 1960s established a no-fault system of state compensation for accidents. In the 1970s, Australia and the United Kingdom drew up proposals for similar no-fault schemes but they were later abandoned.

A wide variety of tort reforms have been implemented or proposed in different jurisdictions, each attempting to address a particular deficiency perceived in the system of tort law. Generally, these can be broken down into two categories: reforms limiting damages recoverable by a plaintiff and procedural reforms limiting the ability of plaintiffs to file lawsuits. A large portion of tort reforms seek to limit the damages a plaintiff can be awarded. The rationale underlying these reforms is that, by limiting the profitability of tort lawsuits to plaintiffs, they will reduce the incentive to file frivolous lawsuits. There are several varieties of reforms to the system of damages:

*Non-economic damages caps place limits on noneconomic damages and collecting lawsuit claim data from malpractice insurance companies and courts in order to assess any connection between malpractice settlements and premium rates. Such caps can be general or limited to a particular category of cases.
*Punitive damages caps limit the amount of punitive damages awardable to a plaintiff. In most civil law jurisdictions, punitive damages are unavailable and are considered contrary to public policy since the civil justice system in many countries does not accord defendants the procedural protections present in the criminal justice system thus penalising an individual without allowing them the ordinary procedural protections that are present in a criminal trial. The rationale for restricting punitive damages is that such damages encourage a vindictive, revenge-seeking state of mind in the claimant and society more generally. In the UK, &quot;Rookes v Barnard&quot; limited the situations in which punitive damages can be won in tort actions to where they are expressly authorised by a statute, where a defendant&#x27;s action is calculated to make a profit, or where an official of the state has acted arbitrarily, oppressively or unconstitutionally. In the United States, though rarely awarded in tort cases, punitive damages are available and are sometimes quite staggering when awarded.
*Limits on damages for pain and suffering are another category of tort reform. While tort compensation easily applies to property damage, where the replacement value is a market price (plus interest), but it is difficult to quantify the injuries to a person&#x27;s body and mind. There is no market for severed legs or sanity of mind, and so there is no price that a court can readily apply in compensation for the wrong. Some courts have developed scales of damages awards, and benchmarks for compensation, which relate to the severity of the injury. For instance, in the United Kingdom, the loss of a thumb is compensated at £18,000, for an arm £72,000, for two arms £150,000, and so on, but while a scale may be consistent, the award itself is arbitrary. Patrick Atiyah has written that one could halve, double, or triple all the awards and it would still make just as much sense as it does now.
*Another reform to compensation, in jurisdictions where it is not already the norm, is to implement the English rule whereby the losing party to a case covers the victorious party&#x27;s legal costs. In Commonwealth countries as well as certain American states, the losing party must pay for the court costs of the winning party. The English rule Is also a prevailing norm in European civil law jurisdictions. For example, after authors Michael Baigent and Richard Leigh lost their plagiarism litigation over &quot;The Da Vinci Code&quot; in a British court, they were ordered to pay the defendants&#x27; $1.75 million in attorneys&#x27; fees. The &quot;American rule&quot; differs; in most cases, each party bears its own expense of litigation. Supporters of tort reform argue that loser-pays rules are fairer, would compensate winners of lawsuits against the costs of litigation, would deter marginal lawsuits and tactical litigation, and would create proper incentives for litigation, and argue for reforms that would require compensation of winning defendants some or all the time. Certain proposed or implemented tort reforms adopt the English rule if the respondent should prevail but retain the American rule otherwise (e.g. California&#x27;s special motion to strike in defamation suits).

In addition to reforms aimed at limiting plaintiff&#x27;s abilities to claim particular categories of compensation, tort reform measures aimed at reducing the prevalence of lawsuits for negligence, the most commonly alleged tort, aim to revise the doctrine of comparative negligence. Comparative negligence is a partial legal defence that reduces the amount of damages that a plaintiff can recover in a negligence-based claim based upon the degree to which the plaintiff&#x27;s own negligence contributed to cause the injury, which progressively displaced the erstwhile traditional doctrine of contributory negligence over the twentieth century which had precluded any damages being awarded in cases in which the plaintiff was deemed to be even partially at fault. Under standard or &quot;pure&quot; comparative negligence, a plaintiff can seek damages regardless of the portion of liability they bear, even where they are found to be more at fault than the respondent. As a tort reform measure aimed at combatting the perceived unfairness of allowing a party to seek extra-contractual damages where they are primarily at fault, many common law jurisdictions have adopted a &quot;modified&quot; doctrine of comparative negligence in which a party may only recover damages if it bears less than half the liability or if the other party bears more than half the liability. More radically, the American states of Alabama, Maryland, North Carolina, and Virginia continue to use contributory negligence, thus precluding a party who is even partly at fault from recovering damages for negligence.

The abolition of the collateral source rule (i.e. the principle that a respondent in a tort action cannot use the fact that a plaintiff has already been compensated as evidence) is another common proposal of tort reform advocates in jurisdictions where the rule exists. They argue that if the plaintiff&#x27;s injuries and damages have already been compensated, it is unfair and duplicative to allow an award of damages against the respondent. As a result, numerous states have altered or partially abrogated the rule by statute.

Regulation of contingent fees; as well as rules regarding barratry, champerty and maintenance, or litigation funding more generally; is another aspect of procedural policies and reforms designed to reduce the number of cases filed in civil court.

In common law jurisdictions, which typically rely on judicial precedent for the creation and development of new torts, the creation of statutory torts is a means through which legislatures reform and modify tort law. A statutory tort is like any other, in that it imposes duties on private or public parties, however, they are created by the legislature, not the courts. For example, the European Union&#x27;s &quot;Product Liability Directive&quot; imposes strict liability for defective products that harm people; such strict liability is not uncommon although not necessarily statutory. As another example, in England common law liability of a landowner to guests or trespassers was replaced by the Occupiers&#x27; Liability Act 1957; a similar situation occurred in the U.S. State of California in which a judicial common law rule established in &quot;Rowland v. Christian&quot; was amended through a 1985 statute. Statutory torts also spread across workplace health and safety laws and health and safety in food. In some cases, federal or state statutes may preempt tort actions, which is particularly discussed in terms of the U.S. FDA Preemption; although actions in the United States for medical devices are preempted due to &quot;Riegel v. Medtronic, Inc.&quot; (2008), actions for medical drugs are not due to &quot;Wyeth v. Levine&quot; (2009).

==Comparison with other areas of law==
Tort law is closely related to other areas of law, particularly contract and criminal law. On one hand, tort and contract law are typically regarded as the two primary fields within the law of obligations, with tort forming a catch-all category encompassing civil wrongs that arise by operation of law in contrast to breach of contract, which encompasses violations of obligations that are freely assumed by parties to a contract. On the other hand, both tort and criminal law aim to address wrongful conduct and often overlap such that conduct which gives rise to a claim under tort law may also give rise to a prosecution under criminal law.

===Contract law===
Tort is sometimes viewed as the causes of action which are not defined in other areas such as contract or fiduciary law. However, tort and contract law are similar in that both involve a breach of duties, and in modern law these duties have blurred and it may not be clear whether an action &quot; in tort or contract&quot;; if both apply and different standards apply for each (such as a statute of limitations), courts will determine which is the &quot;gravamen&quot; (the most applicable). Circumstances such as those involving professional negligence may involve both torts and contracts. The choice may affect time limits or damages, particularly given that damages are typically relatively limited in contract cases while in tort cases noneconomic damages such as pain and suffering may be awarded. Punitive damages are relatively uncommon in contractual cases versus tort cases. However, compensation for defective but not unsafe products is typically available only through contractual actions through the law of warranty.

In the United Kingdom, plaintiffs in professional negligence cases have some degree of choice in which law while in commercial transactions contract law applies; in unusual cases, intangible losses have been awarded in contract law cases.

The English case &quot;Hadley v. Baxendale&quot; (1854), which was adopted in the United States, split contract and tort damages by foreseeability of the damages when the contract was made. In the United States, the pure economic loss rule was adopted to further prevent negligence lawsuits in breach of contract cases. This &quot;economic loss rule&quot; was adopted by the Supreme Court of the United States &quot;East River Steamship Corp V Transamerica Delaval Inc.&quot; (1986) and expanded across the country in a non-uniform manner, leading to confusion. Among other examples, the tort of insurance bad faith arises out of a contractual relationship, and &quot;collateral torts&quot; such as wrongful dismissal involving possible overlap with labour law contracts.

===Criminal law===
There is some overlap between criminal law and tort. For example, in English law an assault is both a crime and a tort (a form of trespass to the person). A tort allows a person to obtain a remedy that serves their own purposes (for example, the payment of damages or the obtaining of injunctive relief). Criminal actions on the other hand are pursued not to obtain remedies to assist a personalthough often criminal courts do have the power to grant such remediesbut to remove their liberty on the state&#x27;s behalf. This explains why incarceration is usually available as a penalty for serious crimes, but not usually for torts. In early common law, the distinction between crime and tort was not distinct.

The more severe penalties available in criminal law also mean that it requires a higher burden of proof to be discharged than the related tort. As with other areas of private law, the burden of proof required in tort, known either as the &#x27;balance of probabilities&#x27; in English common law or &#x27;preponderance of evidence&#x27; in American law, is lower than the higher standard of &#x27;beyond a reasonable doubt&#x27;. Sometimes a claimant may prevail in a tort case even if the defendant who allegedly caused harm were acquitted in an earlier criminal trial. For example, O. J. Simpson was acquitted in the criminal court of murder but later found liable for the tort of wrongful death.

Both tort law and criminal law may impose liability where there is intentional action, reckless behaviour, carelessness, product liability without negligence (in the US and the EU), innocence, provided there is strict liability, battery, assault, and/or trespass.

Under Indian tort law and in other jurisdictions which adopted a version of the 1860 Indian Penal Code, the torts of assault and battery are interpreted with reference to equivalent criminal offences under the Indian Penal Code.

== See also ==

* Outline of tort law
* Causation in English law
* Index of tort articles
* &quot;Journal of Tort Law&quot;

== Notes ==

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
* 
* Max Loubser, Rob Midgley, André Mukheibir, Liezel Niesing, &amp; Devina Perumal. &quot;The Law of Delict in South Africa&quot;. Edited by Max Loubser &amp; Rob Midgley. Cape Town, Western Cape: Oxford University Press, 2009 (3rd edn. 2018).
==Further reading==
* 

== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q158970" start="2" end="6" title="Tort" label="tort"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124704" start="12" end="23" title="civil wrong" label="civil wrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404417" start="116" end="131" title="legal liability" label="legal liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q146491" start="209" end="221" title="criminal law" label="criminal law"/>
<link wikidata="Q83267" start="240" end="255" title="crime" label="criminal wrongs"/>
<link wikidata="Q365680" start="477" end="484" title="assault" label="assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796687" start="489" end="496" title="Battery (crime)" label="battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q93288" start="667" end="679" title="contract law" label="contract law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950118" start="912" end="935" title="civil law (legal system)" label="civil law jurisdictions"/>
<link wikidata="Q162314" start="957" end="966" title="Roman law" label="Roman law"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="968" end="978" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579315" start="1030" end="1046" title="English tort law" label="English tort law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972557" start="1267" end="1272" title="Scots law" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395172" start="1277" end="1292" title="Roman-Dutch law" label="Roman Dutch law"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="1693" end="1699" title="Quebec" label="Québec"/>
<link wikidata="Q760" start="1701" end="1709" title="Saint Lucia" label="St Lucia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027" start="1711" end="1720" title="Mauritius" label="Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="1815" end="1829" title="Mainland China" label="Mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="1835" end="1846" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="1852" end="1860" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q308922" start="2076" end="2083" title="damages" label="damages"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495575" start="2214" end="2224" title="injunction" label="injunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859320" start="2263" end="2279" title="Miller v Jackson" label="Miller v Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="2390" end="2399" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q257385" start="2423" end="2443" title="specific performance" label="specific performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q159394" start="2463" end="2472" title="defendant" label="defendant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950118" start="3032" end="3037" title="Civil law (legal system)" label="civil"/>
<link wikidata="Q131005600" start="3042" end="3051" title="mixed legal system" label="mixed law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184244" start="3076" end="3082" title="delict" label="delict"/>
<link wikidata="Q741338" start="3300" end="3315" title="comparative law" label="comparative law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768566" start="3594" end="3615" title="cause of action" label="cause of legal action"/>
<link wikidata="Q116735750" start="3719" end="3726" title="injury (law)" label="injured"/>
<link wikidata="Q468489" start="3736" end="3745" title="plaintiff" label="plaintiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q308922" start="3775" end="3782" title="damages" label="damages"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="3788" end="3795" title="lawsuit" label="lawsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630714" start="3919" end="3934" title="proximate cause" label="proximate cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078683" start="4087" end="4095" title="Germanic law" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243001" start="4119" end="4124" title="Fine (penalty)" label="fines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039571" start="4199" end="4214" title="Anglo-Saxon law" label="Anglo-Saxon law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423355" start="4438" end="4446" title="weregild" label="weregild"/>
<link wikidata="Q467033" start="4534" end="4538" title="feud" label="feud"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259937" start="4869" end="4876" title="deodand" label="deodand"/>
<link wikidata="Q83476" start="4879" end="4895" title="Alfred the Great" label="Alfred the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241793" start="4903" end="4912" title="Doom Book" label="Doom Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="5041" end="5056" title="Norman Conquest" label="Norman Conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258000" start="5288" end="5295" title="assizes" label="assizes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809102" start="5302" end="5320" title="Assize of novel disseisin" label="of novel disseisin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809100" start="5322" end="5345" title="Assize of mort d&amp;#x27;ancestor" label="of mort d&amp;#x27;ancestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809101" start="5351" end="5373" title="Assize of darrein presentment" label="of darrein presentment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153728" start="5467" end="5475" title="trespass" label="trespass"/>
<link wikidata="Q15916459" start="5502" end="5506" title="plea" label="plea"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="5632" end="5639" title="slander" label="slander"/>
<link wikidata="Q562566" start="5641" end="5659" title="breach of contract" label="breach of contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314049" start="6111" end="6119" title="replevin" label="replevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604665" start="6138" end="6165" title="Statute of Westminster 1285" label="Statute of Westminster 1285"/>
<link wikidata="Q30693805" start="6503" end="6521" title="Beaulieu v Finglam" label="Beaulieu v Finglam"/>
<link wikidata="Q561457" start="6813" end="6827" title="common carrier" label="common carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q332449" start="7177" end="7195" title="William Blackstone" label="William Blackstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5069944" start="7249" end="7274" title="champerty and maintenance" label="champerty and maintenance"/>
<link wikidata="Q828975" start="7279" end="7299" title="vexatious litigation" label="vexatious litigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333767" start="7394" end="7414" title="rights of Englishmen" label="rights of Englishmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986212" start="7440" end="7475" title="Commentaries on the Laws of England" label="Commentaries on the Laws of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630714" start="7772" end="7783" title="Proximate cause" label="foreseeable"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923601" start="7802" end="7815" title="Causation (law)" label="direct result"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959115" start="7823" end="7837" title="Breach of duty in English law" label="breach of duty"/>
<link wikidata="Q12421818" start="7928" end="7945" title="Physical injury" label="physical injuries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247836" start="8033" end="8040" title="Privacy law" label="privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9687" start="8115" end="8135" title="auto accidents" label="automobile accidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q694752" start="8137" end="8155" title="false imprisonment" label="false imprisonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="8157" end="8167" title="defamation" label="defamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q525271" start="8169" end="8186" title="product liability" label="product liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q647578" start="8188" end="8210" title="copyright infringement" label="copyright infringement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830391" start="8241" end="8252" title="toxic torts" label="toxic torts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037642" start="8306" end="8319" title="insurance law" label="insurance law"/>
<link wikidata="Q43183" start="8355" end="8372" title="claims adjuster" label="claims adjustment"/>
<link wikidata="Q977871" start="8443" end="8459" title="insurance policy" label="insurance policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025113" start="8606" end="8624" title="indirect liability" label="indirect liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q682557" start="8704" end="8731" title="joint and several liability" label="joint and several liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303460" start="8762" end="8781" title="secondary liability" label="secondary liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380392" start="8811" end="8831" title="enterprise liability" label="enterprise liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770839" start="8885" end="8907" title="market share liability" label="market share liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q326779" start="8947" end="8966" title="vicarious liability" label="vicarious liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q835173" start="9005" end="9018" title="law of agency" label="law of agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145896" start="9043" end="9062" title="respondeat superior" label="respondeat superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669825" start="9478" end="9496" title="Absolute liability" label="Absolute liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070463" start="9516" end="9545" title="M. C. Mehta v. Union of India" label="M. C. Mehta v. Union of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q705497" start="9607" end="9623" title="strict liability" label="strict liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880541" start="9628" end="9653" title="ultrahazardous activity" label="ultrahazardous activities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7385165" start="9710" end="9728" title="Rylands v Fletcher" label="Rylands v Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q332970" start="9939" end="9947" title="mischief" label="mischief"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672556" start="10813" end="10846" title="Accident Compensation Corporation" label="Accident Compensation Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042776" start="10870" end="10888" title="no-fault insurance" label="no-fault insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q912512" start="10984" end="11005" title="equality of treatment" label="equality of treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7146062" start="11142" end="11156" title="Patrick Atiyah" label="Patrick Atiyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565355" start="11602" end="11621" title="medical malpractice" label="medical malpractice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457196" start="12095" end="12113" title="sovereign immunity" label="sovereign immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5074434" start="12115" end="12134" title="charitable immunity" label="charitable immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911357" start="12137" end="12159" title="comparative negligence" label="comparative negligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044480" start="12221" end="12239" title="Intentional infliction of emotional distress" label="emotional distress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830391" start="12245" end="12255" title="toxic tort" label="toxic tort"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783852" start="12261" end="12273" title="class action" label="class action"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827280" start="12336" end="12347" title="tort reform" label="tort reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269478" start="12638" end="12648" title="Quasi-tort" label="Quasi-tort"/>
<link wikidata="Q628967" start="12768" end="12778" title="labour law" label="labour law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044480" start="12787" end="12831" title="intentional infliction of emotional distress" label="intentional infliction of emotional distress"/>
<link wikidata="Q22909834" start="12858" end="12876" title="wrongful dismissal" label="wrongful dismissal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768566" start="12893" end="12909" title="cause of action" label="causes of action"/>
<link wikidata="Q93288" start="12939" end="12951" title="contract law" label="contract law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184466" start="13127" end="13153" title="workers&amp;#x27; compensation" label="workers&amp;#x27; compensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144694" start="14056" end="14068" title="duty of care" label="duty of care"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900682" start="14125" end="14142" title="reasonable person" label="reasonable person"/>
<link wikidata="Q4976430" start="14205" end="14221" title="Brown v. Kendall" label="Brown v. Kendall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296782" start="14262" end="14282" title="Donoghue v Stevenson" label="Donoghue v Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q159394" start="14969" end="14978" title="defendant" label="defendant"/>
<link wikidata="Q468489" start="15015" end="15024" title="plaintiff" label="plaintiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144694" start="15029" end="15053" title="duty of care" label="exercise reasonable care"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630714" start="15341" end="15356" title="proximate cause" label="proximate cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q525271" start="15709" end="15726" title="product liability" label="product liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q705497" start="15842" end="15858" title="strict liability" label="strict liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827282" start="16015" end="16020" title="Tort law in India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669825" start="16024" end="16042" title="absolute liability" label="absolute liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769635" start="16260" end="16277" title="Anns v Merton LBC" label="Anns v Merton LBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q113961918" start="16333" end="16393" title="Spandeck Engineering v Defence Science and Technology Agency" label="Spandeck Engineering v Defence Science and Technology Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630714" start="16492" end="16507" title="proximate cause" label="proximate cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q294199" start="16512" end="16525" title="public policy doctrine" label="public policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261147" start="16754" end="16772" title="pure economic loss" label="pure economic loss"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17155" end="17200" title="Canadian tort law#Negligence" label="sets of circumstances recognised by precedent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034519" start="17284" end="17315" title="Caparo Industries plc v Dickman" label="Caparo Industries plc v Dickman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17804" end="17828" title="Trespass#Trespass to the person" label="Torts against the person"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911369" start="17837" end="17844" title="assault (tort)" label="assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283617" start="17846" end="17853" title="battery (tort)" label="battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q694752" start="17855" end="17873" title="false imprisonment" label="false imprisonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044480" start="17875" end="17919" title="intentional infliction of emotional distress" label="intentional infliction of emotional distress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333555" start="17963" end="17976" title="economic tort" label="economic tort"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="18323" end="18333" title="Defamation" label="Defamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8354932" start="18335" end="18354" title="invasion of privacy" label="invasion of privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959113" start="18356" end="18376" title="breach of confidence" label="breach of confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273016" start="18422" end="18443" title="malicious prosecution" label="malicious prosecution"/>
<link wikidata="Q667933" start="18448" end="18464" title="abuse of process" label="abuse of process"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726506" start="18577" end="18600" title="alienation of affection" label="alienation of affection"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185613" start="18605" end="18626" title="criminal conversation" label="criminal conversation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178387" start="19825" end="19855" title="Court of King&amp;#x27;s Bench (England)" label="Court of the King&amp;#x27;s Bench"/>
<link wikidata="Q7385165" start="20172" end="20190" title="Rylands v Fletcher" label="Rylands v Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025618" start="20357" end="20410" title="Cambridge Water Co Ltd v Eastern Counties Leather plc" label="Cambridge Water Co Ltd v Eastern Counties Leather plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827306" start="20762" end="20783" title="tortious interference" label="tortious interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246328" start="20987" end="20994" title="privity" label="privity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261147" start="21042" end="21060" title="pure economic loss" label="pure economic loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167888" start="21514" end="21559" title="Washington Supreme Court" label="supreme court of the U.S. state of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q326498" start="21708" end="21723" title="competition law" label="competition law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827306" start="21921" end="21942" title="tortious interference" label="tortious interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316074" start="21972" end="22001" title="Restatement of Torts, Second" label="Restatement (Second) of Torts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246328" start="22066" end="22073" title="privity" label="privity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263225" start="22116" end="22128" title="Derry v Peek" label="Derry v Peek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5697454" start="22190" end="22211" title="Hedley Byrne v Heller" label="Hedley Byrne v Heller"/>
<link wikidata="Q786749" start="22454" end="22469" title="William Prosser (academic)" label="William Prosser"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880597" start="22541" end="22573" title="Ultramares Corporation v. Touche" label="Ultramares Corporation v. Touche"/>
<link wikidata="Q10949665" start="22615" end="22622" title="auditor" label="auditor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316074" start="22745" end="22774" title="Restatement of Torts, Second" label="Restatement (Second) of Torts"/>
<link wikidata="Q816425" start="23019" end="23028" title="surveying" label="surveyors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827279" start="23150" end="23164" title="tort of deceit" label="tort of deceit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6875942" start="23273" end="23299" title="Misrepresentation Act 1967" label="Misrepresentation Act 1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420831" start="23649" end="23668" title="expectation damages" label="expectation damages"/>
<link wikidata="Q308922" start="25587" end="25594" title="damages" label="damages"/>
<link wikidata="Q285466" start="25642" end="25658" title="punitive damages" label="punitive damages"/>
<link wikidata="Q17134718" start="25928" end="25953" title="non-economic damages caps" label="non-economic damages caps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827280" start="25964" end="25975" title="tort reform" label="tort reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q231043" start="26201" end="26208" title="Consent" label="Consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q25743" start="26402" end="26425" title="volenti non fit injuria" label="volenti non fit injuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q797551" start="26625" end="26631" title="waiver" label="waiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144694" start="26966" end="26978" title="duty of care" label="duty of care"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911357" start="27063" end="27074" title="Comparative negligence" label="Comparative"/>
<link wikidata="Q847212" start="27078" end="27101" title="contributory negligence" label="contributory negligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5002892" start="27290" end="27314" title="Butterfield v. Forrester" label="Butterfield v. Forrester"/>
<link wikidata="Q847212" start="27371" end="27394" title="contributory negligence" label="contributory negligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911357" start="27659" end="27681" title="comparative negligence" label="comparative negligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018902" start="28178" end="28200" title="calculus of negligence" label="calculus of negligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419207" start="28515" end="28546" title="ex turpi causa non oritur actio" label="ex turpi causa non oritur actio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457196" start="28967" end="28985" title="Sovereign immunity" label="Sovereign immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q670052" start="28988" end="29006" title="Good Samaritan law" label="Good Samaritan law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037363" start="29068" end="29082" title="duty to rescue" label="duty to rescue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5074434" start="29085" end="29104" title="Charitable immunity" label="Charitable immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="29244" end="29251" title="lawsuit" label="lawsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q206937" start="29292" end="29307" title="civil procedure" label="civil procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q11273023" start="29412" end="29427" title="interrogatories" label="interrogatories"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314802" start="29429" end="29464" title="Request for production" label="requests for production of document"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314796" start="29467" end="29490" title="request for admissions" label="requests for admissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260784" start="29495" end="29505" title="Deposition (law)" label="deposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608642" start="29557" end="29565" title="subpoena" label="subpoena"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917804" start="29679" end="29695" title="motion to compel" label="motion to compel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950118" start="29910" end="29933" title="Civil law (legal system)" label="civil law jurisdictions"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="29970" end="29981" title="rule of law" label="rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634516" start="30099" end="30123" title="State monopoly" label="monopolised by the state"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="30229" end="30245" title="Executive (government)" label="executive branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="30357" end="30375" title="Legislature" label="legislative branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893194" start="31246" end="31268" title="United States tort law" label="United States tort law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827277" start="31270" end="31289" title="Australian tort law" label="Australian tort law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030889" start="31291" end="31308" title="Canadian tort law" label="Canadian tort law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827282" start="31310" end="31325" title="Tort law in India" label="Indian tort law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893194" start="31595" end="31617" title="United States tort law" label="United States tort law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302363" start="31789" end="31806" title="reception statute" label="reception statute"/>
<link wikidata="Q360574" start="32041" end="32066" title="Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr" label="Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128740" start="32391" end="32427" title="Palsgraf v. Long Island Railroad Co." label="Palsgraf v. Long Island Railroad Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q1058404" start="32478" end="32492" title="Judicial functions of the House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296782" start="32501" end="32521" title="Donoghue v Stevenson" label="Donoghue v Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165361" start="32914" end="32928" title="contingent fee" label="contingent fee"/>
<link wikidata="Q308922" start="33003" end="33010" title="damages" label="damages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146000" start="33133" end="33155" title="collateral source rule" label="collateral source rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155290" start="33265" end="33278" title="Welfare state in the United Kingdom" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="33465" end="33474" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="33525" end="33536" title="Law of England and Wales" label="English law"/>
<link wikidata="Q477108" start="33741" end="33753" title="Constitution of India" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669825" start="33778" end="33796" title="absolute liability" label="absolute liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070463" start="33869" end="33898" title="M. C. Mehta v. Union of India" label="M. C. Mehta v. Union of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519479" start="34040" end="34057" title="Indian Penal Code" label="Indian Penal Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="34330" end="34351" title="British Raj" label="British Indian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641572" start="35284" end="35304" title="administrative court" label="administrative court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950118" start="35314" end="35323" title="Civil law (legal system)" label="civil law"/>
<link wikidata="Q764822" start="35366" end="35387" title="constitutional review" label="constitutional review"/>
<link wikidata="Q171251" start="35447" end="35465" title="administrative law" label="administrative law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122235" start="35478" end="35489" title="private law" label="private law"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35528" end="35551" title="Administrative law#In common law countries" label="administrative fairness"/>
<link wikidata="Q65071408" start="36045" end="36069" title="Intrusion on Seclusion" label="intrusion upon seclusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8354932" start="36442" end="36461" title="invasion of privacy" label="invasion of privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q65071408" start="36465" end="36487" title="Intrusion on Seclusion" label="intrusion on seclusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476929" start="36566" end="36581" title="confidentiality" label="confidentiality"/>
<link wikidata="Q8354932" start="36692" end="36708" title="right to privacy" label="right to privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q477108" start="36748" end="36769" title="Constitution of India" label="Constitution of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q39074225" start="36926" end="36970" title="Right to Privacy verdict" label="recognised privacy as a constitutional right"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044480" start="36999" end="37043" title="intentional infliction of emotional distress" label="intentional infliction of emotional distress"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987389" start="37055" end="37097" title="negligent infliction of emotional distress" label="negligent infliction of emotional distress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972557" start="37881" end="37886" title="Scots law" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395172" start="37891" end="37906" title="Roman-Dutch law" label="Roman-Dutch law"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="37911" end="37921" title="Common law" label="uncodified"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192543" start="37923" end="37934" title="Legal doctrine" label="scholarship"/>
<link wikidata="Q665141" start="37947" end="37957" title="Precedent" label="judge-made"/>
<link wikidata="Q858700" start="37958" end="37970" title="legal system" label="legal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q162314" start="37981" end="37990" title="Roman law" label="Roman law"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="38022" end="38033" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="38038" end="38046" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="38058" end="38071" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184244" start="38257" end="38263" title="delict" label="delict"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302363" start="38906" end="38923" title="reception statute" label="reception statute"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="38987" end="38996" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39792" end="39812" title="South African law of delict#Aquilian action" label="actio legis Aquiliae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39911" end="39927" title="South African law of delict#Actio iniuriarum" label="actio iniuriarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822238" start="40338" end="40349" title="Lex Aquilia" label="Lex Aquilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677026" start="40567" end="40583" title="Actio iniuriarum" label="Actio iniuriarum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41531" end="41560" title="South African law of delict#Action for pain and suffering" label="action for pain and suffering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822238" start="42256" end="42276" title="lex Aquilia" label="actio legis Aquiliae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42290" end="42294" title="South African law of delict#Harm or loss" label="harm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42341" end="42348" title="South African law of delict#Conduct" label="conduct"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42437" end="42445" title="South African law of delict#Wrongfulness or unlawfulness" label="wrongful"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42539" end="42544" title="South African law of delict#Fault" label="fault"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42768" end="42777" title="South African law of delict#Causation" label="causation"/>
<link wikidata="Q931483" start="43153" end="43166" title="legal fiction" label="legal fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3701321" start="43726" end="43746" title="Damnum iniuria datum" label="damnum injuria datum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313906" start="44047" end="44057" title="reparation (legal)" label="reparation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598360" start="45113" end="45129" title="standard of care" label="standard of care"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923601" start="45278" end="45284" title="causation (law)" label="caused"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45486" end="45491" title="South African law of delict#Fault" label="fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q25743" start="46020" end="46043" title="Volenti non fit injuria" label="Volenti non fit injuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q325980" start="46680" end="46686" title="duress" label="duress"/>
<link wikidata="Q40283" start="46752" end="46767" title="Private defence" label="Private defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="49603" end="49612" title="feudalism" label="feudalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459068" start="49621" end="49636" title="personal injury" label="personal injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q554774" start="49641" end="49656" title="property damage" label="property damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="49773" end="49785" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49996" end="50004" title="Qin Code" label="Qin Code"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50088" end="50103" title="fault liability" label="fault liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404417" start="50380" end="50386" title="liable" label="liable"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985324" start="51115" end="51124" title="Six Codes" label="Six Codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q59832" start="51180" end="51190" title="Pandectists" label="pandectist"/>
<link wikidata="Q705497" start="51411" end="51427" title="strict liability" label="strict liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q56261592" start="52224" end="52273" title="Civil Code of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Civil Code of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q525271" start="52590" end="52607" title="Product Liability" label="Product Liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565355" start="52697" end="52716" title="Medical Malpractice" label="Medical Malpractice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830391" start="52820" end="52831" title="toxic torts" label="toxic torts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880541" start="52945" end="52964" title="Ultrahazardous activity" label="common law doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q56261592" start="53178" end="53183" title="Civil Code of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="CCPRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q161398" start="54276" end="54289" title="force majeure" label="force majeure"/>
<link wikidata="Q670052" start="54373" end="54391" title="Good Samaritan law" label="Good Samaritan law"/>
<link wikidata="Q151060" start="54826" end="54841" title="Napoleonic Code" label="Napoleonic Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q165728" start="54874" end="54897" title="Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch" label="Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578557" start="55155" end="55164" title="Equity (law)" label="equitable"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261147" start="55495" end="55513" title="pure economic loss" label="pure economic loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="55917" end="55938" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q326779" start="55940" end="55959" title="vicarious liability" label="vicarious liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q705497" start="55964" end="55980" title="strict liability" label="strict liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q525271" start="56094" end="56102" title="product liability" label="products"/>
<link wikidata="Q525271" start="56526" end="56543" title="product liability" label="product liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="56548" end="56558" title="defamation" label="defamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q165728" start="56731" end="56754" title="Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch" label="Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q308922" start="56781" end="56788" title="damages" label="damages"/>
<link wikidata="Q962695" start="56990" end="57000" title="legal good" label="legal good"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="57418" end="57428" title="defamation" label="defamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400881" start="57574" end="57582" title="property" label="property"/>
<link wikidata="Q154797" start="57714" end="57723" title="Bundestag" label="Bundestag"/>
<link wikidata="Q320501" start="57729" end="57736" title="Landtag" label="Landtag"/>
<link wikidata="Q326779" start="58366" end="58384" title="vicarious liability" label="vicariously liable"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784092" start="59480" end="59489" title="mass tort" label="mass tort"/>
<link wikidata="Q59832" start="59664" end="59675" title="pandectists" label="pandectists"/>
<link wikidata="Q794394" start="59709" end="59729" title="classical liberalism" label="classical liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q151060" start="59874" end="59889" title="Napoleonic Code" label="Napoleonic Code"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60557" end="60562" title="#Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60571" end="60588" title="#China" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q59832" start="60637" end="60647" title="pandectist" label="pandectist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60682" end="60693" title="#Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q644042" start="61970" end="61990" title="culpa in contrahendo" label="culpa in contrahendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211913" start="63293" end="63309" title="Damages (Jewish law)" label="rabbinic damages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970316" start="63437" end="63465" title="Mandate for Palestine" label="British Mandate of Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q365680" start="63832" end="63839" title="Assault" label="Assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q58967" start="64351" end="64373" title="Israeli Defence Forces" label="Israeli Defence Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q694752" start="64432" end="64450" title="False imprisonment" label="False imprisonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153728" start="64655" end="64663" title="Trespass" label="Trespass"/>
<link wikidata="Q160070" start="64802" end="64812" title="Negligence" label="Negligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144694" start="64896" end="64908" title="duty of care" label="duty of care"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156462" start="65002" end="65010" title="nuisance" label="nuisance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984159" start="65234" end="65244" title="Conversion (law)" label="conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q28813" start="65305" end="65310" title="fraud" label="fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="65315" end="65334" title="injurious falsehood" label="injurious falsities"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273016" start="65338" end="65359" title="Malicious prosecution" label="Malicious prosecution"/>
<link wikidata="Q562566" start="65387" end="65405" title="breach of contract" label="breach of contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q151060" start="65487" end="65504" title="Napoleonic Code" label="French Civil Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q705497" start="67320" end="67336" title="strict liability" label="strict liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784092" start="68109" end="68118" title="mass tort" label="mass tort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404417" start="69578" end="69587" title="Legal liability" label="liability"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="69592" end="69607" title="Damages#General damages" label="general damages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355832" start="70554" end="70579" title="Supreme Court of New Zealand" label="New Zealand Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="70595" end="70600" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430548" start="70682" end="70696" title="effects of climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q118904358" start="70756" end="70799" title="Smith v Fonterra Co-operative Group Ltd" label="Smith v Fonterra Co-operative Group Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406536" start="70849" end="70862" title="tikanga Māori" label="tikanga Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q106358009" start="71048" end="71065" title="greenhouse gas emissions" label="greenhouse gasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="71079" end="71091" title="fossil fuel" label="fossil fuels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676081" start="71358" end="71364" title="Iwi" label="tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283558" start="71368" end="71375" title="Ngāpuhi" label="Ngāpuhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023227" start="71380" end="71390" title="Ngāti Kahu" label="Ngāti Kahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617735" start="71457" end="71467" title="High Court of New Zealand" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q181800" start="71777" end="71782" title="Juche" label="Juche"/>
<link wikidata="Q326779" start="72177" end="72196" title="vicarious liability" label="vicarious liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768608" start="72868" end="72880" title="quasi-delict" label="quasi-delict"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911357" start="73481" end="73503" title="comparative negligence" label="comparative negligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144694" start="73669" end="73681" title="duty of care" label="duty of care"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296782" start="73697" end="73717" title="Donoghue v Stevenson" label="Donoghue v Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904075" start="74169" end="74186" title="res ipsa loquitur" label="res ipsa loquitur"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="75165" end="75175" title="defamation" label="defamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981458" start="76883" end="76909" title="Civil Code of Lower Canada" label="Civil Code of Lower Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975523" start="76932" end="76958" title="Civil Code of Quebec" label="Code Civil du Québec (CCQ)"/>
<link wikidata="Q525271" start="77956" end="77973" title="product liability" label="product liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q161398" start="78087" end="78100" title="force majeure" label="force majeure"/>
<link wikidata="Q889137" start="78356" end="78364" title="Capacity (law)" label="capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q161398" start="81564" end="81577" title="force majeure" label="force majeure"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="83369" end="83387" title="European Union" label="the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q11122" start="83404" end="83412" title="Treaties of the European Union" label="treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q240141" start="83414" end="83425" title="European Union regulation" label="regulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q326124" start="83427" end="83437" title="European Union directive" label="directives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855726" start="83442" end="83450" title="List of European Court of Justice rulings" label="case law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247739" start="83580" end="83607" title="Product Liability Directive" label="Product Liability Directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884288" start="83616" end="83656" title="Directive 2005/29/EC The Unfair Commercial Practices Directive" label="Directive on Unfair Commercial Practices"/>
<link wikidata="Q6795897" start="83687" end="83708" title="maximum harmonisation" label="maximum harmonisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16979212" start="83788" end="83809" title="minimum harmonisation" label="minimum harmonisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q31433" start="84854" end="84869" title="Francovich case" label="Francovich case"/>
<link wikidata="Q5412648" start="85674" end="85700" title="European Group on Tort Law" label="European Group on Tort Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5412353" start="85940" end="85981" title="European Centre of Tort and Insurance Law" label="European Centre of Tort and Insurance Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550628" start="86078" end="86113" title="Principles of European Contract Law" label="Principles of European Contract Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q158970" start="86317" end="86325" title="tort law" label="tort law"/>
<link wikidata="Q841917" start="86508" end="86530" title="Restatement of the Law" label="Restatement of the Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047324" start="87119" end="87146" title="Proper law" label="&amp;quot;proper law&amp;quot; test"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982983" start="87197" end="87202" title="Jurisdiction (area)" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="87203" end="87206" title="law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769186" start="87412" end="87420" title="Judgment (law)" label="judgment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073755" start="88112" end="88128" title="characterisation (conflict)" label="characterisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="88621" end="88631" title="defamation" label="defamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q30602464" start="88694" end="88755" title="Private International Law (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1995" label="Private International Law (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299961" start="88776" end="88796" title="double actionability" label="double actionability"/>
<link wikidata="Q4952733" start="88916" end="88930" title="Boys v Chaplin" label="Boys v Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q29378855" start="88961" end="88999" title="Red Sea Insurance Co Ltd v Bouygues SA" label="Red Sea Insurance Co Ltd v Bouygues SA"/>
<link wikidata="Q326779" start="89493" end="89512" title="vicarious liability" label="vicarious liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356179" start="90479" end="90497" title="Rome II Regulation" label="Rome II Regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q329912" start="90763" end="90781" title="habitual residence" label="habitual residence"/>
<link wikidata="Q525271" start="91160" end="91177" title="product liability" label="product liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q159394" start="91316" end="91325" title="defendant" label="defendant"/>
<link wikidata="Q468489" start="91411" end="91420" title="plaintiff" label="plaintiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q188728" start="91568" end="91575" title="privacy" label="privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="91579" end="91589" title="defamation" label="defamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q367926" start="91952" end="91965" title="choice of law" label="choice of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779167" start="93182" end="93195" title="legal realism" label="legal realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516201" start="93294" end="93300" title="Renvoi" label="Renvoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537619" start="93427" end="93435" title="lex fori" label="lex fori"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="94053" end="94074" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955876" start="94089" end="94104" title="Brainerd Currie" label="Brainerd Currie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="96216" end="96228" title="Damages#Compensatory damages" label="compensatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533016" start="96230" end="96240" title="aggravation (law)" label="aggravated"/>
<link wikidata="Q285466" start="96246" end="96254" title="punitive damages" label="punitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566655" start="96272" end="96290" title="Glanville Williams" label="Glanville Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q295354" start="96501" end="96518" title="law and economics" label="law and economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q44455" start="96689" end="96700" title="game theory" label="game theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q104493" start="96854" end="96858" title="risk" label="risk"/>
<link wikidata="Q188113" start="96860" end="96872" title="Ronald Coase" label="Ronald Coase"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758440" start="96913" end="96939" title="The Problem of Social Cost" label="The Problem of Social Cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q877496" start="96984" end="97000" title="transaction cost" label="transaction cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q7146062" start="97470" end="97482" title="P. S. Atiyah" label="P. S. Atiyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042776" start="97611" end="97626" title="No-fault insurance" label="no-fault system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672556" start="97653" end="97662" title="Accident Compensation Corporation" label="accidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="97678" end="97687" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="97696" end="97710" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q308922" start="98045" end="98052" title="damages" label="damages"/>
<link wikidata="Q17134718" start="98478" end="98503" title="Non-economic damages caps" label="Non-economic damages caps"/>
<link wikidata="Q318836" start="98664" end="98675" title="malpractice" label="malpractice"/>
<link wikidata="Q285466" start="98779" end="98795" title="Punitive damages" label="Punitive damages"/>
<link wikidata="Q285466" start="98821" end="98837" title="punitive damages" label="punitive damages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950118" start="98872" end="98881" title="Civil law (legal system)" label="civil law"/>
<link wikidata="Q294199" start="98961" end="98974" title="ordre public" label="public policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366212" start="99426" end="99442" title="Rookes v Barnard" label="Rookes v Barnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q562125" start="99897" end="99915" title="pain and suffering" label="pain and suffering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7146062" start="100632" end="100646" title="Patrick Atiyah" label="Patrick Atiyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378629" start="100877" end="100889" title="English rule (attorney&amp;#x27;s fees)" label="English rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="100976" end="100988" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333364" start="101210" end="101225" title="Michael Baigent" label="Michael Baigent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032009" start="101230" end="101243" title="Richard Leigh (author)" label="Richard Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q81689" start="101288" end="101305" title="The Da Vinci Code" label="The Da Vinci Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q106996101" start="102023" end="102047" title="special motion to strike" label="special motion to strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="102051" end="102061" title="defamation" label="defamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q160070" start="102257" end="102267" title="negligence" label="negligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911357" start="102331" end="102353" title="comparative negligence" label="comparative negligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q847212" start="102665" end="102688" title="contributory negligence" label="contributory negligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="103481" end="103488" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="103490" end="103498" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="103500" end="103514" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="103520" end="103528" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146000" start="103684" end="103706" title="collateral source rule" label="collateral source rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q820655" start="104184" end="104191" title="statute" label="statute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165361" start="104208" end="104222" title="contingent fee" label="contingent fee"/>
<link wikidata="Q807282" start="104252" end="104260" title="Barratry (common law)" label="barratry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5069944" start="104262" end="104287" title="champerty and maintenance" label="champerty and maintenance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075825" start="105144" end="105178" title="Occupiers&amp;#x27; Liability Act 1957" label="Occupiers&amp;#x27; Liability Act 1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q17108004" start="105298" end="105318" title="Rowland v. Christian" label="Rowland v. Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5425273" start="105580" end="105594" title="FDA Preemption" label="FDA Preemption"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333088" start="105681" end="105706" title="Riegel v. Medtronic, Inc." label="Riegel v. Medtronic, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q8039738" start="105768" end="105783" title="Wyeth v. Levine" label="Wyeth v. Levine"/>
<link wikidata="Q176006" start="106024" end="106042" title="law of obligations" label="law of obligations"/>
<link wikidata="Q562566" start="106155" end="106173" title="breach of contract" label="breach of contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q119184" start="106228" end="106242" title="freedom of contract" label="freely assumed"/>
<link wikidata="Q537098" start="106608" end="106617" title="fiduciary" label="fiduciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899048" start="106891" end="106913" title="statute of limitations" label="statute of limitations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543917" start="106957" end="106965" title="gravamen" label="gravamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q308922" start="107256" end="107263" title="damages" label="damages"/>
<link wikidata="Q562125" start="107272" end="107290" title="pain and suffering" label="pain and suffering"/>
<link wikidata="Q285466" start="107307" end="107322" title="Punitive damage" label="Punitive damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q329717" start="107523" end="107531" title="warranty" label="warranty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637993" start="107791" end="107822" title="Hadley v Baxendale" label="&amp;quot;Hadley v. Baxendale&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261147" start="107990" end="108008" title="pure economic loss" label="pure economic loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="108149" end="108183" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6042362" start="108370" end="108389" title="insurance bad faith" label="insurance bad faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q22909834" start="108473" end="108491" title="wrongful dismissal" label="wrongful dismissal"/>
<link wikidata="Q628967" start="108524" end="108534" title="labour law" label="labour law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="108635" end="108646" title="English law" label="English law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153728" start="108696" end="108718" title="Trespass" label="trespass to the person"/>
<link wikidata="Q308922" start="108823" end="108830" title="damages" label="damages"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495575" start="108851" end="108868" title="injunctive relief" label="injunctive relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q841236" start="109104" end="109117" title="incarceration" label="incarceration"/>
<link wikidata="Q9012745" start="109366" end="109381" title="Legal burden of proof" label="burden of proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q9012745" start="109462" end="109477" title="Burden of proof (law)" label="burden of proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q44473" start="109863" end="109876" title="O. J. Simpson" label="O. J. Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038640" start="109962" end="109976" title="wrongful death" label="wrongful death"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044445" start="110046" end="110064" title="Intention in English law" label="intentional action"/>
<link wikidata="Q314112" start="110066" end="110084" title="Recklessness (law)" label="reckless behaviour"/>
<link wikidata="Q160070" start="110086" end="110098" title="negligence" label="carelessness"/>
<link wikidata="Q525271" start="110100" end="110117" title="product liability" label="product liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q705497" start="110190" end="110206" title="strict liability" label="strict liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796687" start="110208" end="110215" title="Battery (crime)" label="battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q365680" start="110217" end="110224" title="assault" label="assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838810" start="110233" end="110241" title="Trespass to land" label="trespass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827282" start="110250" end="110265" title="Tort law in India" label="Indian tort law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519479" start="110329" end="110346" title="Indian Penal Code" label="Indian Penal Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112802" start="110492" end="110511" title="Outline of tort law" label="Outline of tort law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054583" start="110514" end="110538" title="Causation in English law" label="Causation in English law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112802" start="110541" end="110563" title="Index of tort articles" label="Index of tort articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6296006" start="110572" end="110591" title="Journal of Tort Law" label="Journal of Tort Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="110837" end="110846" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="110862" end="110885" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29815" wikidata="Q297411" url="?curid=29815" title="The War of the Worlds (disambiguation)">
<text>The War of the Worlds is an 1898 science fiction novel by H. G. Wells.

(The) War of the Worlds may also refer to these adaptations thereof:
==Radio==
* &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; (1938 radio drama), a &quot;The Mercury Theatre on the Air&quot; episode on CBS
* &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; (1968 radio drama), a remake on WKBW

==Film== 
* &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; (1953 film), by Byron Haskin
* &quot;War of the Worlds&quot; (2005 film), by Steven Spielberg
* &quot;H.G. Wells&#x27; War of the Worlds&quot; (The Asylum film), 2005, by David Latt
* &quot;H. G. Wells&#x27; The War of the Worlds&quot; (Pendragon Pictures film), 2005, by Timothy Hines

==Television==
===Episodes===
* &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot;, &quot;Orson Welles&#x27; Sketch Book&quot; episode 5 (1955)
* &quot;War of the Worlds&quot;, &quot;American Experience&quot; season 25, episode 6 (2013)
* &quot;War of the Worlds&quot;, &quot;Ben 10: Alien Force&quot; season 2, episodes 12–13 (2009)
* &quot;War of the Worlds&quot;, &quot;Brooklyn Bridge&quot; season 1, episodes 7–8 (1991)
* &quot;War of the Worlds&quot;, &quot;Fire&quot; season 2, episodes 10–13 (1996)
* &quot;War of the Worlds&quot;, &quot;Great Books&quot; season 2, episode 2 (1994)
* &quot;War of the Worlds&quot;, &quot;Mysteries and Scandals&quot; season 2, episode 12 (1999)
* &quot;War of the Worlds&quot;, &quot;Supernatural&quot; season 13, episode 7 (2017)
* &quot;War(s) of the World(s)?&quot;, &quot;Cunk on Earth&quot; episode 5 (2022)
===Shows===
* &quot;War of the Worlds&quot; (1988 TV series), a 1988 sequel to the 1953 film
* &quot;The Challenge: War of the Worlds&quot;, the 33rd installment of the reality competition show airing in 2019
* &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; (British TV series), a 2019 BBC adaptation
* &quot;War of the Worlds&quot; (2019 TV series), a 2019 Fox and Studio Canal adaptation

==Video games==
* &quot;War of the Worlds&quot; (video game), a 1982 video game by Tim Skelly of Cinematronics
* &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; (1984 video game), a computer game by CRL
* &quot;Jeff Wayne&#x27;s The War of the Worlds&quot; (1998 video game), a real-time strategy game for the PC
* &quot;Jeff Wayne&#x27;s The War of the Worlds&quot; (1999 video game), a vehicular combat game for the PlayStation

==Print works==
* &quot;War of the Worlds: Global Dispatches&quot;, a 1996 anthology of stories
* &quot;War of the Worlds: New Millennium&quot;, a 2005 novel by Douglas Niles
* &quot;H. G. Wells&#x27; The War of the Worlds&quot; (comics), a 2006 graphic novel by Ian Edginton and D&#x27;Israeli
* &quot;War of the Worlds&quot;, a &quot;Birthright&quot; graphic novel by Joshua Williamson and Andrei Bressan

==Music==
* &quot;Jeff Wayne&#x27;s Musical Version of The War of the Worlds&quot;, 1978
* &quot;Jeff Wayne&#x27;s Musical Version of The War of the Worlds – The New Generation&quot;, 2012
*&quot;War of the Worlds, Pt. 1&quot;, 2018, by Michael Romeo
*&quot;War of the Worlds, Pt. 2&quot;, 2022, by Michael Romeo
* &quot;War of the Worlds&quot; (Bad Astronaut album), by Bad Astronaut
* &quot;War of Worlds&quot;, a 2003 song on &quot;Soundchaser&quot; by Rage

==Other uses==
* &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; (board game), a 1980 board wargame from Task Force
* &quot;The War of the Worlds II&quot;, a 1976 board game by Rand Game Associates
* &quot;War of the Worlds... II&quot;, &quot;Dinosaucers&quot; episode 27 (1987)
* ROH/NJPW War of the Worlds, an annual professional wrestling event

==See also==
* 
* Adaptations of The War of the Worlds
* &quot;Sherlock Holmes&#x27;s War of the Worlds&quot;, a 1975 sequel to &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; by Manly Wade Wellman and Wade Wellman
* &quot;&quot;, a 1999 DC Comics publication
* &quot;War of the Worlds: Goliath&quot;, a 2012 Malaysian science fiction animation film
* &quot;The War of the Worlds: Next Century&quot;, a 1981 film by Piotr Szulkin
* &quot;War of the Worlds 2: The Next Wave&quot;, a 2008 sequel to David Michael Latt&#x27;s film, directed by C. Thomas Howell
* &quot;War of the World&quot; by Niall Ferguson
* World at War (disambiguation)
* World war (disambiguation)
* War World (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q213019" start="0" end="21" title="The War of the Worlds" label="The War of the Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q297411" start="73" end="76" title="The War of the Worlds (disambiguation)" label="The"/>
<link wikidata="Q297411" start="78" end="95" title="The War of the Worlds (disambiguation)" label="War of the Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q24958" start="153" end="205" title="The War of the Worlds (1938 radio drama)" label="&amp;quot;The War of the Worlds&amp;quot; (1938 radio drama)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773522" start="269" end="321" title="The War of the Worlds (1968 radio drama)" label="&amp;quot;The War of the Worlds&amp;quot; (1968 radio drama)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113303" start="353" end="398" title="The War of the Worlds (1953 film)" label="&amp;quot;The War of the Worlds&amp;quot; (1953 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q202028" start="418" end="459" title="War of the Worlds (2005 film)" label="&amp;quot;War of the Worlds&amp;quot; (2005 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788591" start="483" end="547" title="H. G. Wells&amp;#x27; War of the Worlds (The Asylum film)" label="&amp;quot;H.G. Wells&amp;#x27; War of the Worlds&amp;quot; (The Asylum film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562580" start="571" end="648" title="H. G. Wells&amp;#x27; The War of the Worlds (Pendragon Pictures film)" label="&amp;quot;H. G. Wells&amp;#x27; The War of the Worlds&amp;quot; (Pendragon Pictures film)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="741" end="793" title="Orson Welles&amp;#x27; Sketch Book#ep5" label="&amp;quot;Orson Welles&amp;#x27; Sketch Book&amp;quot; episode 5"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="834" end="886" title="American Experience season 25#ep290" label="&amp;quot;American Experience&amp;quot; season 25, episode 6"/>
<link wikidata="" start="927" end="983" title="List of Ben 10: Alien Force episodes#ep25" label="&amp;quot;Ben 10: Alien Force&amp;quot; season 2, episodes 12–13"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1024" end="1074" title="Brooklyn Bridge (TV series)#ep7" label="&amp;quot;Brooklyn Bridge&amp;quot; season 1, episodes 7–8"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1115" end="1156" title="Fire (TV series)#ep23" label="&amp;quot;Fire&amp;quot; season 2, episodes 10–13"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1197" end="1240" title="Great Books (TV program)#ep5" label="&amp;quot;Great Books&amp;quot; season 2, episode 2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1281" end="1336" title="List of Mysteries and Scandals episodes#ep64" label="&amp;quot;Mysteries and Scandals&amp;quot; season 2, episode 12"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1377" end="1422" title="Supernatural season 13#ep271" label="&amp;quot;Supernatural&amp;quot; season 13, episode 7"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1469" end="1504" title="Cunk on Earth#ep5" label="&amp;quot;Cunk on Earth&amp;quot; episode 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q242022" start="1526" end="1572" title="War of the Worlds (1988 TV series)" label="&amp;quot;War of the Worlds&amp;quot; (1988 TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1613" end="1645" title="The Challenge: War of the Worlds" label="The Challenge: War of the Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q52823794" start="1723" end="1776" title="The War of the Worlds (British TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The War of the Worlds&amp;quot; (British TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65051955" start="1802" end="1848" title="War of the Worlds (2019 TV series)" label="&amp;quot;War of the Worlds&amp;quot; (2019 TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q742887" start="1908" end="1950" title="War of the Worlds (video game)" label="&amp;quot;War of the Worlds&amp;quot; (video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219236" start="2003" end="2054" title="The War of the Worlds (1984 video game)" label="&amp;quot;The War of the Worlds&amp;quot; (1984 video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494344" start="2081" end="2150" title="Jeff Wayne&amp;#x27;s The War of the Worlds (1998 video game)" label="&amp;quot;Jeff Wayne&amp;#x27;s The War of the Worlds&amp;quot; (1998 video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175239" start="2191" end="2260" title="Jeff Wayne&amp;#x27;s The War of the Worlds (1999 video game)" label="&amp;quot;Jeff Wayne&amp;#x27;s The War of the Worlds&amp;quot; (1999 video game)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2331" end="2367" title="War of the Worlds: Global Dispatches" label="War of the Worlds: Global Dispatches"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2411" end="2444" title="War of the Worlds: New Millennium" label="War of the Worlds: New Millennium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582442" start="2484" end="2544" title="H. G. Wells&amp;#x27; The War of the Worlds (comics)" label="&amp;quot;H. G. Wells&amp;#x27; The War of the Worlds&amp;quot; (comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079802" start="2643" end="2653" title="Birthright (comic book)" label="Birthright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636272" start="2733" end="2791" title="Jeff Wayne&amp;#x27;s Musical Version of The War of the Worlds" label="Jeff Wayne&amp;#x27;s Musical Version of The War of the Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175237" start="2812" end="2891" title="Jeff Wayne&amp;#x27;s Musical Version of The War of the Worlds – The New Generation" label="Jeff Wayne&amp;#x27;s Musical Version of The War of the Worlds – The New Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q55839154" start="2911" end="2935" title="War of the Worlds, Pt. 1" label="War of the Worlds, Pt. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q111504563" start="2973" end="2997" title="War of the Worlds, Pt. 2" label="War of the Worlds, Pt. 2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3030" end="3081" title="War of the Worlds (Bad Astronaut album)" label="&amp;quot;War of the Worlds&amp;quot; (Bad Astronaut album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q798626" start="3086" end="3099" title="Bad Astronaut" label="Bad Astronaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3965373" start="3150" end="3161" title="Soundchaser" label="Soundchaser"/>
<link wikidata="Q48976952" start="3194" end="3240" title="The War of the Worlds (board game)" label="&amp;quot;The War of the Worlds&amp;quot; (board game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48997207" start="3287" end="3311" title="The War of the Worlds II" label="The War of the Worlds II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3400" end="3434" title="Dinosaucers#ep27" label="&amp;quot;Dinosaucers&amp;quot; episode 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q19788046" start="3444" end="3470" title="ROH/NJPW War of the Worlds" label="ROH/NJPW War of the Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q59183461" start="3530" end="3566" title="Adaptations of The War of the Worlds" label="Adaptations of The War of the Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495075" start="3575" end="3615" title="Sherlock Holmes&amp;#x27;s War of the Worlds" label="Sherlock Holmes&amp;#x27;s War of the Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3766" end="3792" title="War of the Worlds: Goliath" label="War of the Worlds: Goliath"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3856" end="3891" title="The War of the Worlds: Next Century" label="The War of the Worlds: Next Century"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3936" end="3970" title="War of the Worlds 2: The Next Wave" label="War of the Worlds 2: The Next Wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q377638" start="4064" end="4080" title="War of the World" label="War of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036550" start="4107" end="4136" title="World at War (disambiguation)" label="World at War (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19929864" start="4139" end="4165" title="World war (disambiguation)" label="World war (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971254" start="4168" end="4194" title="War World (disambiguation)" label="War World (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29816" wikidata="Q11016" url="?curid=29816" title="Technology">
<text>Technology is the application of conceptual knowledge to achieve practical goals, especially in a reproducible way. The word &quot;technology&quot; can also mean the products resulting from such efforts, including both tangible tools such as utensils or machines, and intangible ones such as software. Technology plays a critical role in science, engineering, and everyday life.

Technological advancements have led to significant changes in society. The earliest known technology is the stone tool, used during prehistory, followed by the control of fire—which in turn contributed to the growth of the human brain and the development of language during the Ice Age, according to the cooking hypothesis. The invention of the wheel in the Bronze Age allowed greater travel and the creation of more complex machines. More recent technological inventions, including the printing press, telephone, and the Internet, have lowered barriers to communication and ushered in the knowledge economy.

While technology contributes to economic development and improves human prosperity, it can also have negative impacts like pollution and resource depletion, and can cause social harms like technological unemployment resulting from automation. As a result, philosophical and political debates about the role and use of technology, the ethics of technology, and ways to mitigate its downsides are ongoing.

== Etymology ==
&quot;Technology&quot; is a term dating back to the early 17th century that meant &#x27;systematic treatment&#x27; (from Greek , from the and (), &#x27;study, knowledge&#x27;).&quot;&quot; It is predated in use by the Ancient Greek word (), used to mean &#x27;knowledge of how to make things&#x27;, which encompassed activities like architecture.

Starting in the 19th century, continental Europeans started using the terms (German) or (French) to refer to a &#x27;way of doing&#x27;, which included all technical arts, such as dancing, navigation, or printing, whether or not they required tools or instruments. At the time, (German and French) referred either to the academic discipline studying the &quot;methods of arts and crafts&quot;, or to the political discipline &quot;intended to legislate on the functions of the arts and crafts.&quot; The distinction between and is absent in English, and so both were translated as &quot;technology&quot;. The term was previously uncommon in English and mostly referred to the academic discipline, as in the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

In the 20th century, as a result of scientific progress and the Second Industrial Revolution, &quot;technology&quot; stopped being considered a distinct academic discipline and took on the meaning: the systemic use of knowledge to practical ends.

==History==
===Prehistoric===
Tools were initially developed by hominids through observation and trial and error. Around 2 Mya (million years ago), they learned to make the first stone tools by hammering flakes off a pebble, forming a sharp hand axe. This practice was refined 75 kya (thousand years ago) into pressure flaking, enabling much finer work.

The discovery of fire was described by Charles Darwin as &quot;possibly the greatest ever made by man&quot;. Archaeological, dietary, and social evidence point to &quot;continuous [human] fire-use&quot; at least 1.5 Mya. Fire, fueled with wood and charcoal, allowed early humans to cook their food to increase its digestibility, improving its nutrient value and broadening the number of foods that could be eaten. The &quot;cooking hypothesis&quot; proposes that the ability to cook promoted an increase in hominid brain size, though some researchers find the evidence inconclusive. Archaeological evidence of hearths was dated to 790 kya; researchers believe this is likely to have intensified human socialization and may have contributed to the emergence of language.

Other technological advances made during the Paleolithic era include clothing and shelter. No consensus exists on the approximate time of adoption of either technology, but archaeologists have found archaeological evidence of clothing 90-120 kya and shelter 450 kya. As the Paleolithic era progressed, dwellings became more sophisticated and more elaborate; as early as 380 kya, humans were constructing temporary wood huts. Clothing, adapted from the fur and hides of hunted animals, helped humanity expand into colder regions; humans began to migrate out of Africa around 200 kya, initially moving to Eurasia.

=== Neolithic ===

The Neolithic Revolution (or &quot;First Agricultural Revolution&quot;) brought about an acceleration of technological innovation, and a consequent increase in social complexity. The invention of the polished stone axe was a major advance that allowed large-scale forest clearance and farming. This use of polished stone axes increased greatly in the Neolithic but was originally used in the preceding Mesolithic in some areas such as Ireland. Agriculture fed larger populations, and the transition to sedentism allowed for the simultaneous raising of more children, as infants no longer needed to be carried around by nomads. Additionally, children could contribute labor to the raising of crops more readily than they could participate in hunter-gatherer activities.

With this increase in population and availability of labor came an increase in labor specialization. What triggered the progression from early Neolithic villages to the first cities, such as Uruk, and the first civilizations, such as Sumer, is not specifically known; however, the emergence of increasingly hierarchical social structures and specialized labor, of trade and war among adjacent cultures, and the need for collective action to overcome environmental challenges such as irrigation, are all thought to have played a role.

The invention of writing led to the spread of cultural knowledge and became the basis for history, libraries, schools, and scientific research.

Continuing improvements led to the furnace and bellows and provided, for the first time, the ability to smelt and forge gold, copper, silver, and leadnative metals found in relatively pure form in nature. The advantages of copper tools over stone, bone and wooden tools were quickly apparent to early humans, and native copper was probably used from near the beginning of Neolithic times (about 10 kya). Native copper does not naturally occur in large amounts, but copper ores are quite common and some of them produce metal easily when burned in wood or charcoal fires. Eventually, the working of metals led to the discovery of alloys such as bronze and brass (about 4,000 BCE). The first use of iron alloys such as steel dates to around 1,800 BCE.

=== Ancient ===


After harnessing fire, humans discovered other forms of energy. The earliest known use of wind power is the sailing ship; the earliest record of a ship under sail is that of a Nile boat dating to around 7,000 BCE. From prehistoric times, Egyptians likely used the power of the annual flooding of the Nile to irrigate their lands, gradually learning to regulate much of it through purposely built irrigation channels and &quot;catch&quot; basins. The ancient Sumerians in Mesopotamia used a complex system of canals and levees to divert water from the Tigris and Euphrates rivers for irrigation.

Archaeologists estimate that the wheel was invented independently and concurrently in Mesopotamia (in present-day Iraq), the Northern Caucasus (Maykop culture), and Central Europe. Time estimates range from 5,500 to 3,000 BCE with most experts putting it closer to 4,000 BCE. The oldest artifacts with drawings depicting wheeled carts date from about 3,500 BCE. More recently, the oldest-known wooden wheel in the world as of 2024 was found in the Ljubljana Marsh of Slovenia; Austrian experts have established that the wheel is between 5,100 and 5,350 years old.

The invention of the wheel revolutionized trade and war. It did not take long to discover that wheeled wagons could be used to carry heavy loads. The ancient Sumerians used a potter&#x27;s wheel and may have invented it. A stone pottery wheel found in the city-state of Ur dates to around 3,429 BCE, and even older fragments of wheel-thrown pottery have been found in the same area. Fast (rotary) potters&#x27; wheels enabled early mass production of pottery, but it was the use of the wheel as a transformer of energy (through water wheels, windmills, and even treadmills) that revolutionized the application of nonhuman power sources. The first two-wheeled carts were derived from travois and were first used in Mesopotamia and Iran in around 3,000 BCE.

The oldest known constructed roadways are the stone-paved streets of the city-state of Ur, dating to , and timber roads leading through the swamps of Glastonbury, England, dating to around the same period. The first long-distance road, which came into use around 3,500 BCE, spanned 2,400 km from the Persian Gulf to the Mediterranean Sea, but was not paved and was only partially maintained. In around 2,000 BCE, the Minoans on the Greek island of Crete built a 50 km road leading from the palace of Gortyn on the south side of the island, through the mountains, to the palace of Knossos on the north side of the island. Unlike the earlier road, the Minoan road was completely paved.
Ancient Minoan private homes had running water. A bathtub virtually identical to modern ones was unearthed at the Palace of Knossos. Several Minoan private homes also had toilets, which could be flushed by pouring water down the drain. The ancient Romans had many public flush toilets, which emptied into an extensive sewage system. The primary sewer in Rome was the Cloaca Maxima; construction began on it in the sixth century BCE and it is still in use today.

The ancient Romans also had a complex system of aqueducts, which were used to transport water across long distances. The first Roman aqueduct was built in 312 BCE. The eleventh and final ancient Roman aqueduct was built in 226 CE. Put together, the Roman aqueducts extended over 450 km, but less than 70 km of this was above ground and supported by arches.

=== Pre-modern ===
Innovations continued through the Middle Ages with the introduction of silk production (in Asia and later Europe), the horse collar, and horseshoes. Simple machines (such as the lever, the screw, and the pulley) were combined into more complicated tools, such as the wheelbarrow, windmills, and clocks. A system of universities developed and spread scientific ideas and practices, including Oxford and Cambridge.

The Renaissance era produced many innovations, including the introduction of the movable type printing press to Europe, which facilitated the communication of knowledge. Technology became increasingly influenced by science, beginning a cycle of mutual advancement.

=== Modern ===

Starting in the United Kingdom in the 18th century, the discovery of steam power set off the Industrial Revolution, which saw wide-ranging technological discoveries, particularly in the areas of agriculture, manufacturing, mining, metallurgy, and transport, and the widespread application of the factory system. This was followed a century later by the Second Industrial Revolution which led to rapid scientific discovery, standardization, and mass production. New technologies were developed, including sewage systems, electricity, light bulbs, electric motors, railroads, automobiles, and airplanes. These technological advances led to significant developments in medicine, chemistry, physics, and engineering. They were accompanied by consequential social change, with the introduction of skyscrapers accompanied by rapid urbanization. Communication improved with the invention of the telegraph, the telephone, the radio, and television.

The 20th century brought a host of innovations. In physics, the discovery of nuclear fission in the Atomic Age led to both nuclear weapons and nuclear power. Analog computers were invented and asserted dominance in processing complex data. While the invention of vacuum tubes allowed for digital computing with computers like the ENIAC, their sheer size precluded widespread use until innovations in quantum physics allowed for the invention of the transistor in 1947, which significantly compacted computers and led the digital transition. Information technology, particularly optical fiber and optical amplifiers, allowed for simple and fast long-distance communication, which ushered in the Information Age and the birth of the Internet. The Space Age began with the launch of Sputnik 1 in 1957, and later the launch of crewed missions to the moon in the 1960s. Organized efforts to search for extraterrestrial intelligence have used radio telescopes to detect signs of technology use, or &quot;technosignatures&quot;, given off by alien civilizations. In medicine, new technologies were developed for diagnosis (CT, PET, and MRI scanning), treatment (like the dialysis machine, defibrillator, pacemaker, and a wide array of new pharmaceutical drugs), and research (like interferon cloning and DNA microarrays).

Complex manufacturing and construction techniques and organizations are needed to make and maintain more modern technologies, and entire industries have arisen to develop succeeding generations of increasingly more complex tools. Modern technology increasingly relies on training and education – their designers, builders, maintainers, and users often require sophisticated general and specific training. Moreover, these technologies have become so complex that entire fields have developed to support them, including engineering, medicine, and computer science; and other fields have become more complex, such as construction, transportation, and architecture.

==Impact==

Technological change is the largest cause of long-term economic growth. Throughout human history, energy production was the main constraint on economic development, and new technologies allowed humans to significantly increase the amount of available energy. First came fire, which made edible a wider variety of foods, and made it less physically demanding to digest them. Fire also enabled smelting, and the use of tin, copper, and iron tools, used for hunting or tradesmanship. Then came the agricultural revolution: humans no longer needed to hunt or gather to survive, and began to settle in towns and cities, forming more complex societies, with militaries and more organized forms of religion.

Technologies have contributed to human welfare through increased prosperity, improved comfort and quality of life, and medical progress, but they can also disrupt existing social hierarchies, cause pollution, and harm individuals or groups.

Recent years have brought about a rise in social media&#x27;s cultural prominence, with potential repercussions on democracy, and economic and social life. Early on, the internet was seen as a &quot;liberation technology&quot; that would democratize knowledge, improve access to education, and promote democracy. Modern research has turned to investigate the internet&#x27;s downsides, including disinformation, polarization, hate speech, and propaganda.

Since the 1970s, technology&#x27;s impact on the environment has been criticized, leading to a surge in investment in solar, wind, and other forms of clean energy.

=== Social ===

==== Jobs ====
Since the invention of the wheel, technologies have helped increase humans&#x27; economic output. Past automation has both substituted and complemented labor; machines replaced humans at some lower-paying jobs (for example in agriculture), but this was compensated by the creation of new, higher-paying jobs. Studies have found that computers did not create significant net technological unemployment. Due to artificial intelligence being far more capable than computers, and still being in its infancy, it is not known whether it will follow the same trend; the question has been debated at length among economists and policymakers. A 2017 survey found no clear consensus among economists on whether AI would increase long-term unemployment. According to the World Economic Forum&#x27;s &quot;The Future of Jobs Report 2020&quot;, AI is predicted to replace 85 million jobs worldwide, and create 97 million new jobs by 2025. From 1990 to 2007, a study in the U.S. by MIT economist Daron Acemoglu showed that an addition of one robot for every 1,000 workers decreased the employment-to-population ratio by 0.2%, or about 3.3 workers, and lowered wages by 0.42%. Concerns about technology replacing human labor however are long-lasting. As US president Lyndon Johnson said in 1964, &quot;Technology is creating both new opportunities and new obligations for us, opportunity for greater productivity and progress; obligation to be sure that no workingman, no family must pay an unjust price for progress.&quot; upon signing the National Commission on Technology, Automation, and Economic Progress bill.

==== Security ====
With the growing reliance of technology, there have been security and privacy concerns along with it. Billions of people use different online payment methods, such as WeChat Pay, PayPal, Alipay, and much more to help transfer money. Although security measures are placed, some criminals are able to bypass them. In March 2022, North Korea used Blender.io, a mixer which helped them to hide their cryptocurrency exchanges, to launder over $20.5 million in cryptocurrency, from Axie Infinity, and steal over $600 million worth of cryptocurrency from the game&#x27;s owner. Because of this, the U.S. Treasury Department sanctioned Blender.io, which marked the first time it has taken action against a mixer, to try to crack down on North Korean hackers. The privacy of cryptocurrency has been debated. Although many customers like the privacy of cryptocurrency, many also argue that it needs more transparency and stability.

=== Environmental ===
Technology can have both positive and negative effects on the environment. Environmental technology, describes an array of technologies which seek to reverse, mitigate or halt environmental damage to the environment. This can include measures to halt pollution through environmental regulations, capture and storage of pollution, or using pollutant byproducts in other industries. Other examples of environmental technology include deforestation and the reversing of deforestation. Emerging technologies in the fields of climate engineering may be able to halt or reverse global warming and its environmental impacts, although this remains highly controversial. As technology has advanced, so too has the negative environmental impact, with increased release of greenhouse gases, including methane, nitrous oxide and carbon dioxide, into the atmosphere, causing the greenhouse effect. This continues to gradually heat the earth, causing global warming and climate change. Measures of technological innovation correlates with a rise in greenhouse gas emissions.

==== Pollution ====
Pollution, the presence of contaminants in an environment that causes adverse effects, could have been present as early as the Inca Empire. They used a lead sulfide flux in the smelting of ores, along with the use of a wind-drafted clay kiln, which released lead into the atmosphere and the sediment of rivers.

== Philosophy ==
Philosophy of technology is a branch of philosophy that studies the &quot;practice of designing and creating artifacts&quot;, and the &quot;nature of the things so created.&quot; It emerged as a discipline over the past two centuries, and has grown &quot;considerably&quot; since the 1970s. The &quot;humanities philosophy of technology&quot; is concerned with the &quot;meaning of technology for, and its impact on, society and culture&quot;.

Initially, technology was seen as an extension of the human organism that replicated or amplified bodily and mental faculties. Marx framed it as a tool used by capitalists to oppress the proletariat, but believed that technology would be a fundamentally liberating force once it was &quot;freed from societal deformations&quot;. Second-wave philosophers like Ortega later shifted their focus from economics and politics to &quot;daily life and living in a techno-material culture&quot;, arguing that technology could oppress &quot;even the members of the bourgeoisie who were its ostensible masters and possessors.&quot; Third-stage philosophers like Don Ihde and Albert Borgmann represent a turn toward de-generalization and empiricism, and considered how humans can learn to live with technology.

Early scholarship on technology was split between two arguments: technological determinism, and social construction. Technological determinism is the idea that technologies cause unavoidable social changes. It usually encompasses a related argument, technological autonomy, which asserts that technological progress follows a natural progression and cannot be prevented. Social constructivists argue that technologies follow no natural progression, and are shaped by cultural values, laws, politics, and economic incentives. Modern scholarship has shifted towards an analysis of sociotechnical systems, &quot;assemblages of things, people, practices, and meanings&quot;, looking at the value judgments that shape technology.

Cultural critic Neil Postman distinguished tool-using societies from technological societies and from what he called &quot;technopolies&quot;, societies that are dominated by an ideology of technological and scientific progress to the detriment of other cultural practices, values, and world views. Herbert Marcuse and John Zerzan suggest that technological society will inevitably deprive us of our freedom and psychological health.

==Ethics==

The &quot;ethics of technology&quot; is an interdisciplinary subfield of ethics that analyzes technology&#x27;s ethical implications and explores ways to mitigate potential negative impacts of new technologies. There is a broad range of ethical issues revolving around technology, from specific areas of focus affecting professionals working with technology to broader social, ethical, and legal issues concerning the role of technology in society and everyday life.

Prominent debates have surrounded genetically modified organisms, the use of robotic soldiers, algorithmic bias, and the issue of aligning AI behavior with human values.

Technology ethics encompasses several key fields: Bioethics looks at ethical issues surrounding biotechnologies and modern medicine, including cloning, human genetic engineering, and stem cell research. Computer ethics focuses on issues related to computing. Cyberethics explores internet-related issues like intellectual property rights, privacy, and censorship. Nanoethics examines issues surrounding the alteration of matter at the atomic and molecular level in various disciplines including computer science, engineering, and biology. And engineering ethics deals with the professional standards of engineers, including software engineers and their moral responsibilities to the public.

A wide branch of technology ethics is concerned with the ethics of artificial intelligence: it includes robot ethics, which deals with ethical issues involved in the design, construction, use, and treatment of robots, as well as machine ethics, which is concerned with ensuring the ethical behavior of artificially intelligent agents. Within the field of AI ethics, significant yet-unsolved research problems include AI alignment (ensuring that AI behaviors are aligned with their creators&#x27; intended goals and interests) and the reduction of algorithmic bias. Some researchers have warned against the hypothetical risk of an AI takeover, and have advocated for the use of AI capability control in addition to AI alignment methods.

Other fields of ethics have had to contend with technology-related issues, including military ethics, media ethics, and educational ethics.

==Futures studies==

&quot;Futures studies&quot; is the study of social and technological progress. It aims to explore the range of plausible futures and incorporate human values in the development of new technologies. More generally, futures researchers are interested in improving &quot;the freedom and welfare of humankind&quot;. It relies on a thorough quantitative and qualitative analysis of past and present technological trends, and attempts to rigorously extrapolate them into the future. Science fiction is often used as a source of ideas. Futures research methodologies include survey research, modeling, statistical analysis, and computer simulations.

=== Existential risk ===

Existential risk researchers analyze risks that could lead to human extinction or civilizational collapse, and look for ways to build resilience against them. Relevant research centers include the Cambridge Center for the Study of Existential Risk, and the Stanford Existential Risk Initiative. Future technologies may contribute to the risks of artificial general intelligence, biological warfare, nuclear warfare, nanotechnology, anthropogenic climate change, global warming, or stable global totalitarianism, though technologies may also help us mitigate asteroid impacts and gamma-ray bursts. In 2019 philosopher Nick Bostrom introduced the notion of a &quot;vulnerable world&quot;, &quot;one in which there is some level of technological development at which civilization almost certainly gets devastated by default&quot;, citing the risks of a pandemic caused by bioterrorists, or an arms race triggered by the development of novel armaments and the loss of mutual assured destruction. He invites policymakers to question the assumptions that technological progress is always beneficial, that scientific openness is always preferable, or that they can afford to wait until a dangerous technology has been invented before they prepare mitigations.

==Emerging technologies==
Emerging technologies are novel technologies whose development or practical applications are still largely unrealized. They include nanotechnology, biotechnology, robotics, 3D printing, and blockchains.

In 2005, futurist Ray Kurzweil claimed the next technological revolution would rest upon advances in genetics, nanotechnology, and robotics, with robotics being the most impactful of the three technologies. Genetic engineering will allow far greater control over human biological nature through a process called directed evolution. Some thinkers believe that this may shatter our sense of self, and have urged for renewed public debate exploring the issue more thoroughly; others fear that directed evolution could lead to eugenics or extreme social inequality. Nanotechnology will grant us the ability to manipulate matter &quot;at the molecular and atomic scale&quot;, which could allow us to reshape ourselves and our environment in fundamental ways. Nanobots could be used within the human body to destroy cancer cells or form new body parts, blurring the line between biology and technology. Autonomous robots have undergone rapid progress, and are expected to replace humans at many dangerous tasks, including search and rescue, bomb disposal, firefighting, and war.

Estimates on the advent of artificial general intelligence vary, but half of machine learning experts surveyed in 2018 believe that AI will &quot;accomplish every task better and more cheaply&quot; than humans by 2063, and automate all human jobs by 2140. This expected technological unemployment has led to calls for increased emphasis on computer science education and debates about universal basic income. Political science experts predict that this could lead to a rise in extremism, while others see it as an opportunity to usher in a post-scarcity economy.

==Movements==

===Appropriate technology===

Some segments of the 1960s hippie counterculture grew to dislike urban living and developed a preference for locally autonomous, sustainable, and decentralized technology, termed &quot;appropriate technology&quot;. This later influenced hacker culture and technopaganism.

===Technological utopianism===
Technological utopianism refers to the belief that technological development is a moral good, which can and should bring about a utopia, that is, a society in which laws, governments, and social conditions serve the needs of all its citizens. Examples of techno-utopian goals include post-scarcity economics, life extension, mind uploading, cryonics, and the creation of artificial superintelligence. Major techno-utopian movements include transhumanism and singularitarianism.

The transhumanism movement is founded upon the &quot;continued evolution of human life beyond its current human form&quot; through science and technology, informed by &quot;life-promoting principles and values.&quot; The movement gained wider popularity in the early 21st century.

Singularitarians believe that machine superintelligence will &quot;accelerate technological progress&quot; by orders of magnitude and &quot;create even more intelligent entities ever faster&quot;, which may lead to a pace of societal and technological change that is &quot;incomprehensible&quot; to us. This &quot;event horizon&quot; is known as the technological singularity.

Major figures of techno-utopianism include Ray Kurzweil and Nick Bostrom. Techno-utopianism has attracted both praise and criticism from progressive, religious, and conservative thinkers.

===Anti-technology backlash===

Technology&#x27;s central role in our lives has drawn concerns and backlash. The backlash against technology is not a uniform movement and encompasses many heterogeneous ideologies.

The earliest known revolt against technology was Luddism, a pushback against early automation in textile production. Automation had resulted in a need for fewer workers, a process known as technological unemployment.

Between the 1970s and 1990s, American terrorist Ted Kaczynski carried out a series of bombings across America and published the Unabomber Manifesto denouncing technology&#x27;s negative impacts on nature and human freedom. The essay resonated with a large part of the American public. It was partly inspired by Jacques Ellul&#x27;s &quot;The Technological Society&quot;.

Some subcultures, like the off-the-grid movement, advocate a withdrawal from technology and a return to nature. The ecovillage movement seeks to reestablish harmony between technology and nature.

==Relation to science and engineering==
Engineering is the process by which technology is developed. It often requires problem-solving under strict constraints. Technological development is &quot;action-oriented&quot;, while scientific knowledge is fundamentally explanatory. Polish philosopher Henryk Skolimowski framed it like so: &quot;science concerns itself with what , technology with what .&quot;

The direction of causality between scientific discovery and technological innovation has been debated by scientists, philosophers and policymakers. Because innovation is often undertaken at the edge of scientific knowledge, most technologies are not derived from scientific knowledge, but instead from engineering, tinkering and chance. For example, in the 1940s and 1950s, when knowledge of turbulent combustion or fluid dynamics was still crude, jet engines were invented through &quot;running the device to destruction, analyzing what broke [...] and repeating the process&quot;. Scientific explanations often follow technological developments rather than preceding them. Many discoveries also arose from pure chance, like the discovery of penicillin as a result of accidental lab contamination. Since the 1960s, the assumption that government funding of basic research would lead to the discovery of marketable technologies has lost credibility. Probabilist Nassim Taleb argues that national research programs that implement the notions of serendipity and convexity through frequent trial and error are more likely to lead to useful innovations than research that aims to reach specific outcomes.

Despite this, modern technology is increasingly reliant on deep, domain-specific scientific knowledge. In 1975, there was an average of one citation of scientific literature in every three patents granted in the U.S.; by 1989, this increased to an average of one citation per patent. The average was skewed upwards by patents related to the pharmaceutical industry, chemistry, and electronics. A 2021 analysis shows that patents that are based on scientific discoveries are on average 26% more valuable than equivalent non-science-based patents.

==Other animal species==
The use of basic technology is also a feature of non-human animal species. Tool use was once considered a defining characteristic of the genus Homo. This view was supplanted after discovering evidence of tool use among chimpanzees and other primates, dolphins, and crows. For example, researchers have observed wild chimpanzees using basic foraging tools, pestles, levers, using leaves as sponges, and tree bark or vines as probes to fish termites. West African chimpanzees use stone hammers and anvils for cracking nuts, as do capuchin monkeys of Boa Vista, Brazil. Tool use is not the only form of animal technology use; for example, beaver dams, built with wooden sticks or large stones, are a technology with &quot;dramatic&quot; impacts on river habitats and ecosystems.

==Popular culture==

The relationship of humanity with technology has been explored in science-fiction literature, for example in &quot;Brave New World&quot;, &quot;A Clockwork Orange&quot;, &quot;Nineteen Eighty-Four&quot;, Isaac Asimov&#x27;s essays, and movies like &quot;Minority Report&quot;, &quot;Total Recall&quot;, &quot;Gattaca&quot;, and &quot;Inception&quot;. It has spawned the dystopian and futuristic cyberpunk genre, which juxtaposes futuristic technology with societal collapse, dystopia or decay. Notable cyberpunk works include William Gibson&#x27;s &quot;Neuromancer&quot; novel, and movies like &quot;Blade Runner&quot;, and &quot;The Matrix&quot;.

==See also==

==References==

===Citations===
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==Further reading==
* Gribbin, John, &quot;Alone in the Milky Way: Why we are probably the only intelligent life in the galaxy&quot;, &quot;Scientific American&quot;, vol. 319, no. 3 (September 2018), pp. 94–99. &quot;Is life likely to exist elsewhere in the [Milky Way] galaxy? Almost certainly yes, given the speed with which it appeared on Earth. Is another technological civilization likely to exist today? Almost certainly no, given the chain of circumstances that led to our existence. These considerations suggest that we are unique not just on our planet but in the whole Milky Way. And if our planet is so special, it becomes all the more important to preserve this unique world for ourselves, our descendants and the many creatures that call Earth home.&quot; (p. 99.)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="0" end="10" title="Technology" label="Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623243" start="33" end="53" title="Conceptual model" label="conceptual knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4503831" start="75" end="79" title="goal" label="goal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425625" start="98" end="110" title="reproducible" label="reproducible"/>
<link wikidata="Q39546" start="228" end="232" title="tool" label="tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773693" start="242" end="250" title="Kitchen utensil" label="utensils"/>
<link wikidata="Q11019" start="254" end="261" title="machine" label="machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="292" end="300" title="software" label="software"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="338" end="345" title="science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="347" end="358" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129653" start="364" end="377" title="everyday life" label="everyday life"/>
<link wikidata="Q479257" start="488" end="498" title="stone tool" label="stone tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="512" end="522" title="prehistory" label="prehistory"/>
<link wikidata="Q912205" start="540" end="555" title="control of fire" label="control of fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030681" start="589" end="595" title="Brain size" label="growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q492038" start="603" end="614" title="human brain" label="human brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="638" end="646" title="language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="658" end="665" title="Pleistocene" label="Ice Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q912205" start="684" end="702" title="cooking hypothesis" label="cooking hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q446" start="725" end="730" title="wheel" label="wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="738" end="748" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q144334" start="867" end="881" title="printing press" label="printing press"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="902" end="910" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q830170" start="970" end="987" title="knowledge economy" label="knowledge economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530482" start="1022" end="1042" title="economic development" label="economic development"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760011" start="1062" end="1072" title="prosperity" label="prosperity"/>
<link wikidata="Q58734" start="1113" end="1122" title="pollution" label="pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3737914" start="1127" end="1145" title="resource depletion" label="resource depletion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692538" start="1179" end="1205" title="technological unemployment" label="technological unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q184199" start="1221" end="1231" title="automation" label="automation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25099524" start="1264" end="1281" title="Politics and technology" label="political debates"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403493" start="1324" end="1344" title="ethics of technology" label="ethics of technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="1463" end="1481" title="Renaissance" label="early 17th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="1532" end="1537" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="1629" end="1642" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="2466" end="2503" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351730" start="2542" end="2561" title="Progress" label="scientific progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q217200" start="2570" end="2598" title="Second Industrial Revolution" label="Second Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q635162" start="2818" end="2826" title="hominids" label="hominids"/>
<link wikidata="Q2219080" start="2851" end="2866" title="trial and error" label="trial and error"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2877" end="2880" title="Year#Abbreviations yr and ya" label="Mya"/>
<link wikidata="Q479448" start="2995" end="3003" title="hand axe" label="hand axe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142470" start="3064" end="3080" title="pressure flaking" label="pressure flaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q912205" start="3113" end="3130" title="discovery of fire" label="discovery of fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="3148" end="3162" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q177463" start="3357" end="3365" title="charcoal" label="charcoal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3533" end="3551" title="Control of fire by early humans#The cooking hypothesis" label="cooking hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030681" start="3624" end="3634" title="brain size" label="brain size"/>
<link wikidata="Q585473" start="3719" end="3725" title="hearth" label="hearth"/>
<link wikidata="Q185467" start="3810" end="3823" title="socialization" label="socialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="3869" end="3877" title="language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q858288" start="4425" end="4432" title="Early human migrations" label="migrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="4483" end="4490" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180548" start="4516" end="4536" title="Neolithic Revolution" label="Neolithic Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q479448" start="4721" end="4730" title="Hand axe" label="stone axe"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="4776" end="4792" title="forest clearance" label="forest clearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="4914" end="4924" title="Mesolithic" label="Mesolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141745" start="5014" end="5023" title="sedentism" label="sedentism"/>
<link wikidata="Q128393" start="5131" end="5136" title="nomad" label="nomad"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="5253" end="5268" title="hunter-gatherer" label="hunter-gatherer"/>
<link wikidata="Q207449" start="5361" end="5381" title="labor specialization" label="labor specialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q168518" start="5473" end="5477" title="Uruk" label="Uruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="5516" end="5521" title="Sumer" label="Sumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q188619" start="5589" end="5601" title="hierarchical" label="hierarchical"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="5765" end="5775" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340267" start="5834" end="5841" title="History of writing" label="writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075" start="5916" end="5925" title="libraries" label="libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="5940" end="5950" title="scientific" label="scientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q96384666" start="5997" end="6004" title="Metallurgical furnace" label="furnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q208103" start="6009" end="6016" title="bellows" label="bellows"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748405" start="6066" end="6071" title="smelting" label="smelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q193057" start="6076" end="6081" title="forging" label="forge"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="6334" end="6343" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="6591" end="6597" title="alloys" label="alloys"/>
<link wikidata="Q34095" start="6606" end="6612" title="bronze" label="bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q39782" start="6617" end="6622" title="brass" label="brass"/>
<link wikidata="Q170483" start="6839" end="6851" title="sailing ship" label="sailing ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519552" start="7015" end="7035" title="flooding of the Nile" label="flooding of the Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="7189" end="7194" title="Sumer" label="Sumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="7202" end="7213" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35591" start="7282" end="7288" title="Tigris" label="Tigris"/>
<link wikidata="Q34589" start="7293" end="7302" title="Euphrates" label="Euphrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="7441" end="7445" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257373" start="7471" end="7485" title="Maykop culture" label="Maykop culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q619970" start="7775" end="7790" title="Ljubljana Marsh" label="Ljubljana Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="7794" end="7802" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128390" start="8067" end="8086" title="potter&amp;#x27;s wheel" label="potter&amp;#x27;s wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5699" start="8162" end="8164" title="Ur" label="Ur"/>
<link wikidata="Q215768" start="8324" end="8339" title="mass production" label="mass production"/>
<link wikidata="Q146728" start="8420" end="8431" title="water wheel" label="water wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q949220" start="8575" end="8582" title="travois" label="travois"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="8622" end="8626" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q210891" start="8799" end="8810" title="Glastonbury" label="Glastonbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="8949" end="8961" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="8969" end="8986" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q134178" start="9066" end="9073" title="Minoans" label="Minoans"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="9097" end="9102" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352674" start="9149" end="9155" title="Gortyn" label="Gortyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q173527" start="9229" end="9236" title="Knossos" label="Knossos"/>
<link wikidata="Q506004" start="9366" end="9379" title="Tap water" label="running water"/>
<link wikidata="Q156849" start="9651" end="9664" title="sewage system" label="sewage system"/>
<link wikidata="Q746102" start="9700" end="9713" title="Cloaca Maxima" label="Cloaca Maxima"/>
<link wikidata="Q18870689" start="9844" end="9853" title="aqueduct (bridge)" label="aqueducts"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218676" start="9923" end="9937" title="Roman aqueduct" label="Roman aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="10207" end="10218" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q152523" start="10292" end="10304" title="horse collar" label="horse collar"/>
<link wikidata="Q192130" start="10310" end="10319" title="horseshoe" label="horseshoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q186713" start="10322" end="10336" title="Simple machine" label="Simple machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q40164" start="10351" end="10356" title="lever" label="lever"/>
<link wikidata="Q11022" start="10362" end="10367" title="screw" label="screw"/>
<link wikidata="Q48378" start="10377" end="10383" title="pulley" label="pulley"/>
<link wikidata="Q175334" start="10440" end="10451" title="wheelbarrow" label="wheelbarrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q38720" start="10453" end="10461" title="windmill" label="windmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q376" start="10468" end="10473" title="clock" label="clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="10564" end="10570" title="University of Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="10575" end="10584" title="University of Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312473" start="10591" end="10602" title="Renaissance technology" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q426853" start="10668" end="10680" title="movable type" label="movable type"/>
<link wikidata="Q144334" start="10681" end="10695" title="printing press" label="printing press"/>
<link wikidata="Q12760" start="10938" end="10949" title="steam power" label="steam power"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="10962" end="10983" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q18293488" start="11064" end="11075" title="British Agricultural Revolution" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11467" start="11100" end="11110" title="metallurgy" label="metallurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2789111" start="11165" end="11179" title="factory system" label="factory system"/>
<link wikidata="Q217200" start="11222" end="11250" title="Second Industrial Revolution" label="Second Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q221275" start="11373" end="11387" title="Sewage treatment" label="sewage systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326621" start="11402" end="11413" title="light bulbs" label="light bulbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q72313" start="11415" end="11429" title="electric motor" label="electric motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="11443" end="11454" title="automobiles" label="automobiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="11545" end="11554" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="11556" end="11563" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="11757" end="11766" title="telegraph" label="telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q11429" start="11888" end="11903" title="nuclear fission" label="nuclear fission"/>
<link wikidata="Q757669" start="11911" end="11921" title="Atomic Age" label="Atomic Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="11934" end="11949" title="nuclear weapons" label="nuclear weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739" start="11954" end="11967" title="nuclear power" label="nuclear power"/>
<link wikidata="Q63759" start="11969" end="11984" title="Analog computer" label="Analog computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="12074" end="12085" title="vacuum tube" label="vacuum tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="12122" end="12130" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q169399" start="12141" end="12146" title="ENIAC" label="ENIAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="12211" end="12226" title="quantum physics" label="quantum physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="12260" end="12270" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="12389" end="12402" title="optical fiber" label="optical fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359305" start="12407" end="12424" title="optical amplifier" label="optical amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q956129" start="12505" end="12520" title="Information Age" label="Information Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="12542" end="12550" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q938328" start="12556" end="12565" title="Space Age" label="Space Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q80811" start="12591" end="12600" title="Sputnik 1" label="Sputnik 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q752783" start="12634" end="12649" title="Human spaceflight" label="crewed missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q484587" start="12697" end="12737" title="search for extraterrestrial intelligence" label="search for extraterrestrial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q184356" start="12748" end="12763" title="radio telescope" label="radio telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156964" start="12809" end="12824" title="technosignature" label="technosignature"/>
<link wikidata="Q32566" start="12927" end="12929" title="CT scan" label="CT"/>
<link wikidata="Q208376" start="12931" end="12934" title="Positron emission tomography" label="PET"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="12940" end="12943" title="MRI" label="MRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q15043671" start="12975" end="12991" title="dialysis machine" label="dialysis machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q954202" start="12993" end="13006" title="defibrillator" label="defibrillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q372713" start="13008" end="13017" title="pacemaker" label="pacemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="13043" end="13062" title="pharmaceutical drug" label="pharmaceutical drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q188269" start="13085" end="13095" title="interferon" label="interferon"/>
<link wikidata="Q591745" start="13108" end="13122" title="DNA microarray" label="DNA microarray"/>
<link wikidata="Q268592" start="13264" end="13274" title="Industry (economics)" label="industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="13672" end="13688" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530482" start="13945" end="13965" title="economic development" label="economic development"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748405" start="14194" end="14202" title="smelting" label="smelting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="14219" end="14222" title="tin" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588761" start="14268" end="14277" title="tradesman" label="tradesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="14349" end="14363" title="Hunter-gatherer" label="hunt or gather"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="14454" end="14464" title="militaries" label="militaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519843" start="14623" end="14639" title="Health technology" label="medical progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260036" start="15272" end="15282" title="Criticism of technology" label="criticized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483757" start="15320" end="15325" title="Solar power" label="solar"/>
<link wikidata="Q43302" start="15327" end="15331" title="Wind power" label="wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962383" start="15352" end="15364" title="clean energy" label="clean energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692538" start="15772" end="15798" title="technological unemployment" label="technological unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="15807" end="15830" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q170418" start="16158" end="16178" title="World Economic Forum" label="World Economic Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="16366" end="16369" title="MIT" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q718581" start="16380" end="16394" title="Daron Acemoglu" label="Daron Acemoglu"/>
<link wikidata="Q829714" start="16470" end="16500" title="employment-to-population ratio" label="employment-to-population ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="16650" end="16664" title="Lyndon Johnson" label="Lyndon Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q59426035" start="17186" end="17196" title="WeChat Pay" label="WeChat Pay"/>
<link wikidata="Q483959" start="17198" end="17204" title="PayPal" label="PayPal"/>
<link wikidata="Q493556" start="17206" end="17212" title="Alipay" label="Alipay"/>
<link wikidata="Q112055567" start="17363" end="17373" title="Blender.io" label="Blender.io"/>
<link wikidata="Q20311056" start="17377" end="17382" title="Cryptocurrency tumbler" label="mixer"/>
<link wikidata="Q94653118" start="17495" end="17508" title="Axie Infinity" label="Axie Infinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q743030" start="18039" end="18063" title="Environmental technology" label="Environmental technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q58734" start="18210" end="18224" title="Pollution prevention program" label="halt pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="18396" end="18409" title="deforestation" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q921851" start="18485" end="18504" title="climate engineering" label="climate engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="18726" end="18740" title="greenhouse gas" label="greenhouse gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="18754" end="18761" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q905750" start="18763" end="18776" title="nitrous oxide" label="nitrous oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="18781" end="18795" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q41560" start="18830" end="18847" title="greenhouse effect" label="greenhouse effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="18920" end="18934" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q28573" start="19173" end="19184" title="Inca Empire" label="Inca Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508438" start="19198" end="19210" title="lead sulfide" label="lead sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134475" start="19211" end="19215" title="Flux (metallurgy)" label="flux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748405" start="19223" end="19231" title="smelting" label="smelting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724341" start="19283" end="19287" title="kiln" label="kiln"/>
<link wikidata="Q8104" start="19318" end="19328" title="atmosphere" label="atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="19337" end="19345" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="19947" end="19951" title="Marx" label="Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292818" start="20471" end="20479" title="Don Ihde" label="Don Ihde"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709775" start="20484" end="20499" title="Albert Borgmann" label="Albert Borgmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q605434" start="20685" end="20710" title="technological determinism" label="technological determinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q353940" start="20716" end="20735" title="Social construction of technology" label="social construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639361" start="21199" end="21220" title="sociotechnical system" label="sociotechnical system"/>
<link wikidata="Q436131" start="21362" end="21374" title="Neil Postman" label="Neil Postman"/>
<link wikidata="Q60030" start="21645" end="21660" title="Herbert Marcuse" label="Herbert Marcuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q454268" start="21665" end="21676" title="John Zerzan" label="John Zerzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q182726" start="22295" end="22324" title="genetically modified organism" label="genetically modified organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q45253460" start="22356" end="22372" title="algorithmic bias" label="algorithmic bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q24882728" start="22391" end="22402" title="AI alignment" label="aligning AI"/>
<link wikidata="Q194294" start="22482" end="22491" title="Bioethics" label="Bioethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122446" start="22635" end="22650" title="Computer ethics" label="Computer ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197779" start="22691" end="22702" title="Cyberethics" label="Cyberethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q131257" start="22741" end="22769" title="Intellectual property" label="intellectual property rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q175975" start="22771" end="22778" title="Internet privacy" label="privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22696" start="22784" end="22794" title="Internet censorship" label="censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q97276685" start="22796" end="22806" title="Nanoethics" label="Nanoethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133029" start="22975" end="22993" title="engineering ethics" label="engineering ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q80993" start="23056" end="23074" title="software engineers" label="software engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12727779" start="23181" end="23214" title="ethics of artificial intelligence" label="ethics of artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q543087" start="23228" end="23240" title="robot ethics" label="robot ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6723711" start="23353" end="23367" title="machine ethics" label="machine ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142726" start="23426" end="23457" title="Intelligent agent" label="artificially intelligent agents"/>
<link wikidata="Q24882728" start="23541" end="23553" title="AI alignment" label="AI alignment"/>
<link wikidata="Q45253460" start="23671" end="23687" title="algorithmic bias" label="algorithmic bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254427" start="23754" end="23765" title="AI takeover" label="AI takeover"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652026" start="23801" end="23822" title="AI capability control" label="AI capability control"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="23946" end="23961" title="military ethics" label="military ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q365016" start="23963" end="23975" title="media ethics" label="media ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q564371" start="23981" end="23999" title="Philosophy of education" label="educational ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490295" start="24591" end="24606" title="survey research" label="survey research"/>
<link wikidata="Q938438" start="24618" end="24638" title="statistical analysis" label="statistical analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q45045" start="24644" end="24664" title="Simulation" label="computer simulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600479" start="24755" end="24771" title="human extinction" label="human extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153172" start="24890" end="24940" title="Centre for the Study of Existential Risk" label="Cambridge Center for the Study of Existential Risk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264109" start="25039" end="25070" title="artificial general intelligence" label="artificial general intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q8242560" start="25072" end="25090" title="biological warfare" label="biological warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q201424" start="25092" end="25107" title="nuclear warfare" label="nuclear warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q11468" start="25109" end="25123" title="nanotechnology" label="nanotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="25125" end="25153" title="anthropogenic climate change" label="anthropogenic climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="25155" end="25169" title="global warming" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="25188" end="25203" title="totalitarianism" label="totalitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q463796" start="25251" end="25267" title="Impact event" label="asteroid impacts"/>
<link wikidata="Q22247" start="25272" end="25287" title="gamma-ray burst" label="gamma-ray burst"/>
<link wikidata="Q460475" start="25310" end="25322" title="Nick Bostrom" label="Nick Bostrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12184" start="25543" end="25551" title="pandemic" label="pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q854975" start="25562" end="25575" title="Bioterrorism" label="bioterrorists"/>
<link wikidata="Q322348" start="25583" end="25592" title="arms race" label="arms race"/>
<link wikidata="Q637802" start="25657" end="25683" title="mutual assured destruction" label="mutual assured destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q11468" start="26105" end="26119" title="nanotechnology" label="nanotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108" start="26121" end="26134" title="biotechnology" label="biotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q170978" start="26136" end="26144" title="robotics" label="robotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q229367" start="26146" end="26157" title="3D printing" label="3D printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q20514253" start="26163" end="26173" title="blockchain" label="blockchain"/>
<link wikidata="Q298341" start="26195" end="26207" title="Ray Kurzweil" label="Ray Kurzweil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="26278" end="26286" title="genetics" label="genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11468" start="26288" end="26302" title="nanotechnology" label="nanotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q170978" start="26308" end="26316" title="robotics" label="robotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q159236" start="26384" end="26403" title="Genetic engineering" label="Genetic engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q25346144" start="26489" end="26507" title="Directed evolution (transhumanism)" label="directed evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11468" start="26739" end="26753" title="Nanotechnology" label="Nanotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q741964" start="27193" end="27210" title="search and rescue" label="search and rescue"/>
<link wikidata="Q649416" start="27212" end="27225" title="bomb disposal" label="bomb disposal"/>
<link wikidata="Q897825" start="27227" end="27239" title="firefighting" label="firefighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264109" start="27278" end="27309" title="artificial general intelligence" label="artificial general intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="27591" end="27607" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q678522" start="27636" end="27658" title="universal basic income" label="universal basic income"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975790" start="27791" end="27812" title="post-scarcity economy" label="post-scarcity economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995893" start="27881" end="27908" title="Counterculture of the 1960s" label="1960s hippie counterculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149297" start="27969" end="27987" title="Localism (politics)" label="locally autonomous"/>
<link wikidata="Q219416" start="27989" end="28000" title="sustainable" label="sustainable"/>
<link wikidata="Q188961" start="28006" end="28019" title="decentralized" label="decentralized"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083944" start="28097" end="28111" title="hacker culture" label="hacker culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3982492" start="28116" end="28130" title="technopaganism" label="technopaganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15290" start="28246" end="28256" title="moral good" label="moral good"/>
<link wikidata="Q131156" start="28293" end="28299" title="utopia" label="utopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975790" start="28448" end="28471" title="post-scarcity economics" label="post-scarcity economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q574567" start="28473" end="28487" title="life extension" label="life extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267982" start="28489" end="28503" title="mind uploading" label="mind uploading"/>
<link wikidata="Q633581" start="28505" end="28513" title="cryonics" label="cryonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566000" start="28546" end="28563" title="superintelligence" label="superintelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q194100" start="28604" end="28617" title="transhumanism" label="transhumanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3961858" start="28622" end="28640" title="singularitarianism" label="singularitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q237525" start="28925" end="28941" title="Technological singularity" label="Singularitarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q237525" start="29275" end="29300" title="technological singularity" label="technological singularity"/>
<link wikidata="Q298341" start="29346" end="29358" title="Ray Kurzweil" label="Ray Kurzweil"/>
<link wikidata="Q460475" start="29363" end="29375" title="Nick Bostrom" label="Nick Bostrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159675" start="29756" end="29763" title="Luddism" label="Luddism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692538" start="29896" end="29922" title="technological unemployment" label="technological unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q222134" start="29973" end="29986" title="Ted Kaczynski" label="Ted Kaczynski"/>
<link wikidata="Q11896903" start="30053" end="30072" title="Unabomber Manifesto" label="Unabomber Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607727" start="30263" end="30288" title="The Technological Society" label="The Technological Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q267162" start="30324" end="30336" title="off-the-grid" label="off-the-grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q295472" start="30413" end="30423" title="ecovillage" label="ecovillage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493601" start="30789" end="30807" title="Henryk Skolimowski" label="Henryk Skolimowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q179289" start="30916" end="30925" title="causality" label="causality"/>
<link wikidata="Q12190" start="31642" end="31652" title="penicillin" label="penicillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q964754" start="31757" end="31771" title="basic research" label="basic research"/>
<link wikidata="Q166039" start="31943" end="31954" title="serendipity" label="serendipity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166524" start="31959" end="31968" title="Convexity (finance)" label="convexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q171283" start="32816" end="32820" title="Homo" label="Homo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126704" start="32892" end="32902" title="chimpanzee" label="chimpanzee"/>
<link wikidata="Q388450" start="32938" end="32942" title="crow" label="crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297541" start="33122" end="33145" title="West African chimpanzee" label="West African chimpanzee"/>
<link wikidata="Q326260" start="33201" end="33216" title="capuchin monkey" label="capuchin monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q181056" start="33221" end="33230" title="Boa Vista, Roraima" label="Boa Vista"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878217" start="33309" end="33319" title="beaver dam" label="beaver dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q191949" start="33586" end="33601" title="Brave New World" label="Brave New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q692557" start="33615" end="33633" title="A Clockwork Orange (novel)" label="A Clockwork Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q208460" start="33647" end="33667" title="Nineteen Eighty-Four" label="Nineteen Eighty-Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q34981" start="33675" end="33687" title="Isaac Asimov" label="Isaac Asimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q244604" start="33725" end="33740" title="Minority Report (film)" label="Minority Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q222018" start="33754" end="33766" title="Total Recall (1990 film)" label="Total Recall"/>
<link wikidata="Q491800" start="33780" end="33787" title="Gattaca" label="Gattaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q25188" start="33805" end="33814" title="Inception" label="Inception"/>
<link wikidata="Q174526" start="33866" end="33875" title="cyberpunk" label="cyberpunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q188987" start="33997" end="34011" title="William Gibson" label="William Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q662029" start="34025" end="34036" title="Neuromancer" label="Neuromancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q184843" start="34072" end="34084" title="Blade Runner" label="Blade Runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q83495" start="34102" end="34112" title="The Matrix" label="The Matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q130780" start="34238" end="34251" title="Gribbin, John" label="Gribbin, John"/>
<link wikidata="Q39379" start="34356" end="34375" title="Scientific American" label="Scientific American"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29818" wikidata="Q201949" url="?curid=29818" title="The Doors (album)">
<text>The Doors is the debut studio album by the American rock band the Doors, released on January 4, 1967, by Elektra Records. It was recorded in August and September 1966 at Sunset Sound Recorders, in Hollywood, California, under the production of Paul A. Rothchild. The album features the full length version of the band&#x27;s breakthrough single &quot;Light My Fire&quot; and the lengthy closer &quot;The End&quot; with its Oedipal spoken word section. Various publications, including &quot;BBC&quot; and &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;, have listed &quot;The Doors&quot; as one of the greatest debut albums of all time. 

The Doors worked on the material of their debut album throughout 1966 at various locations and stages, such as the Whisky a Go Go. The album&#x27;s recording started after their dismissal from the venue, having just signed with Elektra Records. &quot;The Doors&quot; features the band&#x27;s wide range of musical influences, such as jazz, classical, blues, pop, R&amp;B and rock music. It has been viewed as an essential part of the psychedelic rock evolution, while also being acknowledged as a source of inspiration to numerous other works.

&quot;The Doors&quot; and &quot;Light My Fire&quot; have been inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame. In 2015, the Library of Congress selected &quot;The Doors&quot; for inclusion in the National Recording Registry for being &quot;culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant&quot;. &quot;The Doors&quot; has sold over 13 million copies worldwide as of 2015, making it the band&#x27;s best-selling album. In 2003 and 2012, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; ranked it number 42 on its list of the &quot;500 Greatest Albums of All Time&quot;, repositioning it to number 86 in the 2020 edition.

== Background ==

The Doors&#x27; final lineup was formed in mid-1965 after keyboardist Ray Manzarek&#x27;s two brothers Rick and Jim &#x27;Manczarek&#x27; left Rick &amp; the Ravens, whose members included besides Manzarek, jazz-influenced drummer John Densmore and then-novice vocalist Jim Morrison. The group&#x27;s four man membership was established when guitarist Robby Krieger agreed to join. Though he had previous experience playing folk and flamenco, Krieger had only been playing the electric guitar for a few months when he was invited to become a member of the band, soon renamed the Doors. They were initially signed to Columbia Records under a six-month contract, but they asked for an early release after the record company failed to secure a producer for the album and placed them on a drop list.

Following their release from the label, the Doors played residencies in mid-1966 at two historic Sunset Strip club venues, the London Fog and Whisky a Go Go. They were spotted at the Whisky a Go Go by Elektra Records president Jac Holzman, who was present at the suggestion of Love singer Arthur Lee. After he saw two sets, Holzman called producer Paul A. Rothchild to see the group. On August 18, after attending several appearances of the band, Holzman and Rothchild ultimately signed them to Elektra Records.

The Doors continued performing at the Whisky until on August 21, when they were fired due to their performance of &quot;The End&quot; on which Morrison improvised a retelling section of &quot;Oedipus Rex&quot;. Morrison had missed the first of two sets that night, as he had stayed at the Tropicana Hotel, tripping on LSD.

== Recording == 
&quot;The Doors&quot; was recorded by producer Paul A. Rothchild and audio engineer Bruce Botnick at Sunset Sound Studios in Hollywood, California, over about a week in late August 1966. &quot;Indian Summer&quot; and &quot;Moonlight Drive&quot; were the first rehearsal outtakes of the album, while the first actual songs recorded that appeared being &quot;I Looked at You&quot; and &quot;Take It as It Comes&quot;. A four-track tape machine was used at the cost of approximately $10,000. Three of the tracks were utilized as: bass and drums on one, guitar and organ on another, and Morrison&#x27;s vocals on the third. The fourth track was used for overdubbing (mainly Morrison&#x27;s harmony vocals and bass guitar).

The album&#x27;s instrumentation includes keyboards, electric guitar, occasional bass, drums, and marxophone (on &quot;Alabama Song&quot;). Rothchild had forbidden Krieger from using any of his guitar effects (particularly the wah wah pedal) on the record in order to avoid what Rothchild thought was the overuse of these devices. However, the studio was equipped with an echo chamber which gave that specific effect to the sound.

Ray Manzarek, explaining the bass-overdubs, said:
According to Botnick, &quot;What you hear on the first album is what they did live. It wasn&#x27;t just playing the song–it transcended that.&quot; However, session musician Larry Knechtel and Krieger overdubbed bass guitar on several tracks in order to give some &quot;punch&quot; to the sound of Manzarek&#x27;s keyboard bass. Morrison explained in 1969, &quot;We started almost immediately, and some of the songs took only a few takes. We&#x27;d do several takes just to make sure we couldn&#x27;t do a better one.&quot; For &quot;The End&quot; and &quot;Light My Fire&quot;, two takes were edited together to achieve the final recording. The album was mixed and completed in October 1966. Although &quot;Indian Summer&quot; was recorded during the sessions and thought was given to including it as the final track, it was eventually replaced with &quot;The End&quot;.

== Composition ==
&quot;The Doors&quot; features many of the group&#x27;s most famous compositions, including &quot;Light My Fire&quot;, &quot;Break On Through (To the Other Side)&quot;, and &quot;The End&quot;. In 1969, Morrison stated:
Interviewed by Lizze James, he pointed out the meaning of the verse &quot;My only friend, the end&quot;:
&quot;Break On Through (To the Other Side)&quot; was released as the group&#x27;s first single but it was relatively unsuccessful, peaking at No. 104 in &quot;Cash Box&quot; and No. 126 in &quot;Billboard&quot;. Elektra Records edited the line &quot;she gets high&quot;, knowing a drug reference would discourage airplay (many releases have the original portions of both &quot;Break On Through&quot; and &quot;The End&quot; edited). The song is in 4/4 time and quite fast-paced, starting with Densmore&#x27;s bossa nova drum groove in which a clave pattern is played as a rim click underneath a driving ride cymbal pattern. Densmore appreciated the new bossa nova craze coming from Brazil, so he decided to use it in the song. Robby Krieger has stated that he took the idea for the guitar riff from Paul Butterfield&#x27;s version of the song &quot;Shake Your Moneymaker&quot; (originally by blues guitarist Elmore James). Later, a disjointed quirky organ solo is played quite similar to the introduction of Ray Charles&#x27; &quot;What&#x27;d I Say&quot;.

The Doors&#x27; breakout hit &quot;Light My Fire&quot; was primarily composed by Krieger. Although the album version was just over seven minutes long, it was widely requested for radio play, so a single version was edited to under three minutes with nearly all the instrumental break removed for airplay on AM radio. While recalling its writing process, Krieger has claimed that it was Morrison who encouraged the others to write songs when they realized they did not have enough original material. Adding more specifically that Morrison had suggested to him to write &quot;about something universal.&quot;

Additionally, Morrison wrote &quot;Take It as It Comes&quot;, which is thought to be a &quot;tribute to Maharishi Mahesh Yogi&quot;. It came from one of his observations on Yogi&#x27;s meditation classes, which Morrison wasn&#x27;t initially studying contrary to the other group members, but was later convinced by them to attend. Manzarek&#x27;s organ solo on the song was inspired by Johann Sebastian Bach. The lyrics to &quot;Twentieth Century Fox&quot; refer to either Manzarek&#x27;s wife Dorothy Fujikawa or Morrison&#x27;s girlfriend Pamela Courson.

&quot;The Doors&quot; also contains two cover songs: &quot;Alabama Song&quot; and &quot;Back Door Man&quot;. &quot;Alabama Song&quot; was written and composed by Bertolt Brecht and Kurt Weill in 1927, for their opera &quot;Aufstieg und Fall der Stadt Mahagonny&quot; (&quot;Rise and Fall of the City of Mahagonny&quot;). The melody is changed and the verse beginning &quot;Show me the way to the next little dollar&quot; is omitted. On the album version, Morrison altered the second verse from &quot;Show us the way to the next pretty boy&quot; to &quot;Show me the way to the next little girl&quot;, but on the 1967 &quot;Live at the Matrix&quot; recording, he sings the original &quot;next pretty boy&quot;. Notable peculiarity of the band&#x27;s version is the unusual use of the marxophone. The Chicago blues &quot;Back Door Man&quot; was written by Willie Dixon and originally recorded by Howlin&#x27; Wolf.

== Releases ==
&quot;The Doors&quot; was released on January 4, 1967, by Elektra Records. Jac Holzman had initially intended to release the record in November 1966, but after a negotiation with the band, he decided to postpone the release to the new year, as he felt that period was the appropriate time for album sales. For the album&#x27;s cover, Joel Brodsky was hired to provide a photo of the group, which later received a Grammy nomination. Holzman also suggested an association with &quot;Billboard&quot; magazine for the album&#x27;s advertisement by promoting the record with &quot;hoarding&quot;, a novel concept which was made popular later on. It was promoted under the slogan &quot;Break On Through With An Electrifying Album&quot;. The Doors were the first rock band to use this advertising medium.
&quot;The Doors&quot; made a steady climb up the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, ultimately becoming a huge success in the US once the edited single version of &quot;Light My Fire&quot; scaled the charts to become No. 1, with the album peaking at No. 2 on the chart in September 1967 (kept off the top stop by the Beatles&#x27; &quot;Sgt. Pepper&#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band&quot;) and going on to achieve multi-platinum status. In Europe the band would have to wait slightly longer for similar recognition, with &quot;Light My Fire&quot; originally stalling at No. 49 in the UK singles chart and the album failing to chart at all; however, in 1991, buoyed by the high-profile Oliver Stone film &quot;The Doors&quot;, a reissue of &quot;Light My Fire&quot; reached No. 7 in the singles chart, and the album reached No. 43.

The mono LP was withdrawn not long after its original release and remained unavailable until 2009, when it was reissued as a limited edition 180 gram audiophile LP by Rhino Records. The 40th anniversary mix of the debut album presents a stereo version of &quot;Light My Fire&quot; in speed-corrected form for the first time. Previously, only the original 45 RPM singles (&quot;Light My Fire&quot; and &quot;Break On Through&quot;) were produced at the correct speed.

=== Reissues ===
&quot;The Doors&quot; has been reissued several times since the 1980s. In 1981, Mobile Fidelity Sound Lab released a half speed mastered version of the album on vinyl, cut by Stan Ricker with the Ortofon Cutting System. In 1988, it was digitally remastered by Bruce Botnick and Paul A. Rothchild at Digital Magnetics, using the original master tapes. In 1992, DCC Compact Classics reissued the album on 24kt gold CD and 180g vinyl; the gold CD was remastered by Steve Hoffman while the vinyl was cut by Kevin Gray and Hoffman at Future Disc. It was remastered again in 1999 for &quot;The Complete Studio Recordings&quot; box set by Bernie Grundman and Botnick at Bernie Grundman Mastering using 96khz/24bit technology; it was also released as a standalone CD release. In 2006, the record was released in multichannel DVD-Audio as part of the &quot;Perception&quot; box set. The next year, a 40th anniversary edition was released featuring the 2006 stereo remix and three bonus tracks, which was mastered by Botnick at Uniteye. In 2009, the original mono mix was released on 180g vinyl, cut by Grundman.

On September 14, 2011, &quot;The Doors&quot; was released on hybrid stereo-multichannel Super Audio CD by Warner Japan in their Warner Premium Sound series. Analogue Productions reissued the album on hybrid SACD and double 45 RPM vinyl, both editions were mastered by Doug Sax and Sangwook Nam at The Mastering Lab; the CD layer of the Super Audio CD contains the original stereo mix while the SACD layer contains Botnick&#x27;s 2006 5.1 surround mix. In 2017, a deluxe edition was released in commemoration of the album&#x27;s 50th anniversary, and includes the original stereo and mono mixes, as well as a compilation of songs recorded live at The Matrix in San Francisco on March 7, 1967. This edition was remastered by Botnick from &quot;recently discovered original master tapes&quot;.

== Reception and legacy ==

In a contemporary review for &quot;Crawdaddy!&quot; magazine, founder and critic Paul Williams hailed &quot;The Doors&quot; as &quot;an album of magnitude&quot; and described the band as creators of &quot;modern music&quot;, with which &quot;contemporary &#x27;jazz&#x27; and &#x27;classical&#x27; composers must try to measure up&quot;. Williams added: &quot;The birth of the group is in this album, and it&#x27;s as good as anything in rock. The awesome fact about the Doors is that they will improve.&quot; &quot;Record Mirror&quot; was similarly positive to the record: &quot;[&quot;The Doors&quot;] for Elektra is wild, rough and although it&#x27;s subtle in places, the overall sound is torrid. They&#x27;re blues-based and get quite an effective sound.&quot; According to Densmore, the Beatles had reportedly bought ten copies of the album, and Paul McCartney has claimed that following the album&#x27;s release, he wanted his band to capture the Doors&#x27; musical style as one of the &quot;alter egos&quot; of the group for their upcoming concept album &quot;Sgt. Pepper&#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band&quot;.

Robert Christgau was less enthusiastic in his column for &quot;Esquire&quot;, recommending the album but with reservations; he approved of Manzarek&#x27;s organ playing and Morrison&#x27;s &quot;flexible though sometimes faint&quot; singing while highlighting the presence of a &quot;great original hard rock&quot; in &quot;Break on Through&quot; and clever songs such as &quot;Twentieth Century Fox&quot;, but was critical of more &quot;esoteric&quot; material such as the &quot;long, obscure dirge&quot; &quot;The End&quot;. He also found Morrison&#x27;s lyrics often self-indulgent, particularly lines like &quot;our love becomes a funeral pyre&quot;, which he said spoiled &quot;Light My Fire&quot;, and &quot;the nebulousness that passes for depth among so many lovers of rock poetry&quot; on &quot;The End&quot;.

&quot;The Doors&quot; has since been ranked by critics as one of the greatest albums of all time. In 1993, &quot;New Musical Express&quot; writers cited &quot;The Doors&quot; the 25th greatest album of all time, while in 1998, it was named the 70th in a &quot;Music of the Millennium&quot; poll conducted in the UK by HMV Group, Channel 4, &quot;The Guardian&quot; and Classic FM. In 2003, Parke Puterbaugh of &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; called the record &quot;the L.A. foursome&#x27;s most successful marriage of rock poetics with classically tempered hard rocka stoned, immaculate classic.&quot; Sean Egan of BBC Music opines, &quot;The eponymous debut of the Doors took popular music into areas previously thought impossible: the incitement to expand one&#x27;s consciousness of opener &#x27;Break on Through&#x27; was just the beginning of its incendiary agenda.&quot; AllMusic critic Richie Unterberger, lauded &quot;The Doors&quot; as a &quot;tremendous debut album, and indeed one of the best first-time outings in rock history&quot;, concluding in his review that &quot;The End&quot; was &quot;a haunting cap to an album whose nonstop melodicism and dynamic tension would never be equaled by the group again, let alone bettered.&quot;

&quot;The Doors&quot; has been numerously cited as the group&#x27;s finest record. In 2000, the album was voted number 46 in Colin Larkin&#x27;s &quot;All Time Top 1000 Albums&quot;. &quot;The Doors&quot; was ranked No. 42 on &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;&#x27;s list of &quot;The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time&quot;. When the list was revised in 2020, the album was repositioned at No. 86. Two of the album&#x27;s songs, &quot;Light My Fire&quot; and &quot;The End&quot;, were also present on &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;″s 2004 list &quot;The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time&quot;. &quot;Q&quot; magazine readers ranked the album at No. 75 on its list of the &quot;100 Greatest Albums Ever&quot;, while &quot;NME&quot; magazine at No. 226 on their respective list &quot;500 Greatest Albums of All Time&quot;. In 2007, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; included it on their list of The 40 Essential Albums of 1967. More recently in 2020, online media magazine &quot;Loudwire&quot; placed &quot;The Doors&quot; one of the &quot;25 Legendary Rock Albums With No Weak Songs&quot;. In a list published the next year in February, &quot;Ultimate Classic Rock&quot; cited it as the fourth-top psychedelic rock album of all time.

== Track listing ==
===Original album===
All tracks are written by the Doors (Jim Morrison, Ray Manzarek, Robby Krieger and John Densmore), except where noted. Details are taken from the 1967 U.S. Elektra release; other releases may show different information.


===Reissues===


== Personnel ==
Personnel adapted from the 50th Anniversary edition album liner notes:

The Doors
* Jim Morrison – vocals
* Ray Manzarek – organ, piano, bass; backing vocals and marxophone on &quot;Alabama Song (Whisky Bar)&quot;
* Robby Krieger – guitar; bass guitar on &quot;Soul Kitchen&quot; and &quot;Back Door Man&quot;; backing vocals on &quot;Alabama Song (Whisky Bar)&quot;
* John Densmore – drums, backing vocals on &quot;Alabama Song (Whisky Bar)&quot;

Additional musicians
* Larry Knechtel – bass guitar on &quot;Soul Kitchen&quot;, &quot;Twentieth Century Fox&quot;, &quot;Light My Fire&quot;, &quot;I Looked at You&quot; and &quot;Take It as It Comes&quot;

Production
* Paul A. Rothchild – production; backing vocals on &quot;Alabama Song (Whisky Bar)&quot;
* Bruce Botnick – engineering
* Joel Brodsky – back cover photography
* Guy Webster – front cover photography
* William S. Harvey – art direction and design

== Charts ==
Album
Singles
==Certifications==




==See also==
* Outline of the Doors

== Notes ==

== References ==
== Sources ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q45354" start="62" end="71" title="the Doors" label="the Doors"/>
<link wikidata="Q726251" start="105" end="120" title="Elektra Records" label="Elektra Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304002" start="170" end="192" title="Sunset Sound Recorders" label="Sunset Sound Recorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q464178" start="244" end="261" title="Paul A. Rothchild" label="Paul A. Rothchild"/>
<link wikidata="Q580010" start="351" end="364" title="Light My Fire" label="Light My Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q154187" start="400" end="407" title="The End (The Doors song)" label="The End"/>
<link wikidata="Q131246" start="423" end="430" title="Oedipus complex" label="Oedipal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="490" end="493" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="510" end="523" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277567" start="731" end="745" title="Whisky a Go Go" label="Whisky a Go Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="950" end="954" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="967" end="972" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="979" end="986" title="Rhythm and blues" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q206159" start="1050" end="1066" title="psychedelic rock" label="psychedelic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q81180" start="1241" end="1260" title="Grammy Hall of Fame" label="Grammy Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="1275" end="1294" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q253299" start="1347" end="1374" title="National Recording Registry" label="National Recording Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q240550" start="1664" end="1695" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time" label="500 Greatest Albums of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q108912" start="1843" end="1855" title="Ray Manzarek" label="Ray Manzarek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510750" start="1916" end="1937" title="Rick &amp;amp; the Ravens" label="Rick &amp;amp; the Ravens"/>
<link wikidata="Q310113" start="2004" end="2017" title="John Densmore" label="John Densmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q44301" start="2043" end="2055" title="Jim Morrison" label="Jim Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q311900" start="2125" end="2138" title="Robby Krieger" label="Robby Krieger"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="2197" end="2201" title="folk music" label="folk"/>
<link wikidata="Q930531" start="2206" end="2214" title="flamenco guitar" label="flamenco"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="2389" end="2405" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301193" start="2667" end="2679" title="Sunset Strip" label="Sunset Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258958" start="2697" end="2707" title="London Fog (nightclub)" label="London Fog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277567" start="2712" end="2726" title="Whisky a Go Go" label="Whisky a Go Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q726251" start="2771" end="2786" title="Elektra Records" label="Elektra Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079102" start="2797" end="2808" title="Jac Holzman" label="Jac Holzman"/>
<link wikidata="Q664248" start="2847" end="2851" title="Love (band)" label="Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q543545" start="2859" end="2869" title="Arthur Lee (musician)" label="Arthur Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q464178" start="2918" end="2935" title="Paul A. Rothchild" label="Paul A. Rothchild"/>
<link wikidata="Q154187" start="3203" end="3210" title="The End (The Doors song)" label="The End"/>
<link wikidata="Q148643" start="3275" end="3286" title="Oedipus Rex" label="Oedipus Rex"/>
<link wikidata="Q23118" start="3401" end="3404" title="LSD" label="LSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301795" start="3508" end="3521" title="Bruce Botnick" label="Bruce Botnick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304002" start="3525" end="3545" title="Sunset Sound Studios" label="Sunset Sound Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551670" start="3647" end="3662" title="Moonlight Drive" label="Moonlight Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552913" start="3842" end="3852" title="Multitrack recording" label="four-track"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296114" start="4242" end="4252" title="marxophone" label="marxophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q264300" start="4371" end="4384" title="wah wah pedal" label="wah wah pedal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183986" start="4516" end="4528" title="echo chamber" label="echo chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446674" start="4800" end="4814" title="Larry Knechtel" label="Larry Knechtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398221" start="4940" end="4953" title="keyboard bass" label="keyboard bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q903649" start="5642" end="5678" title="Break On Through (To the Other Side)" label="Break On Through (To the Other Side)"/>
<link wikidata="Q656903" start="6001" end="6009" title="Cashbox (magazine)" label="Cash Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="6037" end="6046" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q155234" start="6290" end="6298" title="Time signature" label="4/4 time"/>
<link wikidata="Q486263" start="6351" end="6361" title="bossa nova" label="bossa nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099007" start="6385" end="6390" title="Clave (rhythm)" label="clave"/>
<link wikidata="Q918576" start="6641" end="6657" title="Paul Butterfield" label="Paul Butterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462650" start="6691" end="6712" title="Shake Your Moneymaker (song)" label="Shake Your Moneymaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="6734" end="6739" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q356598" start="6750" end="6762" title="Elmore James" label="Elmore James"/>
<link wikidata="Q544387" start="6850" end="6861" title="Ray Charles" label="Ray Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113979" start="6874" end="6891" title="What&amp;#x27;d I Say" label="What&amp;#x27;d I Say"/>
<link wikidata="Q244968" start="7612" end="7633" title="Maharishi Mahesh Yogi" label="Maharishi Mahesh Yogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="7894" end="7915" title="Johann Sebastian Bach" label="Johann Sebastian Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q428967" start="8049" end="8063" title="Pamela Courson" label="Pamela Courson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633771" start="8125" end="8137" title="Alabama Song" label="Alabama Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q798320" start="8154" end="8167" title="Back Door Man" label="Back Door Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q38757" start="8228" end="8242" title="Bertolt Brecht" label="Bertolt Brecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q55004" start="8247" end="8257" title="Kurt Weill" label="Kurt Weill"/>
<link wikidata="Q760054" start="8289" end="8326" title="Rise and Fall of the City of Mahagonny" label="Aufstieg und Fall der Stadt Mahagonny"/>
<link wikidata="Q798320" start="8885" end="8898" title="Back Door Man" label="Back Door Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q204092" start="8920" end="8932" title="Willie Dixon" label="Willie Dixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q44780" start="8960" end="8977" title="Howlin&amp;#x27; Wolf" label="Howlin&amp;#x27; Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180228" start="9329" end="9341" title="Joel Brodsky" label="Joel Brodsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="9408" end="9414" title="Grammy" label="Grammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="9470" end="9500" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q623149" start="9571" end="9579" title="Billboard" label="hoarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="9842" end="9867" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="10098" end="10109" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q169226" start="10122" end="10164" title="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band" label="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q179497" start="10467" end="10479" title="Oliver Stone" label="Oliver Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q937087" start="10491" end="10500" title="The Doors (film)" label="The Doors"/>
<link wikidata="Q627091" start="10781" end="10794" title="Rhino Records" label="Rhino Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859724" start="11179" end="11204" title="Mobile Fidelity Sound Lab" label="Mobile Fidelity Sound Lab"/>
<link wikidata="Q58802825" start="11459" end="11479" title="Dunhill Records" label="DCC Compact Classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3642668" start="11502" end="11514" title="Gold compact disc" label="24kt gold CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612855" start="11561" end="11574" title="Steve Hoffman (audio engineer)" label="Steve Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q65706022" start="11602" end="11612" title="Kevin Gray (mastering engineer)" label="Kevin Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956488" start="11683" end="11713" title="The Complete Studio Recordings (The Doors album)" label="The Complete Studio Recordings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894402" start="11731" end="11746" title="Bernie Grundman" label="Bernie Grundman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431161" start="11794" end="11805" title="Audio bit depth" label="96khz/24bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q117678" start="11916" end="11925" title="DVD-Audio" label="DVD-Audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439062" start="11947" end="11957" title="Perception (The Doors album)" label="Perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q212960" start="12291" end="12305" title="Super Audio CD" label="Super Audio CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751077" start="12360" end="12380" title="Analogue Productions" label="Analogue Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q212960" start="12410" end="12414" title="Super Audio CD" label="SACD"/>
<link wikidata="Q19750973" start="12471" end="12479" title="Doug Sax" label="Doug Sax"/>
<link wikidata="Q569874" start="12641" end="12649" title="Surround sound" label="surround"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182775" start="13058" end="13068" title="Crawdaddy!" label="Crawdaddy!"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154386" start="13104" end="13117" title="Paul Williams (Crawdaddy)" label="Paul Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q844480" start="13539" end="13552" title="Record Mirror" label="Record Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="13812" end="13823" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="13875" end="13889" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q207393" start="14072" end="14085" title="concept album" label="concept album"/>
<link wikidata="Q169226" start="14092" end="14134" title="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band" label="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q314382" start="14143" end="14159" title="Robert Christgau" label="Robert Christgau"/>
<link wikidata="Q762195" start="14206" end="14213" title="Esquire (magazine)" label="Esquire"/>
<link wikidata="Q903649" start="14467" end="14483" title="Break On Through (To the Other Side)" label="Break on Through"/>
<link wikidata="Q154187" start="14655" end="14662" title="The End (The Doors song)" label="The End"/>
<link wikidata="Q580010" start="14826" end="14839" title="Light My Fire" label="Light My Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="15076" end="15095" title="New Musical Express" label="New Musical Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q10854572" start="15281" end="15290" title="HMV Group" label="HMV Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="15292" end="15301" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="15309" end="15321" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128150" start="15332" end="15342" title="Classic FM (UK)" label="Classic FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="15379" end="15392" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834855" start="15573" end="15582" title="BBC Music" label="BBC Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="15835" end="15843" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330590" start="15851" end="15869" title="Richie Unterberger" label="Richie Unterberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145275" start="16331" end="16343" title="Colin Larkin" label="Colin Larkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729825" start="16357" end="16381" title="All Time Top 1000 Albums" label="All Time Top 1000 Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q240550" start="16479" end="16514" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time" label="The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q286102" start="16742" end="16776" title="The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time" label="The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q217629" start="16790" end="16791" title="Q (magazine)" label="Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="16905" end="16929" title="NME (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;NME&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18378807" start="16966" end="17009" title="NME&amp;#x27;s The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time" label="&amp;quot;500 Greatest Albums of All Time&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686082" start="17159" end="17167" title="Loudwire" label="Loudwire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830269" start="17324" end="17345" title="Ultimate Classic Rock" label="Ultimate Classic Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q206159" start="17379" end="17395" title="psychedelic rock" label="psychedelic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q44301" start="17494" end="17506" title="Jim Morrison" label="Jim Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q108912" start="17508" end="17520" title="Ray Manzarek" label="Ray Manzarek"/>
<link wikidata="Q311900" start="17522" end="17535" title="Robby Krieger" label="Robby Krieger"/>
<link wikidata="Q310113" start="17540" end="17553" title="John Densmore" label="John Densmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263757" start="17770" end="17781" title="liner notes" label="liner notes"/>
<link wikidata="Q44301" start="17796" end="17808" title="Jim Morrison" label="Jim Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q108912" start="17820" end="17832" title="Ray Manzarek" label="Ray Manzarek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398221" start="17849" end="17853" title="keyboard bass" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296114" start="17874" end="17884" title="marxophone" label="marxophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q311900" start="17928" end="17941" title="Robby Krieger" label="Robby Krieger"/>
<link wikidata="Q310113" start="18081" end="18094" title="John Densmore" label="John Densmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446674" start="18184" end="18198" title="Larry Knechtel" label="Larry Knechtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q464178" start="18382" end="18399" title="Paul A. Rothchild" label="Paul A. Rothchild"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301795" start="18472" end="18485" title="Bruce Botnick" label="Bruce Botnick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180228" start="18502" end="18514" title="Joel Brodsky" label="Joel Brodsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q61740550" start="18542" end="18553" title="Guy Webster (photographer)" label="Guy Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q96655859" start="18582" end="18599" title="William S. Harvey" label="William S. Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q123460094" start="18693" end="18713" title="Outline of the Doors" label="Outline of the Doors"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29821" wikidata="Q1215450" url="?curid=29821" title="The Doors of Perception">
<text>The Doors of Perception is an autobiographical book written by Aldous Huxley. Published in 1954, it elaborates on his psychedelic experience under the influence of mescaline in May 1953. Huxley recalls the insights he experienced, ranging from the &quot;purely aesthetic&quot; to &quot;sacramental vision&quot;, and reflects on their philosophical and psychological implications. In 1956, he published &quot;Heaven and Hell&quot;, another essay which elaborates these reflections further. The two works have since often been published together as one book; the title of both comes from William Blake&#x27;s 1793 book &quot;The Marriage of Heaven and Hell&quot;.

&quot;The Doors of Perception&quot; provoked strong reactions for its evaluation of psychedelic drugs as facilitators of mystical insight with great potential benefits for science, art, and religion. While many found the argument compelling, others including German writer Thomas Mann, Vedantic monk Swami Prabhavananda, Jewish philosopher Martin Buber, and Orientalist scholar Robert Charles Zaehner countered that the effects of mescaline are subjective and should not be conflated with objective religious mysticism. Huxley himself continued to take psychedelics for the rest of his life, and the understanding he gained from them influenced his final novel &quot;Island&quot;, published in 1962.

== Background ==
=== William Blake ===
William Blake (1757–1827), who inspired the book&#x27;s title and writing style, was an influential English artist most notable for his paintings and poetry. The &quot;doors of perception&quot; was originally a metaphor written by Blake in his 1790 book, &quot;The Marriage of Heaven and Hell&quot;. The metaphor was used to represent Blake&#x27;s feelings about mankind&#x27;s limited perception of the reality around them:

=== Mescaline ===

Mescaline is the principal active psychedelic agent of the peyote cactus, which has been used in Native American religious ceremonies for thousands of years. A German pharmacologist, Arthur Heffter, isolated the alkaloids in the peyote cactus in 1897. These included mescaline, which he showed through a combination of animal and self-experiments was the compound responsible for the psychoactive properties of the plant. In 1919, Ernst Späth, an Austrian chemist, synthesised the drug. Although personal accounts of taking the cactus had been written by psychologists such as Weir Mitchell in the US and Havelock Ellis in the UK during the 1890s, the German-American Heinrich Klüver was the first to systematically study its psychological effects in a small book called &quot;Mescal and Mechanisms of Hallucinations&quot; published in 1928. The book stated that the drug could be used to research the unconscious mind.
In the 1930s, an American anthropologist Weston La Barre, published &quot;The Peyote Cult&quot;, the first study of the ritual use of peyote as an entheogen drug amongst the Huichol people of western Mexico. La Barre noted that the Native American users of the cactus took it to obtain visions for prophecy, healing and inner strength. Most psychiatric research projects into the drug in the 1930s and early 1940s tended to look at the role of the drug in mimicking psychosis. In 1947 however, the US Navy undertook Project Chatter, which examined the potential for the drug as a truth revealing agent. In the early 1950s, when Huxley wrote his book, mescaline was still regarded as a research chemical rather than a drug and was listed in the Parke-Davis catalogue with no controls. Mescaline also played a paramount part in influencing the beat generation of poets and writers of the later 1940s to the early 1960s. Most notable, William S. Burroughs, Jack Kerouac, and Allen Ginsberg—all of whom were respected contemporary beat artists of their generation. Theirs and many other contemporary artists&#x27; works were heavily influenced by over-the-counter forms of mescaline during this time, due to its potency and attainability.

Huxley had been interested in spiritual matters and had used alternative therapies for some time. In 1936 he told TS Eliot that he was starting to meditate, and he used other therapies too; the Alexander Technique and the Bates Method of seeing had particular importance in guiding him through personal crises. In the late 1930s he had become interested in the spiritual teaching of Vedanta and in 1945 he published &quot;The Perennial Philosophy&quot;, which set out a philosophy that he believed was found amongst mystics of all religions. He had known for some time of visionary experience achieved by taking drugs in certain religions.

=== Research by Humphry Osmond ===

Huxley had first heard of peyote use in ceremonies of the Native American Church in New Mexico, soon after coming to the United States in 1937. He first became aware of the cactus&#x27;s active ingredient, mescaline, after reading an academic paper written by Humphry Osmond, a British psychiatrist working at Weyburn Mental Hospital, Saskatchewan, in early 1952. Osmond&#x27;s paper set out results from his research into schizophrenia, using mescaline that he had been undertaking with colleagues, doctors Abram Hoffer and John Smythies. In the epilogue to his novel &quot;The Devils of Loudun,&quot; published earlier that year, Huxley had written that drugs were &quot;toxic short cuts to self-transcendence&quot;. For the Canadian writer George Woodcock, Huxley had changed his opinion because mescaline was not addictive and appeared to be without unpleasant physical or mental side-effects. Further, he had found that hypnosis, autohypnosis and meditation had apparently failed to produce the results he wanted.

== Huxley&#x27;s experience with mescaline ==

After reading Osmond&#x27;s paper, Huxley sent him a letter on Thursday, 10 April 1952, expressing interest in the research and putting himself forward as an experimental subject. His letter explained his motivations as being rooted in an idea that the brain is a reducing valve that restricts consciousness, and hoping mescaline might help access a greater degree of awareness (an idea he later included in the book). Reflecting on his stated motivations, Woodcock wrote that Huxley had realised that the ways to enlightenment were many, including prayer and meditation. He hoped drugs might also break down the barriers of the ego, and both draw him closer to spiritual enlightenment and satisfy his quest as a seeker of knowledge.

In a second letter on Saturday, 19 April, Huxley invited Osmond to stay while he was visiting Los Angeles to attend the American Psychiatric Association convention. He also wrote that he looked forward to the mescaline experience and reassured Osmond that his doctor did not object to his taking it. Huxley had invited his friend, the writer Gerald Heard, to participate in the experiment; although Heard was too busy this time, he did join him for a session in November of that year.

=== Day of the experiment ===

Osmond arrived at Huxley&#x27;s house in West Hollywood on Sunday, 3 May 1953, and recorded his impressions of the famous author as a tolerant and kind man, although he had expected otherwise. The psychiatrist had misgivings about giving the drug to Huxley, and wrote, &quot;I did not relish the possibility, however remote, of being the man who drove Aldous Huxley mad,&quot; but instead found him an ideal subject. Huxley was &quot;shrewd, matter-of-fact and to the point&quot; and his wife Maria &quot;eminently sensible&quot;. Overall, they all liked each other, which was very important when administering the drug. The mescaline was slow to take effect, but Osmond saw that after two and a half hours the drug was working and after three hours Huxley was responding well. The experience lasted eight hours and both Osmond and Maria remained with him throughout.

The experience started in Huxley&#x27;s study before the party made a seven block trip to The Owl Drug (Rexall) store, known as World&#x27;s Biggest Drugstore, at the corner of Beverly and La Cienega Boulevards. Huxley was particularly fond of the shop and the large variety of products available there (in stark contrast to the much smaller selection in English chemist&#x27;s shops). There he considered a variety of paintings in art books. For one of his friends, Huxley&#x27;s poor eyesight manifested in both a great desire to see and a strong interest in painting, which influenced the strong visual and artistic nature of his experience.

After returning home to listen to music, eat, and walk in the garden, a friend drove the threesome to the hills overlooking the city. Photographs show Huxley standing, alternately arms on hips and outstretched with a grin on his face. Finally, they returned home and to ordinary consciousness. One of Huxley&#x27;s friends who met him on the day said that despite writing about wearing flannel trousers, he was actually wearing blue jeans. Huxley admitted to having changed the fabric as Maria thought he should be better dressed for his readers. Osmond later said he had a photo of the day that showed Huxley wearing flannels.

=== Compilation of the book ===
After Osmond&#x27;s departure, Huxley and Maria left to go on a three-week, car trip around the national parks of the North West of the US. After returning to Los Angeles, he took a month to write the book. &quot;The Doors of Perception&quot; was the first book Huxley dedicated to his wife Maria. Harold Raymond, at his publisher Chatto and Windus, said of the manuscript, &quot;You are the most articulate guinea pig that any scientist could hope to engage.&quot; The title was taken from William Blake&#x27;s poem &quot;The Marriage of Heaven and Hell&quot;:

If the doors of perception were cleansed every thing would appear to man as it is: Infinite. For man has closed himself up, till he sees all things thro&#x27; narrow chinks of his cavern.

Huxley had used Blake&#x27;s metaphor in &quot;The Doors of Perception&quot; while discussing the paintings of Vermeer and the Nain brothers, and previously in &quot;The Perennial Philosophy&quot;, once in relation to the use of mortification as a means to remove persistent spiritual myopia and secondly to refer to the absence of separation in spiritual vision. Blake had a resounding impact on Huxley, who shared many of Blake&#x27;s earlier revelations and interests in art and literature. In the early 1950s, Huxley had suffered a debilitating attack of the eye condition iritis. This increased his concern for his already poor eyesight and much of his work in the early part of the decade had featured metaphors of vision and sight.

== Synopsis ==

After a brief overview of research into mescaline, Huxley recounts that he was given 4/10 of a gram at 11:00 am one day in May 1953. Huxley writes that he hoped to gain insight into extraordinary states of mind and expected to see brightly coloured visionary landscapes. When he only sees lights and shapes, he puts this down to being a bad visualiser; however, he experiences a great change in his perception of the external world.

By 12:30 pm, a vase of flowers becomes the &quot;miracle, moment by moment, of naked existence&quot;. The experience, he asserts, is neither agreeable nor disagreeable, but simply &quot;is&quot;. He likens it to Meister Eckhart&#x27;s &quot;istigkeit&quot; or &quot;is-ness&quot;, and Plato&#x27;s &quot;Being&quot; but not separated from &quot;Becoming&quot;. He feels he understands the Hindu concept of Satchitananda, as well as the Zen koan that, &quot;the dharma body of the Buddha is in the hedge&quot; and Buddhist suchness. In this state, Huxley explains that he did not have an &quot;I&quot;, but instead a &quot;not-I&quot;. Meaning and existence, pattern and colour become more significant than spatial relationships and time. Duration is replaced by a perpetual present.

Reflecting on the experience afterwards, Huxley finds himself in agreement with philosopher C. D. Broad that to enable us to live, the brain and nervous system eliminate unessential information from the totality of the &#x27;Mind at Large&#x27;. (It was however noted in a 2023 paper that Huxley&#x27;s citation of a passage from C. D. Broad&#x27;s 1949 paper &quot;The Relevance of Psychical Research to Philosophy&quot; omitted two words and changed one other, thus altering the sense and accuracy of Broad&#x27;s reference to the philosophy of time and memory proposed by philosopher Henri Bergson.)

In summary, Huxley writes that the ability to think straight is not reduced while under the influence of mescaline, visual impressions are intensified, and the human experimenter will see no reason for action because the experience is so fascinating.

Temporarily leaving the chronological flow, he mentions that four or five hours into the experience he was taken to the World&#x27;s Biggest Drug Store (WBDS), where he was presented with books on art. In one book, the dress in Botticelli&#x27;s &quot;Judith&quot; provokes a reflection on drapery as a major artistic theme as it allows painters to include the abstract in representational art, to create mood, and also to represent the mystery of pure being. Huxley feels that human affairs are somewhat irrelevant whilst on mescaline and attempts to shed light on this by reflecting on paintings featuring people. Cézanne&#x27;s &quot;Self-portrait with a straw hat&quot; seems incredibly pretentious, while Vermeer&#x27;s human still lifes (also, the Le Nain brothers and Vuillard) are the nearest to reflecting this not-self state.

For Huxley, the reconciliation of these cleansed perceptions with humanity reflects the age old debate between active and contemplative life, known as the way of Martha and the way of Mary. As Huxley believes that contemplation should also include action and charity, he concludes that the experience represents contemplation at its height, but not its fullness. Correct behaviour and alertness are needed. Nonetheless, Huxley maintains that even quietistic contemplation has an ethical value, because it is concerned with negative virtues and acts to channel the transcendent into the world.

After listening to Mozart&#x27;s C-Minor Piano Concerto, Gesualdo&#x27;s madrigals and Alban Berg&#x27;s &quot;Lyric Suite&quot;, Huxley heads into the garden. Outside, the garden chairs take on such an immense intensity that he fears being overwhelmed; this gives him an insight into madness. He reflects that spiritual literature, including the works of Jakob Böhme, William Law and the Tibetan Book of the Dead, talks of these pains and terrors. Huxley speculates that schizophrenia is the inability to escape from this reality into the world of common sense and thus help would be essential.

After lunch and the drive to the WBDS he returns home and to his ordinary state of mind. His final insight is taken from Buddhist scripture: that within sameness there is difference, although that difference is not different from sameness.

The book finishes with Huxley&#x27;s final reflections on the meaning of his experience. Firstly, the urge to transcend one&#x27;s self is universal through times and cultures (and was characterised by H. G. Wells as The Door in the Wall). He reasons that better, healthier &quot;doors&quot; are needed than alcohol and tobacco. Mescaline has the advantage of not provoking violence in takers, but its effects last an inconveniently long time and some users can have negative reactions. Ideally, self-transcendence would be found in religion, but Huxley feels that it is unlikely that this will ever happen. Christianity and mescaline seem well-suited for each other; the Native American Church for instance uses the drug as a sacrament, where its use combines religious feeling with decorum.

Huxley concludes that mescaline is neither divine illumination nor beatific vision, but a &quot;gratuitous grace&quot; (a term taken from Thomas Aquinas&#x27; &quot;Summa Theologica&quot;). It is not necessary but helpful, especially so for the intellectual, who can become the victim of words and symbols. Although systematic reasoning is important, direct perception has intrinsic value too. Finally, Huxley maintains that the person who has this experience will be transformed for the better.

== Reception ==

The book met with a variety of responses, both positive and negative, from writers in the fields of literature, psychiatry, philosophy and religion. These included a symposium published in &quot;The Saturday Review&quot; magazine with the unlikely title of, &quot;Mescalin – An Answer to Cigarettes&quot;, including contributions from Huxley; J.S. Slotkin, a professor of anthropology; and a physician, Dr. W.C. Cutting.

===Literature===

For the Scottish poet Edwin Muir, &quot;Mr. Huxley&#x27;s experiment is extraordinary, and is beautifully described&quot;. Thomas Mann, the author and friend of Huxley, believed the book demonstrated Huxley&#x27;s escapism. He thought that while escapism found in mysticism might be honourable, drugs were not. Huxley&#x27;s &#x27;aesthetic self-indulgence&#x27; and indifference to humanity would lead to suffering or stupidity; Mann concluded the book was irresponsible, if not quite immoral, to encourage young people to try the drug mescaline.

For Huxley&#x27;s biographer and friend, the author Sybille Bedford, the book combined sincerity with simplicity, passion with detachment. &quot;It reflects the heart and mind open to meet the given, ready, even longing, to accept the wonderful. &quot;The Doors&quot; is a quiet book. It is also one that postulates a goodwill – the choice once more of the nobler hypothesis. It turned out, for certain temperaments, a seductive book&quot;. For biographer David King Dunaway, &quot;The Doors of Perception&quot;, along with &quot;The Art of Seeing&quot;, can be seen as the closest Huxley ever came to autobiographical writing.

===Psychiatry===

William Sargant, the controversial British psychiatrist, reviewed the book for &quot;The British Medical Journal&quot; and particularly focused on Huxley&#x27;s reflections on schizophrenia. He wrote that the book brought to life the mental suffering of schizophrenics, which should make psychiatrists uneasy about their failure to relieve this. Also, he hoped that the book would encourage the investigation of the physiological, rather than psychological, aspects of psychiatry. Other medical researchers questioned the validity of Huxley&#x27;s account. According to Roland Fisher, the book contained &quot;99 percent Aldous Huxley and only one half gram mescaline&quot;. Joost A.M. Meerloo found Huxley&#x27;s reactions &quot;not necessarily the same as... other people&#x27;s experiences.&quot;

For Steven J. Novak, &quot;The Doors of Perception&quot; and &quot;Heaven and Hell&quot; redefined taking mescaline as a mystical experience with possible psychotherapeutic benefits, where physicians had previously thought of the drug in terms of mimicking a psychotic episode, known as psychotomimetic. The popularity of the book also affected research into these drugs, because researchers needed a random sample of subjects with no preconceptions about the drug to conduct experiments, and these became very difficult to find.

=== Philosophy and religion ===

Huxley&#x27;s friend and spiritual mentor, the Vedantic monk Swami Prabhavananda, thought that mescaline was an illegitimate path to enlightenment, a &quot;deadly heresy&quot; as Christopher Isherwood put it. Other thinkers expressed similar apprehensions.

==== Martin Buber ====

Martin Buber, the Jewish religious philosopher, attacked Huxley&#x27;s notion that mescaline allowed a person to participate in &quot;common being&quot;, and held that the drug ushered users &quot;merely into a strictly private sphere&quot;. Buber believed the drug experiences to be holidays &quot;from the person participating in the community of logos and cosmos—holidays from the very uncomfortable reminder to verify oneself as such a person.&quot; For Buber man must master, withstand and alter his situation, or even leave it, &quot;but the fugitive flight out of the claim of the situation into situationlessness is no legitimate affair of man.&quot;

==== Robert Charles Zaehner ====

Robert Charles Zaehner, a professor at Oxford University, formed one of the fullest and earliest critiques of &quot;The Doors of Perception&quot; from a religious and philosophical perspective. In 1954, Zaehner published an article called &quot;The Menace of Mescaline&quot;, in which he asserted that &quot;artificial interference with consciousness&quot; could have nothing to do with the Christian &quot;Beatific Vision&quot;. Zaehner expanded on these criticisms in his book &quot;Mysticism Sacred and Profane&quot; (1957), which also acts as a theistic riposte to what he sees as the monism of Huxley&#x27;s &quot;The Perennial Philosophy&quot;. Although he acknowledged the importance of &quot;The Doors of Perception&quot; as a challenge to people interested in religious experience, he pointed out what he saw as inconsistencies and self-contradictions. Zaehner concludes that Huxley&#x27;s apprehensions under mescaline are affected by his deep familiarity with Vedanta and Mahayana Buddhism. So the experience may not be the same for others who take the drug and do not have this background, although they will undoubtedly experience a transformation of sensation. Zaehner himself was a convert to Catholicism.

That the longing to transcend oneself is &quot;one of the principal appetites of the soul&quot; is questioned by Zaehner. There are still people who do not feel this desire to escape themselves, and religion itself need not mean escaping from the ego. Zaehner criticises what he sees as Huxley&#x27;s apparent call for all religious people to use drugs (including alcohol) as part of their practices. Quoting St Paul&#x27;s proscriptions against drunkenness in church, in 1 Corinthians xi, Zaehner makes the point that artificial ecstatic states and spiritual union with God are not the same.

Holding that there are similarities between the experience on mescaline, the mania in a manic-depressive psychosis and the visions of God of a mystical saint suggests, for Zaehner, that the saint&#x27;s visions must be the same as those of a lunatic. The personality is dissipated into the world, for Huxley on mescaline and people in a manic state, which is similar to the experience of nature mystics. However, this experience is different from the theistic mystic who is absorbed into a God, who is quite different from the objective world. The appendices to &quot;Mysticism Sacred and Profane&quot; include three accounts of mescaline experiences, including those of Zaehner himself. He writes that he was transported into a world of farcical meaninglessness and that the experience was interesting and funny, but not religious.

Soon after the publication of his book, Huxley wrote to Harold Raymond at Chatto and Windus that he thought it strange that when Hilaire Belloc and G. K. Chesterton wrote the praises of alcohol they were still considered good Christians, while anyone who suggested other routes to self-transcendence was accused of being a drug addict and perverter of mankind. Later Huxley responded to Zaehner in an article published in 1961: &quot;For most of those to whom the experiences have been vouchsafed, their value is self-evident. By Dr. Zaehner, the author of &quot;Mysticism, Sacred and Profane&quot;, their deliberate induction is regarded as immoral. To which his colleague, Professor Price, retorts in effect, &#x27;Speak for yourself!&#x27;&quot;.

==== Huston Smith ====

Professor of religion and philosophy Huston Smith argued that &quot;Mysticism Sacred and Profane&quot; had not fully examined and refuted Huxley&#x27;s claims made in &quot;The Doors of Perception&quot;. Smith claims that consciousness-changing substances have been linked with religion both throughout history and across the world, and further it is possible that many religious perspectives had their origins in them, which were later forgotten. Acknowledging that personality, preparation and environment all play a role in the effects of the drugs, Huston Smith draws attention to evidence that suggests that a religious outcome of the experience may not be restricted to one of Huxley&#x27;s temperament. Further, because Zaehner&#x27;s experience was not religious, does not prove that none will be. Contrary to Zaehner, Huston Smith draws attention to evidence suggesting that these drugs can facilitate theistic mystical experience.

As the descriptions of naturally occurring and drug-stimulated mystical experiences cannot be distinguished phenomenologically, Huston Smith regards Zaehner&#x27;s position in &quot;Mysticism Sacred and Profane&quot;, as a product of the conflict between science and religion – that religion tends to ignore the findings of science. Nonetheless, although these drugs may produce a religious experience, they need not produce a religious life, unless set within a context of faith and discipline. Finally, he concludes that psychedelic drugs should not be forgotten in relation to religion because the phenomenon of religious awe, or the encounter with the holy, is declining and religion cannot survive long in its absence.

== Later experience ==

Huxley continued to take these substances several times a year until his death, but with a serious and temperate frame of mind. He refused to talk about the substances outside scientific meetings, turned down an invitation to talk about them on TV and refused the leadership of a foundation devoted to the study of psychedelics, explaining that they were only one of his diverse number of interests. For Philip Thody, a professor of French literature, Huxley&#x27;s revelations made him conscious of the objections that had been put forward to his theory of mysticism set out in &quot;Eyeless in Gaza&quot; and &quot;Grey Eminence&quot;, and consequently &quot;Island&quot; reveals a more humane philosophy. However, this change in perspective may lie elsewhere. In October 1955, Huxley had an experience while on mescaline that he considered more profound than those detailed in &quot;The Doors of Perception&quot;. He decided his previous experiments, the ones detailed in &quot;Doors&quot; and &quot;Heaven and Hell&quot;, had been &quot;temptations to escape from the central reality into false, or at least imperfect and partial Nirvanas of beauty and mere knowledge.&quot; He wrote in a letter to Humphry Osmond, that he experienced &quot;the direct, total awareness, from the inside, so to say, of Love as the primary and fundamental cosmic fact. ... I was this fact; or perhaps it would be more accurate to say that this fact occupied the place where I had been.&quot; The experience made its way into the final chapter of &quot;Island&quot;. This raised a troublesome point. Was it better to pursue a course of careful psychological experimentation... or was the real value of these drugs to &quot;stimulate the most basic kind of religious ecstasy&quot;?

== Influence ==

A variety of influences have been claimed for the book. The psychedelic proselytiser Timothy Leary was given the book by a colleague soon after returning from Mexico where he had first taken psilocybin mushrooms in the summer of 1960. He found that &quot;The Doors of Perception&quot; corroborated what he had experienced &#x27;and more too&#x27;. Leary soon set up a meeting with Huxley and the two became friendly. The book can also be seen as a part of the history of entheogenic model of understanding these drugs, that sees them within a spiritual context.

This book was the influence behind Jim Morrison naming his band The Doors in 1965.

== In popular culture ==
In the 2016 film &quot;Doctor Strange&quot;, Stan Lee&#x27;s character is seen reading the book, calling it, &quot;hilarious.&quot;

== Publication history ==

&quot;The Doors of Perception&quot; is usually published in a combined volume with Huxley&#x27;s essay &quot;Heaven and Hell&quot; (1956)

* &quot;The Doors of Perception and Heaven and Hell&quot;, 1954, 1956, Harper &amp; Brothers
* 1977 Harpercollins (UK), mass market paperback: 
* 1990 Harper Perennial edition: 
* 2004 Harper Modern Classics edition: 
* 2004 Sagebrush library binding: 
* 2009 First Harper Perennial Modern Classics edition: 
* &quot;The Doors of Perception&quot;, unabridged audio cassette, Audio Partners 1998, 

== See also ==
* List of psychedelic literature

== References ==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4184" start="30" end="46" title="autobiographical" label="autobiographical"/>
<link wikidata="Q81447" start="63" end="76" title="Aldous Huxley" label="Aldous Huxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076521" start="118" end="140" title="psychedelic experience" label="psychedelic experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q193140" start="164" end="173" title="mescaline" label="mescaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742534" start="408" end="423" title="Heaven and Hell (essay)" label="Heaven and Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q41513" start="586" end="599" title="William Blake" label="William Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132673" start="623" end="654" title="The Marriage of Heaven and Hell" label="The Marriage of Heaven and Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314176" start="747" end="764" title="psychedelic drugs" label="psychedelic drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q37030" start="936" end="947" title="Thomas Mann" label="Thomas Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653218" start="963" end="982" title="Swami Prabhavananda" label="Swami Prabhavananda"/>
<link wikidata="Q84423" start="1003" end="1015" title="Martin Buber" label="Martin Buber"/>
<link wikidata="Q959943" start="1041" end="1063" title="Robert Charles Zaehner" label="Robert Charles Zaehner"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="1172" end="1181" title="mysticism" label="mysticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419461" start="1330" end="1336" title="Island (Huxley novel)" label="Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q41513" start="1403" end="1416" title="William Blake" label="William Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132673" start="1664" end="1695" title="The Marriage of Heaven and Hell" label="The Marriage of Heaven and Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314176" start="1882" end="1893" title="psychedelic drug" label="psychedelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q271937" start="1907" end="1913" title="peyote" label="peyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="1945" end="1960" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162345" start="1961" end="1981" title="Native American religion" label="religious ceremonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q86963" start="2031" end="2045" title="Arthur Heffter" label="Arthur Heffter"/>
<link wikidata="Q70702" start="2060" end="2069" title="alkaloids" label="alkaloids"/>
<link wikidata="Q38344" start="2167" end="2173" title="Animal testing" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777105" start="2178" end="2194" title="Self-experimentation" label="self-experiments"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706669" start="2232" end="2244" title="Psychoactive drug" label="psychoactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q94024" start="2279" end="2290" title="Ernst Späth" label="Ernst Späth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283916" start="2425" end="2438" title="Silas Weir Mitchell (physician)" label="Weir Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q552983" start="2453" end="2467" title="Havelock Ellis" label="Havelock Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q74829" start="2516" end="2531" title="Heinrich Klüver" label="Heinrich Klüver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522418" start="2809" end="2824" title="Weston La Barre" label="Weston La Barre"/>
<link wikidata="Q310491" start="2915" end="2924" title="entheogen" label="entheogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162132" start="2942" end="2949" title="Huichol people" label="Huichol"/>
<link wikidata="Q170082" start="3234" end="3243" title="psychosis" label="psychosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249017" start="3284" end="3299" title="Project Chatter" label="Project Chatter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4046487" start="3512" end="3523" title="Parke-Davis" label="Parke-Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188176" start="3700" end="3720" title="William S. Burroughs" label="William S. Burroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q160534" start="3722" end="3734" title="Jack Kerouac" label="Jack Kerouac"/>
<link wikidata="Q6711" start="3740" end="3754" title="Allen Ginsberg" label="Allen Ginsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q37767" start="4118" end="4126" title="TS Eliot" label="TS Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q108458" start="4151" end="4159" title="Meditation" label="meditate"/>
<link wikidata="Q621647" start="4198" end="4217" title="Alexander Technique" label="Alexander Technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q709136" start="4226" end="4238" title="Bates Method" label="Bates Method"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512051" start="4387" end="4394" title="Vedanta" label="Vedanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447521" start="4426" end="4450" title="The Perennial Philosophy" label="The Perennial Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q920084" start="4739" end="4761" title="Native American Church" label="Native American Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="4765" end="4775" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275370" start="4941" end="4955" title="Humphry Osmond" label="Humphry Osmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565203" start="4991" end="5014" title="Souris Valley Mental Health Hospital" label="Weyburn Mental Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989" start="5016" end="5028" title="Saskatchewan" label="Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645006" start="5189" end="5201" title="Abram Hoffer" label="Abram Hoffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3232078" start="5256" end="5276" title="The Devils of Loudun" label="The Devils of Loudun"/>
<link wikidata="Q954360" start="5424" end="5439" title="George Woodcock" label="George Woodcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q8609" start="5606" end="5614" title="hypnosis" label="hypnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659986" start="5616" end="5628" title="Self-hypnosis" label="autohypnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275370" start="5762" end="5768" title="Humphry Osmond" label="Osmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q466524" start="6603" end="6635" title="American Psychiatric Association" label="American Psychiatric Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606714" start="6825" end="6837" title="Gerald Heard" label="Gerald Heard"/>
<link wikidata="Q81447" start="7493" end="7498" title="Maria Nys" label="Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7319360" start="7973" end="7979" title="Rexall" label="Rexall"/>
<link wikidata="Q105186" start="8232" end="8252" title="Dispensing chemist" label="chemist&amp;#x27;s shops"/>
<link wikidata="Q58162" start="8901" end="8908" title="flannel" label="flannel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3666843" start="9507" end="9524" title="Chatto and Windus" label="Chatto and Windus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41513" start="9667" end="9680" title="William Blake" label="William Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132673" start="9699" end="9730" title="The Marriage of Heaven and Hell" label="The Marriage of Heaven and Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q41264" start="10039" end="10046" title="Johannes Vermeer" label="Vermeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q280027" start="10505" end="10511" title="iritis" label="iritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q76548" start="11330" end="11345" title="Meister Eckhart" label="Meister Eckhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="11403" end="11408" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="11507" end="11512" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523622" start="11524" end="11537" title="Satchitananda" label="Satchitananda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953" start="11554" end="11557" title="Zen" label="Zen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231764" start="11558" end="11562" title="koan" label="koan"/>
<link wikidata="Q693230" start="11640" end="11648" title="Tathātā/Dharmatā" label="suchness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022453" start="11994" end="12005" title="C. D. Broad" label="C. D. Broad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6863547" start="12127" end="12140" title="Mind at Large" label="Mind at Large"/>
<link wikidata="Q42156" start="12489" end="12502" title="Henri Bergson" label="Henri Bergson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5669" start="12986" end="12996" title="Sandro Botticelli" label="Botticelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q35548" start="13374" end="13381" title="Paul Cézanne" label="Cézanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q41264" start="13468" end="13475" title="Johannes Vermeer" label="Vermeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q809658" start="13512" end="13528" title="Le Nain" label="Le Nain brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q239394" start="13533" end="13541" title="Édouard Vuillard" label="Vuillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q232453" start="13757" end="13763" title="Martha" label="Martha"/>
<link wikidata="Q63070" start="13779" end="13783" title="Mary Magdalene" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q919060" start="14042" end="14052" title="Quietism (Christian philosophy)" label="quietistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q194112" start="14118" end="14134" title="Positive and negative value" label="negative virtues"/>
<link wikidata="Q254" start="14208" end="14214" title="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart" label="Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q216840" start="14222" end="14244" title="Piano Concerto No. 24 (Mozart)" label="C-Minor Piano Concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q192958" start="14246" end="14254" title="Carlo Gesualdo" label="Gesualdo"/>
<link wikidata="Q193217" start="14262" end="14271" title="Madrigal (music)" label="madrigals"/>
<link wikidata="Q78475" start="14276" end="14286" title="Alban Berg" label="Alban Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355101" start="14294" end="14317" title="Lyric Suite (Berg)" label="&amp;quot;Lyric Suite&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q77017" start="14545" end="14556" title="Jakob Böhme" label="Jakob Böhme"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177480" start="14558" end="14569" title="William Law" label="William Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q597697" start="14578" end="14602" title="Bardo Thodol" label="Tibetan Book of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="15229" end="15240" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967936" start="15244" end="15264" title="The Door in the Wall (short story)" label="The Door in the Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q920084" start="15699" end="15721" title="Native American Church" label="Native American Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284165" start="15864" end="15883" title="divine illumination" label="divine illumination"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463224" start="15888" end="15903" title="beatific vision" label="beatific vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="15959" end="15973" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q653871" start="15986" end="16002" title="Summa Theologica" label="Summa Theologica"/>
<link wikidata="Q15846515" start="16524" end="16555" title="Saturday Review (US magazine)" label="&amp;quot;The Saturday Review&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q304752" start="16797" end="16807" title="Edwin Muir" label="Edwin Muir"/>
<link wikidata="Q37030" start="16898" end="16909" title="Thomas Mann" label="Thomas Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q72705" start="17376" end="17391" title="Sybille Bedford" label="Sybille Bedford"/>
<link wikidata="Q581600" start="17854" end="17871" title="The Art of Seeing" label="The Art of Seeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018124" start="17971" end="17986" title="William Sargant" label="William Sargant"/>
<link wikidata="Q546003" start="18056" end="18083" title="The British Medical Journal" label="The British Medical Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742534" start="18839" end="18854" title="Heaven and Hell (essay)" label="Heaven and Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256512" start="19059" end="19074" title="psychotomimetic" label="psychotomimetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653218" start="19397" end="19416" title="Swami Prabhavananda" label="Swami Prabhavananda"/>
<link wikidata="Q310111" start="19515" end="19536" title="Christopher Isherwood" label="Christopher Isherwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q84423" start="19618" end="19630" title="Martin Buber" label="Martin Buber"/>
<link wikidata="Q180832" start="19967" end="19972" title="logos" label="logos"/>
<link wikidata="Q959943" start="20312" end="20334" title="Robert Charles Zaehner" label="Robert Charles Zaehner"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="20351" end="20368" title="Oxford University" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q620805" start="20861" end="20869" title="theistic" label="theistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q178801" start="20901" end="20907" title="monism" label="monism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447521" start="20931" end="20955" title="The Perennial Philosophy" label="The Perennial Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512051" start="21283" end="21290" title="Vedanta" label="Vedanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q48362" start="21295" end="21312" title="Mahayana Buddhism" label="Mahayana Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="21520" end="21531" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q80355" start="22006" end="22019" title="First Epistle to the Corinthians" label="1 Corinthians"/>
<link wikidata="Q185935" start="22205" end="22210" title="mania" label="mania"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="22216" end="22242" title="manic-depressive psychosis" label="manic-depressive psychosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q333106" start="23091" end="23105" title="Hilaire Belloc" label="Hilaire Belloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q183167" start="23110" end="23126" title="G. K. Chesterton" label="G. K. Chesterton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3751249" start="23637" end="23652" title="H.H. Price" label="Professor Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950051" start="23774" end="23786" title="Huston Smith" label="Huston Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300771" start="25304" end="25307" title="awe" label="awe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151419" start="25335" end="25339" title="Sacred" label="holy"/>
<link wikidata="Q55999009" start="25832" end="25844" title="Philip Thody" label="Philip Thody"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422772" start="26013" end="26028" title="Eyeless in Gaza (novel)" label="Eyeless in Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3818964" start="26045" end="26058" title="Grey Eminence" label="Grey Eminence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419461" start="26089" end="26095" title="Island (Huxley novel)" label="Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742534" start="26431" end="26446" title="Heaven and Hell (essay)" label="Heaven and Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275370" start="26631" end="26645" title="Humphry Osmond" label="Humphry Osmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419461" start="26965" end="26971" title="Island (Huxley novel)" label="Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q211731" start="27296" end="27309" title="Timothy Leary" label="Timothy Leary"/>
<link wikidata="Q336358" start="27402" end="27422" title="psilocybin mushrooms" label="psilocybin mushrooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q310491" start="27682" end="27693" title="entheogenic" label="entheogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q44301" start="27809" end="27821" title="Jim Morrison" label="Jim Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q45354" start="27838" end="27847" title="The Doors" label="The Doors"/>
<link wikidata="Q18406872" start="27906" end="27920" title="Doctor Strange (2016 film)" label="Doctor Strange"/>
<link wikidata="Q181900" start="27928" end="27936" title="Stan Lee" label="Stan Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742534" start="28152" end="28167" title="Heaven and Hell (essay)" label="Heaven and Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256214" start="28597" end="28627" title="List of psychedelic literature" label="List of psychedelic literature"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29823" wikidata="Q37621" url="?curid=29823" title="Thomas Hobbes">
<text>Thomas Hobbes ( ; 5 April 1588 – 4 December 1679) was an English philosopher, best known for his 1651 book &quot;Leviathan&quot;, in which he expounds an influential formulation of social contract theory. He is considered to be one of the founders of modern political philosophy.

In his early life, overshadowed by his father&#x27;s departure following a fight, he was taken under the care of his wealthy uncle. Hobbes&#x27;s academic journey began in Westport, leading him to Oxford University, where he was exposed to classical literature and mathematics. He then graduated from the University of Cambridge in 1608. He became a tutor to the Cavendish family, which connected him to intellectual circles and initiated his extensive travels across Europe. These experiences, including meetings with figures like Galileo, shaped his intellectual development.

After returning to England from France in 1637, Hobbes witnessed the destruction and brutality of the English Civil War from 1642 to 1651 between Parliamentarians and Royalists, which heavily influenced his advocacy for governance by an absolute sovereign in &quot;Leviathan&quot;, as the solution to human conflict and societal breakdown. Aside from social contract theory, &quot;Leviathan&quot; also popularized ideas such as the state of nature (&quot;war of all against all&quot;) and laws of nature. His other major works include the trilogy &quot;De Cive&quot; (1642), &quot;De Corpore&quot; (1655), and &quot;De Homine&quot; (1658) as well as the posthumous work &quot;Behemoth&quot; (1681).

Hobbes contributed to a diverse array of fields, including history, jurisprudence, geometry, optics, theology, classical translations, ethics, as well as philosophy in general, marking him as a polymath. Despite controversies and challenges, including accusations of atheism and contentious debates with contemporaries, Hobbes&#x27;s work profoundly influenced the understanding of political structure and human nature.

==Biography==
===Early life===
Thomas Hobbes was born on 5 April 1588 (Old Style), in Westport, now part of Malmesbury in Wiltshire, England. Having been born prematurely when his mother heard of the coming invasion of the Spanish Armada, Hobbes later reported that &quot;my mother gave birth to twins: myself and fear.&quot; Hobbes had a brother, Edmund, about two years older, as well as a sister, Anne.

Although Thomas Hobbes&#x27;s childhood is unknown to a large extent, as is his mother&#x27;s name, it is known that Hobbes&#x27;s father, Thomas Sr., was the vicar of both Charlton and Westport. Hobbes&#x27;s father was uneducated, according to John Aubrey, Hobbes&#x27;s biographer, and he &quot;disesteemed learning.&quot; Thomas Sr. was involved in a fight with the local clergy outside his church, forcing him to leave London. As a result, the family was left in the care of Thomas Sr.&#x27;s older brother, Francis, a wealthy glove manufacturer with no family of his own.

==== Education ====
Hobbes was educated at Westport church from age four, went to the Malmesbury school, and then to a private school kept by a young man named Robert Latimer, a graduate of the University of Oxford. Hobbes was a good pupil, and between 1601 and 1602 he went to Magdalen Hall, the predecessor to Hertford College, Oxford, where he was taught scholastic logic and mathematics. The principal, John Wilkinson, was a Puritan and had some influence on Hobbes. Before going up to Oxford, Hobbes translated Euripides&#x27; &quot;Medea&quot; from Greek into Latin verse.

At university, Thomas Hobbes appears to have followed his own curriculum as he was little attracted by the scholastic learning. Leaving Oxford, Hobbes completed his B.A. degree by incorporation at St John&#x27;s College, Cambridge, in 1608. He was recommended by Sir James Hussey, his master at Magdalen, as tutor to William, the son of William Cavendish, Baron of Hardwick (and later Earl of Devonshire), and began a lifelong connection with that family. William Cavendish was elevated to the peerage on his father&#x27;s death in 1626, holding it for two years before his death in 1628. His son, also William, likewise became the 3rd Earl of Devonshire. Hobbes served as a tutor and secretary to both men. The 1st Earl&#x27;s younger brother, Charles Cavendish, had two sons who were patrons of Hobbes. The elder son, William Cavendish, later 1st Duke of Newcastle, was a leading supporter of Charles I during the Civil War in which he personally financed an army for the king, having been governor to the Prince of Wales, Charles James, Duke of Cornwall. It was to this William Cavendish that Hobbes dedicated his &quot;Elements of Law&quot;.

Hobbes became a companion to the younger William Cavendish and they both took part in a grand tour of Europe between 1610 and 1615. Hobbes was exposed to European scientific and critical methods during the tour, in contrast to the scholastic philosophy that he had learned in Oxford. In Venice, Hobbes made the acquaintance of Fulgenzio Micanzio, an associate of Paolo Sarpi, a Venetian scholar and statesman.

His scholarly efforts at the time were aimed at a careful study of classical Greek and Latin authors, the outcome of which was, in 1628, his edition of Thucydides&#x27; &quot;History of the Peloponnesian War&quot;, the first translation of that work into English directly from a Greek manuscript. Hobbes professed a deep admiration for Thucydides, praising him as &quot;the most politic historiographer that ever writ,&quot; and one scholar has suggested that &quot;Hobbes&#x27; reading of Thucydides confirmed, or perhaps crystallized, the broad outlines and many of the details of [Hobbes&#x27;] own thought.&quot; It has been argued that three of the discourses in the 1620 publication known as &quot;Horae Subsecivae: Observations and Discourses&quot; also represent the work of Hobbes from this period.

Although he did associate with literary figures like Ben Jonson and briefly worked as Francis Bacon&#x27;s amanuensis, translating several of his &quot;Essays&quot; into Latin, he did not extend his efforts into philosophy until after 1629. In June 1628, his employer Cavendish, then the Earl of Devonshire, died of the plague, and his widow, the countess Christian, dismissed Hobbes.

===In Paris (1629–1637)===
Hobbes soon (in 1629) found work as a tutor to Gervase Clifton, the son of Sir Gervase Clifton, 1st Baronet, and continued in this role until November 1630. He spent most of this time in Paris. Thereafter, he again found work with the Cavendish family, tutoring William Cavendish, 3rd Earl of Devonshire, the eldest son of his previous pupil. Over the next seven years, as well as tutoring, he expanded his own knowledge of philosophy, awakening in him curiosity over key philosophic debates. He visited Galileo Galilei in Florence while he was under house arrest upon condemnation, in 1636, and was later a regular debater in philosophic groups in Paris, held together by Marin Mersenne.

Hobbes&#x27;s first area of study was an interest in the physical doctrine of motion and physical momentum. Despite his interest in this phenomenon, he disdained experimental work as in physics. He went on to conceive the system of thought to the elaboration of which he would devote his life. His scheme was first to work out, in a separate treatise, a systematic doctrine of body, showing how physical phenomena were universally explicable in terms of motion, at least as motion or mechanical action was then understood. He then singled out Man from the realm of Nature and plants. Then, in another treatise, he showed what specific bodily motions were involved in the production of the peculiar phenomena of sensation, knowledge, affections and passions whereby Man came into relation with Man. Finally, he considered, in his crowning treatise, how Men were moved to enter into society, and argued how this must be regulated if people were not to fall back into &quot;brutishness and misery&quot;. Thus he proposed to unite the separate phenomena of Body, Man, and the State.

=== In England (1637–1641) ===
Hobbes came back home from Paris, in 1637, to a country riven with discontent, which disrupted him from the orderly execution of his philosophic plan. However, by the end of the Short Parliament in 1640, he had written a short treatise called &quot;The Elements of Law, Natural and Politic&quot;. It was not published and only circulated as a manuscript among his acquaintances. A pirated version, however, was published about ten years later. Although it seems that much of &quot;The Elements of Law&quot; was composed before the sitting of the Short Parliament, there are polemical pieces of the work that clearly mark the influences of the rising political crisis. Nevertheless, many (though not all) elements of Hobbes&#x27;s political thought were unchanged between &quot;The Elements of Law&quot; and &quot;Leviathan&quot;, which demonstrates that the events of the English Civil War had little effect on his contractarian methodology. However, the arguments in &quot;Leviathan&quot; were modified from &quot;The Elements of Law&quot; when it came to the necessity of consent in creating political obligation: Hobbes wrote in &quot;The Elements of Law&quot; that patrimonial kingdoms were not necessarily formed by the consent of the governed, while in &quot;Leviathan&quot; he argued that they were. This was perhaps a reflection either of Hobbes&#x27;s thoughts about the engagement controversy or of his reaction to treatises published by Patriarchalists, such as Sir Robert Filmer, between 1640 and 1651.

When in November 1640 the Long Parliament succeeded the Short, Hobbes felt that he was in disfavour due to the circulation of his treatise and fled to Paris. He did not return for 11 years. In Paris, he rejoined the coterie around Mersenne and wrote a critique of the &quot;Meditations on First Philosophy&quot; of René Descartes, which was printed as third among the sets of &quot;Objections&quot; appended, with &quot;Replies&quot; from Descartes, in 1641. A different set of remarks on other works by Descartes succeeded only in ending all correspondence between the two.

Hobbes also extended his own works in a way, working on the third section, &quot;De Cive&quot;, which was finished in November 1641. Although it was initially only circulated privately, it was well received, and included lines of argumentation that were repeated a decade later in &quot;Leviathan&quot;. He then returned to hard work on the first two sections of his work and published little except a short treatise on optics (&quot;Tractatus opticus&quot;), included in the collection of scientific tracts published by Mersenne as &quot;Cogitata physico-mathematica&quot; in 1644. He built a good reputation in philosophic circles and in 1645 was chosen with Descartes, Gilles de Roberval and others to referee the controversy between John Pell and Longomontanus over the problem of squaring the circle.

===Civil War Period (1642–1651)===
The English Civil War began in 1642, and when the royalist cause began to decline in mid-1644, many royalists came to Paris and were known to Hobbes. This revitalised Hobbes&#x27;s political interests, and the &quot;De Cive&quot; was republished and more widely distributed. The printing began in 1646 by Samuel de Sorbiere through the Elsevier press in Amsterdam with a new preface and some new notes in reply to objections.

In 1647, Hobbes took up a position as mathematical instructor to the young Charles, Prince of Wales, who had come to Paris from Jersey around July. This engagement lasted until 1648 when Charles went to Holland.

The company of the exiled royalists led Hobbes to produce &quot;Leviathan&quot;, which set forth his theory of civil government in relation to the political crisis resulting from the war. Hobbes compared the State to a monster (leviathan) composed of men, created under pressure of human needs and dissolved by civil strife due to human passions. The work closed with a general &quot;Review and Conclusion&quot;, in response to the war, which answered the question: Does a subject have the right to change allegiance when a former sovereign&#x27;s power to protect is irrevocably lost?

During the years of composing &quot;Leviathan&quot;, Hobbes remained in or near Paris. In 1647, he suffered a near-fatal illness that disabled him for six months. On recovering, he resumed his literary task and completed it by 1650. Meanwhile, a translation of &quot;De Cive&quot; was being produced; scholars disagree about whether it was Hobbes who translated it.

In 1650, a pirated edition of &quot;The Elements of Law, Natural and Politic&quot; was published. It was divided into two small volumes: &quot;Human Nature, or the Fundamental Elements of Policie&quot;; and &quot;De corpore politico, or the Elements of Law, Moral and Politick&quot;.

In 1651, the translation of &quot;De Cive&quot; was published under the title &quot;Philosophical Rudiments concerning Government and Society&quot;. Also, the printing of the greater work proceeded, and finally appeared in mid-1651, titled &quot;Leviathan, or the Matter, Forme, and Power of a Common Wealth, Ecclesiastical and Civil&quot;. It had a famous title-page engraving depicting a crowned giant above the waist towering above hills overlooking a landscape, holding a sword and a crozier and made up of tiny human figures. The work had immediate impact. Soon, Hobbes was more lauded and decried than any other thinker of his time. The first effect of its publication was to sever his link with the exiled royalists, who might well have killed him. The secularist spirit of his book greatly angered both Anglicans and French Catholics. Hobbes appealed to the revolutionary English government for protection and fled back to London in winter 1651. After his submission to the Council of State, he was allowed to subside into private life in Fetter Lane.

===Later life===
In 1658, Hobbes published the final section of his philosophical system, completing the scheme he had planned more than 19 years before. &quot;De Homine&quot; consisted for the most part of an elaborate theory of vision. The remainder of the treatise dealt partially with some of the topics more fully treated in the &quot;Human Nature&quot; and the &quot;Leviathan&quot;. In addition to publishing some controversial writings on mathematics, including disciplines like geometry, Hobbes also continued to produce philosophical works.

From the time of the Restoration, he acquired a new prominence; &quot;Hobbism&quot; became a byword for all that respectable society ought to denounce. The young king, Hobbes&#x27;s former pupil, now Charles II, remembered Hobbes and called him to the court to grant him a pension of £100.

The king was important in protecting Hobbes when, in 1666, the House of Commons introduced a bill against atheism and profaneness. That same year, on 17 October 1666, it was ordered that the committee to which the bill was referred &quot;should be empowered to receive information touching such books as tend to atheism, blasphemy and profaneness... in particular... the book of Mr. Hobbes called the &quot;Leviathan&quot;.&quot; Hobbes was terrified at the prospect of being labelled a heretic, and proceeded to burn some of his compromising papers. At the same time, he examined the actual state of the law of heresy. The results of his investigation were first announced in three short Dialogues added as an &quot;Appendix&quot; to his &quot;Latin translation of Leviathan&quot;, published in Amsterdam in 1668. In this appendix, Hobbes aimed to show that, since the High Court of Commission had been put down, there remained no court of heresy at all to which he was amenable, and that nothing could be heresy except opposing the Nicene Creed, which, he maintained, &quot;Leviathan&quot; did not do.

The only consequence that came of the bill was that Hobbes could never thereafter publish anything in England on subjects relating to human conduct. The 1668 edition of his works was printed in Amsterdam because he could not obtain the censor&#x27;s licence for its publication in England. Other writings were not made public until after his death, including &quot;Behemoth: the History of the Causes of the Civil Wars of England and of the Counsels and Artifices by which they were carried on from the year 1640 to the year 1662&quot;. For some time, Hobbes was not even allowed to respond to any attacks by his enemies. Despite this, his reputation abroad was formidable.

Hobbes spent the last four or five years of his life with his patron, William Cavendish, 1st Duke of Devonshire, at the family&#x27;s Chatsworth House estate. He had been a friend of the family since 1608 when he first tutored an earlier William Cavendish. After Hobbes&#x27;s death, many of his manuscripts would be found at Chatsworth House.

His final works were an autobiography in Latin verse in 1672, and a translation of four books of the &quot;Odyssey&quot; into &quot;rugged&quot; English rhymes that in 1673 led to a complete translation of both &quot;Iliad&quot; and &quot;Odyssey&quot; in 1675.

===Death===
In October 1679 Hobbes suffered a bladder disorder, and then a paralytic stroke, from which he died on 4 December 1679, aged 91,
at Hardwick Hall, owned by the Cavendish family.

His last words were said to have been &quot;A great leap in the dark&quot;, uttered in his final conscious moments. His body was interred in St John the Baptist&#x27;s Church, Ault Hucknall, in Derbyshire.

==Political theory==
Hobbes, influenced by contemporary scientific ideas, had intended for his political theory to be a quasi-geometrical system, in which the conclusions followed inevitably from the premises. The main practical conclusion of Hobbes&#x27;s political theory is that state or society cannot be secure unless at the disposal of an absolute sovereign. From this follows the view that no individual can hold rights of property against the sovereign, and that the sovereign may therefore take the goods of its subjects without their consent. This particular view owes its significance to it being first developed in the 1630s when Charles I had sought to raise revenues without the consent of Parliament, and therefore of his subjects. Hobbes rejected one of the most famous theses of Aristotle&#x27;s politics, namely that human beings are naturally suited to life in a polis and do not fully realize their natures until they exercise the role of citizen. It is perhaps also important to note that Hobbes extrapolated his mechanistic understanding of nature into the social and political realm, making him a progenitor of the term &#x27;social structure.&#x27;

===&quot;Leviathan&quot;===

In &quot;Leviathan&quot;, Hobbes set out his doctrine of the foundation of states and legitimate governments and creating an objective science of morality. Much of the book is occupied with demonstrating the necessity of a strong central authority to avoid the evil of discord and civil war.

Beginning from a mechanistic understanding of human beings and their passions, Hobbes postulates what life would be like without government, a condition which he calls the state of nature. In that state, each person would have a right, or license, to everything in the world. This, Hobbes argues, would lead to a &quot;war of all against all&quot; (). The description contains what has been called one of the best-known passages in English philosophy, which describes the natural state humankind would be in, were it not for political community:
 In such states, people fear death and lack both the things necessary to comfortable living, and the hope of being able to obtain them. So, in order to avoid it, people accede to a social contract and establish a civil society. According to Hobbes, society is a population and a authority, to whom all individuals in that society cede some right for the sake of protection. Power exercised by this authority cannot be resisted, because the protector&#x27;s sovereign power derives from individuals&#x27; surrendering their own sovereign power for protection. The individuals are thereby the authors of all decisions made by the sovereign: &quot;he that complaineth of injury from his sovereign complaineth that whereof he himself is the author, and therefore ought not to accuse any man but himself, no nor himself of injury because to do injury to one&#x27;s self is impossible&quot;. There is no doctrine of separation of powers in Hobbes&#x27;s discussion. He argues that any division of authority would lead to internal strife, jeopardizing the stability provided by an absolute sovereign. According to Hobbes, the sovereign must control civil, military, judicial and ecclesiastical powers, even the words.

==Opposition==

===John Bramhall===
In 1654 a small treatise, &quot;Of Liberty and Necessity&quot;, directed at Hobbes, was published by Bishop John Bramhall. Bramhall, a strong Arminian, had met and debated with Hobbes and afterwards wrote down his views and sent them privately to be answered in this form by Hobbes. Hobbes duly replied, but not for publication. However, a French acquaintance took a copy of the reply and published it with &quot;an extravagantly laudatory epistle&quot;. Bramhall countered in 1655, when he printed everything that had passed between them (under the title of &quot;A Defence of the True Liberty of Human Actions from Antecedent or Extrinsic Necessity&quot;).

In 1656, Hobbes was ready with &quot;The Questions Concerning Liberty, Necessity and Chance&quot;, in which he replied &quot;with astonishing force&quot; to the bishop. As perhaps the first clear exposition of the psychological doctrine of determinism, Hobbes&#x27;s own two pieces were important in the history of the free will controversy. The bishop returned to the charge in 1658 with &quot;Castigations of Mr Hobbes&#x27;s Animadversions&quot;, and also included a bulky appendix entitled &quot;The Catching of Leviathan the Great Whale&quot;.

===John Wallis===

Hobbes opposed the existing academic arrangements, and assailed the system of the original universities in &quot;Leviathan&quot;. He went on to publish &quot;De Corpore&quot;, which contained not only tendentious views on mathematics but also an erroneous proof of the squaring of the circle. This all led mathematicians to target him for polemics and sparked John Wallis to become one of his most persistent opponents. From 1655, the publishing date of &quot;De Corpore&quot;, Hobbes and Wallis continued name-calling and bickering for nearly a quarter of a century, with Hobbes failing to admit his error to the end of his life. After years of debate, the spat over proving the squaring of the circle gained such notoriety that it has become one of the most infamous feuds in mathematical history.

==Religious views==

The religious opinions of Hobbes remain controversial as many positions have been attributed to him and range from atheism to orthodox Christianity. In &quot;The Elements of Law&quot;, Hobbes provided a cosmological argument for the existence of God, saying that God is &quot;the first cause of all causes&quot;.

Hobbes was accused of atheism by several contemporaries; Bramhall accused him of teachings that could lead to atheism. This was an important accusation, and Hobbes himself wrote, in his answer to Bramhall&#x27;s &quot;The Catching of Leviathan&quot;, that &quot;atheism, impiety, and the like are words of the greatest defamation possible&quot;. Hobbes always defended himself from such accusations. In more recent times also, much has been made of his religious views by scholars such as Richard Tuck and J. G. A. Pocock, but there is still widespread disagreement about the exact significance of Hobbes&#x27;s unusual views on religion.

As Martinich has pointed out, in Hobbes&#x27;s time the term &quot;atheist&quot; was often applied to people who believed in God but not in divine providence, or to people who believed in God but also maintained other beliefs that were considered to be inconsistent with such belief or judged incompatible with orthodox Christianity. He says that this &quot;sort of discrepancy has led to many errors in determining who was an atheist in the early modern period&quot;. In this extended early modern sense of atheism, Hobbes did take positions that strongly disagreed with church teachings of his time. For example, he argued repeatedly that there are no incorporeal substances, and that all things, including human thoughts, and even God, heaven, and hell are corporeal, matter in motion. He argued that &quot;though Scripture acknowledge spirits, yet doth it nowhere say, that they are incorporeal, meaning thereby without dimensions and quantity&quot;. (In this view, Hobbes claimed to be following Tertullian.) Like John Locke, he also stated that true revelation can never disagree with human reason and experience, although he also argued that people should accept revelation and its interpretations for the same reason that they should accept the commands of their sovereign: in order to avoid war.

While in Venice on tour, Hobbes made the acquaintance of Fulgenzio Micanzio, a close associate of Paolo Sarpi, who had written against the pretensions of the papacy to temporal power in response to the Interdict of Pope Paul V against Venice, which refused to recognise papal prerogatives. James I had invited both men to England in 1612. Micanzio and Sarpi had argued that God willed human nature, and that human nature indicated the autonomy of the state in temporal affairs. When he returned to England in 1615, William Cavendish maintained correspondence with Micanzio and Sarpi, and Hobbes translated the latter&#x27;s letters from Italian, which were circulated among the Duke&#x27;s circle.

== Works ==
* 1602. Latin translation of Euripides&#x27; &quot;Medea&quot; (lost).
* 1620. &quot;A Discourse of Tacitus&quot;, &quot;A Discourse of Rome&quot;, and &quot;A Discourse of Laws&quot;. In &quot;The Horae Subsecivae: Observation and Discourses&quot;.
* 1626. &quot;De Mirabilis Pecci, Being the Wonders of the Peak in Darby-shire&quot; (publ. 1636) – a poem on the Seven Wonders of the Peak.
* 1629. &quot;Eight Books of the Peloponnese Warre&quot;, translation with an Introduction of Thucydides, &quot;History of the Peloponnesian War.&quot;
* 1630. &quot;A Short Tract on First Principles&quot;.
** Authorship doubtful, as this work is attributed by important critics to Robert Payne.
* 1637. &quot;A Briefe of the Art of Rhetorique&quot;
** Molesworth edition title: &quot;The Whole Art of Rhetoric&quot;.
** Authorship probable: While Schuhmann (1998) firmly rejects the attribution of this work to Hobbes, a preponderance of scholarship disagrees with Schuhmann&#x27;s idiosyncratic assessment. Schuhmann disagrees with historian Quentin Skinner, who would come to agree with Schuhmann.
* 1639. &quot;Tractatus Opticus II&quot; (also known as &quot;Latin Optical Manuscript&quot;).
* 1640. &quot;Elements of Law, Natural and Politic&quot;
** Initially circulated only in handwritten copies; without Hobbes&#x27;s permission, the first printed edition would be in 1650.
* 1641. &quot;Objectiones ad Cartesii Meditationes de Prima Philosophia&quot; 3rd series of Objections.
* 1642. &quot;Elementorum Philosophiae Sectio Tertia de Cive&quot; (Latin, 1st limited ed.).
* 1643. &quot;De Motu, Loco et Tempore&quot;
** First edition (1973) with the title: &quot;Thomas White&#x27;s De Mundo Examined.&quot;
* 1644. Part of the &quot;Praefatio to Mersenni Ballistica&quot;. In &quot;F. Marini Mersenni minimi Cogitata physico-mathematica. In quibus tam naturae quàm artis effectus admirandi certissimis demonstrationibus explicantur&quot;.
* 1644. &quot;Opticae, liber septimus&quot; (also known as &quot;Tractatus opticus I&quot; written in 1640). In &quot;Universae geometriae mixtaeque mathematicae synopsis&quot;, edited by Marin Mersenne.
** Molesworth edition (OL V, pp. 215–248) title: &quot;Tractatus Opticus&quot;.
* 1646. &quot;A Minute or First Draught of the Optiques&quot; (Harley MS 3360)
** Molesworth published only the dedication to Cavendish and the conclusion in EW VII, pp. 467–471.
* 1646. &quot;Of Liberty and Necessity&quot; (publ. 1654)
** Published without the permission of Hobbes.
* 1647. &quot;Elementa Philosophica de Cive&quot;
** Second expanded edition with a new &quot;Preface to the Reader&quot;.
* 1650. &quot;Answer to Sir William Davenant&#x27;s Preface before Gondibert&quot;.
* 1650. &quot;Human Nature: or The Fundamental Elements of Policie&quot;.
** Includes first thirteen chapters of &quot;The Elements of Law, Natural and Politic&quot;.
** Published without Hobbes&#x27;s authorisation.
* 1650. &quot;The Elements of Law, Natural and Politic&quot; (pirated ed.)
** Repackaged to include two parts:
*** &quot;Human Nature, or the Fundamental Elements of Policie,&quot; ch. 14–19 of &quot;Elements&quot;, Part One (1640)
*** &quot;De Corpore Politico&quot;, &quot;Elements&quot;, Part Two (1640)
* 1651. &quot;Philosophicall Rudiments concerning Government and Society&quot; – English translation of &quot;De Cive&quot;
* 1651. &quot;Leviathan, or the Matter, Forme, and Power of a Commonwealth, Ecclesiasticall and Civil&quot;
* 1654. &quot;Of Libertie and Necessitie, a Treatise&quot;
* 1655. &quot;De Corpore&quot; (in Latin)
* 1656. &quot;Elements of Philosophy, The First Section, Concerning Body&quot; – anonymous English translation of &quot;De Corpore&quot;
* 1656. &quot;Six Lessons to the Professor of Mathematics&quot;
* 1656. &quot;The Questions concerning Liberty, Necessity and Chance&quot; – reprint of &quot;Of Libertie and Necessitie, a Treatise&quot;, with the addition of Bramhall&#x27;s reply and Hobbes&#x27;s reply to Bramahall&#x27;s reply.
* 1657. &quot;Stigmai, or Marks of the Absurd Geometry, Rural Language, Scottish Church Politics, and Barbarisms of John Wallis&quot;
* 1658. &quot;Elementorum Philosophiae Sectio Secunda De Homine&quot;
* 1660. &quot;Examinatio et emendatio mathematicae hodiernae qualis explicatur in libris Johannis Wallisii&quot;
* 1661. &quot;Dialogus physicus, sive De natura aeris&quot;
* 1662. &quot;Problematica Physica&quot;
** English translation titled: &quot;Seven Philosophical Problems&quot; (1682)
* 1662. &quot;Seven Philosophical Problems, and Two Propositions of Geometry&quot; – published posthumously
* 1662. &quot;Mr. Hobbes Considered in his Loyalty, Religion, Reputation, and Manners. By way of Letter to Dr. Wallis&quot; – English autobiography
* 1666. &quot;De Principis &amp; Ratiocinatione Geometrarum&quot;
* 1666. &quot;A Dialogue between a Philosopher and a Student of the Common Laws of England&quot; (publ. 1681)
* 1668. &quot;Leviathan&quot; – Latin translation
* 1668. &quot;An answer to a book published by Dr. Bramhall, late bishop of Derry; called the Catching of the leviathan. Together with an historical narration concerning heresie, and the punishment thereof&quot; (publ. 1682)
* 1671. &quot;Three Papers Presented to the Royal Society Against Dr. Wallis. Together with Considerations on Dr. Wallis his Answer to them&quot;
* 1671. &quot;Rosetum Geometricum, sive Propositiones Aliquot Frustra antehac tentatae. Cum Censura brevi Doctrinae Wallisianae de Motu&quot;
* 1672. &quot;Lux Mathematica. Excussa Collisionibus Johannis Wallisii&quot;
* 1673. English translation of Homer&#x27;s &quot;Iliad&quot; and &quot;Odyssey&quot;
* 1674. &quot;Principia et Problemata Aliquot Geometrica Antè Desperata, Nunc breviter Explicata &amp; Demonstrata&quot;
* 1678. &quot;Decameron Physiologicum: Or, Ten Dialogues of Natural Philosophy&quot;
* 1679. &quot;Thomae Hobbessii Malmesburiensis Vita. Authore seipso&quot; – Latin autobiography
** Translated into English in 1680

=== Posthumous works ===
* 1680. &quot;An Historical Narration concerning Heresie, And the Punishment thereof&quot;
* 1681. &quot;Behemoth, or The Long Parliament&quot;
** Written in 1668, it was unpublished at the request of the King
** First pirated edition: 1679
* 1682. &quot;Seven Philosophical Problems&quot; (English translation of &quot;Problematica Physica&quot;, 1662)
* 1682. &quot;A Garden of Geometrical Roses&quot; (English translation of &quot;Rosetum Geometricum&quot;, 1671)
* 1682. &quot;Some Principles and Problems in Geometry&quot; (English translation of &quot;Principia et Problemata&quot;, 1674)
* 1688. &quot;Historia Ecclesiastica Carmine Elegiaco Concinnata&quot;

=== Complete editions ===

==== Molesworth editions ====
Editions compiled by William Molesworth.

==== Posthumous works not included in the Molesworth editions ====
=== Translations in modern English ===
* &quot;De Corpore, Part I. Computatio Sive Logica&quot;. Edited with an Introductory Essay by L C. Hungerland and G. R. Vick. Translation and Commentary by A. Martinich. New York: Abaris Books, 1981.
* &quot;Thomas White&#x27;s De mundo Examined&quot;, translation by H. W. Jones, Bradford: Bradford University Press, 1976 (the appendixes of the Latin edition (1973) are not enclosed).

=== New critical editions of Hobbes&#x27;s works ===
* &quot;Clarendon Edition of the Works of Thomas Hobbes&quot;, Oxford: Clarendon Press (10 volumes published of 27 planned).
* &quot;Traduction des œuvres latines de Hobbes&quot;, under the direction of Yves Charles Zarka, Paris: Vrin (5 volumes published of 17 planned).

==See also==
* Joseph Butler
* 
* Hobbesian trap
* Hobbes&#x27;s moral and political philosophy
* &quot;Leviathan and the Air-Pump&quot;
* Social physics

==References==
===Citations===
===Sources===

Attribution:

==Further reading==

===General resources===
* MacDonald, Hugh &amp; Hargreaves, Mary. &quot;Thomas Hobbes, a Bibliography&quot;, London: The Bibliographical Society, 1952.
* Hinnant, Charles H. (1980). &quot;Thomas Hobbes: A Reference Guide&quot;, Boston: G. K. Hall &amp; Co.
* Garcia, Alfred (1986). &quot;Thomas Hobbes: bibliographie internationale de 1620 à 1986&quot; , Caen: Centre de Philosophie politique et juridique Université de Caen.

===Critical studies===
* Brandt, Frithiof (1928). &quot;Thomas Hobbes&#x27; Mechanical Conception of Nature&quot;, Copenhagen: Levin &amp; Munksgaard.
* Jesseph, Douglas M. (1999). &quot;Squaring the Circle. The War Between Hobbes and Wallis&quot;, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
* Leijenhorst, Cees (2002). &quot;The Mechanisation of Aristotelianism. The Late Aristotelian Setting of Thomas Hobbes&#x27; Natural Philosophy&quot;, Leiden: Brill.
* Lemetti, Juhana (2011). &quot;Historical Dictionary of Hobbes&#x27;s Philosophy&quot;, Lanham: Scarecrow Press.
* Macpherson, C. B. (1962). &quot;The Political Theory of Possessive Individualism: Hobbes to Locke&quot;, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
* Malcolm, Noel (2002). &quot;Aspects of Hobbes&quot;, New York: Oxford University Press.
* MacKay-Pritchard, Noah (2019). &quot;Origins of the State of Nature&quot;, London
* Malcolm, Noel (2007). &quot;Reason of State, Propaganda, and the Thirty Years&#x27; War: An Unknown Translation by Thomas Hobbes&quot;, New York: Oxford University Press.
* Manent, Pierre (1996). &quot;An Intellectual History of Liberalism&quot;, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
* Martinich, A. P. (2003) &quot;Thomas Hobbes&quot; in &quot;The Dictionary of Literary Biography, Volume 281: British Rhetoricians and Logicians, 1500–1660, Second Series&quot;, Detroit: Gale, pp. 130–144.
* Martinich, A. P. (1995). &quot;A Hobbes Dictionary&quot;, Cambridge: Blackwell.
* Martinich, A. P. (1997). &quot;Thomas Hobbes&quot;, New York: St. Martin&#x27;s Press.
* Martinich, A. P. (1992). &quot;The Two Gods of Leviathan: Thomas Hobbes on Religion and Politics&quot;, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
* Martinich, A. P. (1999). &quot;Hobbes: A Biography&quot;, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
* Oakeshott, Michael (1975). &quot;Hobbes on Civil Association&quot;, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
* Parkin, Jon, (2007), &quot;Taming the Leviathan: The Reception of the Political and Religious Ideas of Thomas Hobbes in England 1640–1700&quot;, [Cambridge: Cambridge University Press]
* Pettit, Philip (2008). &quot;Made with Words. Hobbes on Language, Mind, and Politics&quot;, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
* Robinson, Dave and Groves, Judy (2003). &quot;Introducing Political Philosophy&quot;, Icon Books. .
* Ross, George MacDonald (2009). &quot;Starting with Hobbes&quot;, London: Continuum.
* Shapin, Steven and Schaffer, Simon (1995). &quot;Leviathan and the Air-Pump.&quot; Princeton: Princeton University Press.
* Skinner, Quentin (1996). &quot;Reason and Rhetoric in the Philosophy of Hobbes&quot;, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
* Skinner, Quentin (2002). &quot;Visions of Politics. Vol. III: Hobbes and Civil Science&quot;, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
* Skinner, Quentin (2008). &quot;Hobbes and Republican Liberty&quot;, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
* Skinner, Quentin (2018). &quot;From Humanism to Hobbes: Studies in Rhetoric and Politics&quot;, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

* Stauffer, Devin (2018). &quot;Hobbes&#x27;s Kingdom of Light: A Study of the Foundations of Modern Political Philosophy&quot;, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
* Stomp, Gabriella (ed.) (2008). &quot;Thomas Hobbes&quot;, Aldershot: Ashgate.
* Strauss, Leo (1936). &quot;The Political Philosophy of Hobbes; Its Basis and Its Genesis&quot;, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
* Strauss, Leo (1959). &quot;On the Basis of Hobbes&#x27;s Political Philosophy&quot; in &quot;What Is Political Philosophy?&quot;, Glencoe, IL: Free Press, chap. 7.
* Tönnies, Ferdinand (1925). &quot;Hobbes. Leben und Lehre&quot;, Stuttgart: Frommann, 3rd ed.
* Tuck, Richard (1993). &quot;Philosophy and Government, 1572–1651&quot;, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
* Vélez, Fabio (2014). &quot;La palabra y la espada: a vueltas con Hobbes&quot;, Madrid: Maia.
* Vieira, Monica Brito (2009). &quot;The Elements of Representation in Hobbes&quot;, Leiden: Brill Publishers.
* Zagorin, Perez (2009). &quot;Hobbes and the Law of Nature&quot;, Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press.
==External links==

;Digital collections
* 
* 
* Hobbes Texts English translations by George Mac Donald Ross
* Contains Leviathan, lightly edited for easier reading, earlymoderntexts.com
* Clarendon Edition of the Works of Thomas Hobbes

;Physical collections

;Philosophy encyclopedia entries
* Thomas Hobbes at the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
* Hobbes&#x27;s Moral and Political Philosophy at the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
* Hobbes: Methodology at the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy
* Hobbes: Moral and Political Philosophy at the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

;Biographical information
* A Brief Life of Thomas Hobbes, 1588–1679 by John Aubrey
* A short biography of Thomas Hobbes, atheisme.free.fr
* Hobbes biography, Philosophypages.com 

;Other links
* Thomas Hobbes nominated by Steven Pinker for the BBC Radio 4 programme &quot;Great Lives&quot;.
* Richard A. Talaska (ed.), &quot;The Hardwick Library and Hobbes&#x27;s Early Intellectual Development&quot;
* Hobbes studies Online edition</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q37621" start="0" end="13" title="Thomas Hobbes" label="Thomas Hobbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="65" end="76" title="philosopher" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q193034" start="113" end="122" title="Leviathan (Hobbes book)" label="Leviathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326430" start="181" end="196" title="social contract" label="social contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q179805" start="258" end="278" title="political philosophy" label="political philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="453" end="461" title="Malmesbury#Westport_St_Mary" label="Westport"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="586" end="609" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960463" start="644" end="660" title="Cavendish family" label="Cavendish family"/>
<link wikidata="Q307" start="813" end="820" title="Galileo" label="Galileo"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="962" end="979" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="1097" end="1105" title="Absolute monarchy" label="absolute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304859" start="1106" end="1115" title="sovereign" label="sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130390" start="1292" end="1307" title="state of nature" label="state of nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q816064" start="1309" end="1343" title="Bellum omnium contra omnes" label="&amp;quot;war of all against all&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1349" end="1363" title="Natural_law#Hobbes" label="laws of nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149540" start="1413" end="1420" title="De Cive" label="De Cive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244329" start="1441" end="1451" title="De Corpore" label="De Corpore"/>
<link wikidata="Q814466" start="1536" end="1544" title="Behemoth (Hobbes book)" label="Behemoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932206" start="1628" end="1641" title="jurisprudence" label="jurisprudence"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="1643" end="1651" title="geometry" label="geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q14620" start="1653" end="1659" title="optics" label="optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="1661" end="1669" title="theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="1695" end="1701" title="ethics" label="ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q270141" start="1754" end="1762" title="polymath" label="polymath"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="1827" end="1834" title="atheism" label="atheism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2067" end="2075" title="Malmesbury#Westport St Mary" label="Westport"/>
<link wikidata="Q570153" start="2089" end="2099" title="Malmesbury" label="Malmesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q23183" start="2103" end="2112" title="Wiltshire" label="Wiltshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q625506" start="2140" end="2151" title="Preterm birth" label="prematurely"/>
<link wikidata="Q179684" start="2188" end="2218" title="Spanish Armada" label="invasion of the Spanish Armada"/>
<link wikidata="Q13414944" start="2547" end="2552" title="Vicar (Anglicanism)" label="vicar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995202" start="2561" end="2569" title="Charlton, Brinkworth" label="Charlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q356317" start="2634" end="2645" title="John Aubrey" label="John Aubrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q177826" start="2764" end="2770" title="clergy" label="clergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="2812" end="2818" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q15244281" start="3053" end="3070" title="Malmesbury school" label="Malmesbury school"/>
<link wikidata="Q423208" start="3086" end="3100" title="Independent school" label="private school"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="3161" end="3181" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q81090" start="3245" end="3258" title="Magdalen Hall" label="Magdalen Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q81090" start="3279" end="3303" title="Hertford College, Oxford" label="Hertford College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q237125" start="3325" end="3341" title="scholastic logic" label="scholastic logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="3396" end="3403" title="Puritan" label="Puritan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="3483" end="3492" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q286381" start="3505" end="3510" title="Medea (play)" label="Medea"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="3522" end="3527" title="Ancient Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496542" start="3533" end="3544" title="Latin verse" label="Latin verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="3712" end="3723" title="B.A. degree" label="B.A. degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q691283" start="3744" end="3777" title="St John&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="St John&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756020" start="3864" end="3871" title="William Cavendish, 2nd Earl of Devonshire" label="William"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756075" start="3884" end="3901" title="William Cavendish, 1st Earl of Devonshire" label="William Cavendish"/>
<link wikidata="Q165503" start="3903" end="3908" title="Baron" label="Baron"/>
<link wikidata="Q541098" start="3932" end="3950" title="Duke of Devonshire" label="Earl of Devonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101373" start="4367" end="4384" title="William Cavendish, 1st Duke of Newcastle" label="William Cavendish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411815" start="4396" end="4413" title="Duke of Newcastle" label="Duke of Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="4463" end="4472" title="English Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q180729" start="4555" end="4570" title="Prince of Wales" label="Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682302" start="4782" end="4792" title="Grand Tour" label="grand tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q41679" start="4925" end="4946" title="scholastic philosophy" label="scholastic philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q737310" start="5021" end="5039" title="Fulgenzio Micanzio" label="Fulgenzio Micanzio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349158" start="5057" end="5068" title="Paolo Sarpi" label="Paolo Sarpi"/>
<link wikidata="Q41683" start="5257" end="5267" title="Thucydides" label="Thucydides"/>
<link wikidata="Q639493" start="5280" end="5312" title="History of the Peloponnesian War" label="History of the Peloponnesian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q193857" start="5967" end="5977" title="Ben Jonson" label="Ben Jonson"/>
<link wikidata="Q37388" start="6000" end="6013" title="Francis Bacon (philosopher)" label="Francis Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q499134" start="6021" end="6031" title="amanuensis" label="amanuensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3944819" start="6066" end="6072" title="Essays (Francis Bacon)" label="Essays"/>
<link wikidata="Q217519" start="6234" end="6240" title="Bubonic plague" label="plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109410" start="6270" end="6279" title="Christian Cavendish, Countess of Devonshire" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7526962" start="6374" end="6389" title="Sir Gervase Clifton, 2nd Baronet" label="Gervase Clifton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7526961" start="6402" end="6434" title="Sir Gervase Clifton, 1st Baronet" label="Sir Gervase Clifton, 1st Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084968" start="6589" end="6630" title="William Cavendish, 3rd Earl of Devonshire" label="William Cavendish, 3rd Earl of Devonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q307" start="6831" end="6846" title="Galileo Galilei" label="Galileo Galilei"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="6850" end="6858" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517983" start="6896" end="6908" title="Galileo affair" label="condemnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q188663" start="7000" end="7014" title="Marin Mersenne" label="Marin Mersenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q384515" start="7359" end="7367" title="treatise" label="treatise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153299" start="8306" end="8322" title="Short Parliament" label="Short Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153299" start="8674" end="8690" title="Short Parliament" label="Short Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q193034" start="8941" end="8950" title="Leviathan (Hobbes book)" label="Leviathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="9000" end="9017" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326430" start="9043" end="9056" title="contractarian" label="contractarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q15622229" start="9297" end="9308" title="Patrimonialism" label="patrimonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162861" start="9353" end="9376" title="consent of the governed" label="consent of the governed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377419" start="9508" end="9530" title="engagement controversy" label="engagement controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7145346" start="9576" end="9591" title="Patriarchalism" label="Patriarchalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q707787" start="9601" end="9618" title="Robert Filmer" label="Sir Robert Filmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q535158" start="9670" end="9685" title="Long Parliament" label="Long Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q605790" start="9918" end="9949" title="Meditations on First Philosophy" label="Meditations on First Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="9959" end="9973" title="René Descartes" label="René Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149540" start="10301" end="10308" title="De Cive" label="De Cive"/>
<link wikidata="Q382016" start="10892" end="10910" title="Gilles de Roberval" label="Gilles de Roberval"/>
<link wikidata="Q471794" start="10957" end="10966" title="John Pell (mathematician)" label="John Pell"/>
<link wikidata="Q729315" start="10971" end="10984" title="Christen Sørensen Longomontanus" label="Longomontanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q193394" start="11005" end="11024" title="squaring the circle" label="squaring the circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="11066" end="11083" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284765" start="11112" end="11120" title="Cavalier" label="royalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3471230" start="11367" end="11385" title="Samuel de Sorbiere" label="Samuel de Sorbiere"/>
<link wikidata="Q602323" start="11398" end="11412" title="House of Elzevir" label="Elsevier press"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="11416" end="11425" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="11564" end="11588" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles, Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q785" start="11617" end="11623" title="Jersey" label="Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q192677" start="11930" end="11939" title="leviathan" label="leviathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q506002" start="13429" end="13436" title="crozier" label="crozier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="13752" end="13760" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q795240" start="13766" end="13781" title="French Catholic" label="French Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993731" start="13923" end="13939" title="English Council of State" label="Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445974" start="13988" end="13999" title="Fetter Lane" label="Fetter Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q846848" start="14571" end="14586" title="Restoration (England)" label="the Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="14908" end="14924" title="British House of Commons" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="15332" end="15339" title="heretic" label="heretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4445297" start="15715" end="15739" title="Court of High Commission" label="High Court of Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q207937" start="15879" end="15891" title="Nicene Creed" label="Nicene Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697139" start="16695" end="16736" title="William Cavendish, 1st Duke of Devonshire" label="William Cavendish, 1st Duke of Devonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068289" start="16759" end="16775" title="Chatsworth House" label="Chatsworth House"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="17077" end="17084" title="Odyssey" label="Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="17187" end="17192" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6066379" start="17279" end="17295" title="bladder disorder" label="bladder disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="17308" end="17324" title="paralytic stroke" label="paralytic stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526406" start="17377" end="17390" title="Hardwick Hall" label="Hardwick Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q17530701" start="17565" end="17613" title="St John the Baptist&amp;#x27;s Church, Ault Hucknall" label="St John the Baptist&amp;#x27;s Church, Ault Hucknall"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="18273" end="18282" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266946" start="18417" end="18423" title="Thesis" label="theses"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="18427" end="18436" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q148837" start="18513" end="18518" title="polis" label="polis"/>
<link wikidata="Q42138" start="18590" end="18597" title="Citizenship" label="citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q211606" start="18780" end="18796" title="social structure" label="social structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275" start="18909" end="18915" title="State (polity)" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103443" start="19144" end="19155" title="Mechanism (philosophy)" label="mechanistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130390" start="19299" end="19314" title="state of nature" label="state of nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326430" start="19854" end="19869" title="social contract theory" label="social contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q181865" start="19886" end="19899" title="civil society" label="civil society"/>
<link wikidata="Q174834" start="19952" end="19961" title="authority" label="authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="20583" end="20603" title="separation of powers" label="separation of powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q707722" start="20845" end="20859" title="Cuius regio, eius religio" label="ecclesiastical"/>
<link wikidata="Q429749" start="21029" end="21042" title="John Bramhall" label="John Bramhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q13446873" start="21063" end="21071" title="Arminianism" label="Arminian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9476" start="21900" end="21909" title="free will" label="free will"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244329" start="22308" end="22318" title="De Corpore" label="De Corpore"/>
<link wikidata="Q193394" start="22419" end="22441" title="squaring of the circle" label="squaring of the circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q27406" start="22489" end="22497" title="polemics" label="polemics"/>
<link wikidata="Q208359" start="22510" end="22521" title="John Wallis" label="John Wallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336397" start="23792" end="23807" title="J. G. A. Pocock" label="J. G. A. Pocock"/>
<link wikidata="Q866338" start="24066" end="24083" title="divine providence" label="divine providence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="24368" end="24387" title="early modern period" label="early modern period"/>
<link wikidata="Q174929" start="24927" end="24937" title="Tertullian" label="Tertullian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="24945" end="24955" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q192906" start="24982" end="24992" title="revelation" label="revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778657" start="25434" end="25443" title="Venetian Interdict" label="Interdict"/>
<link wikidata="Q132711" start="25447" end="25458" title="Pope Paul V" label="Pope Paul V"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="25467" end="25473" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q286381" start="25994" end="25999" title="Medea (play)" label="Medea"/>
<link wikidata="Q97358454" start="26307" end="26332" title="Seven Wonders of the Peak" label="Seven Wonders of the Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q41683" start="26428" end="26438" title="Thucydides" label="Thucydides"/>
<link wikidata="Q639493" start="26446" end="26478" title="History of the Peloponnesian War" label="History of the Peloponnesian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348791" start="26616" end="26628" title="Robert Payne (natural philosopher)" label="Robert Payne"/>
<link wikidata="Q465807" start="26978" end="26993" title="Quentin Skinner" label="Quentin Skinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149540" start="27435" end="27481" title="De Cive" label="Elementorum Philosophiae Sectio Tertia de Cive"/>
<link wikidata="Q188663" start="28070" end="28084" title="Marin Mersenne" label="Marin Mersenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110454" start="28640" end="28649" title="Gondibert" label="Gondibert"/>
<link wikidata="Q193034" start="29319" end="29406" title="Leviathan (Hobbes book)" label="Leviathan, or the Matter, Forme, and Power of a Commonwealth, Ecclesiasticall and Civil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244329" start="29486" end="29496" title="De Corpore" label="De Corpore"/>
<link wikidata="Q193034" start="30892" end="30901" title="Leviathan (Hobbes book)" label="Leviathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="31549" end="31554" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="31568" end="31573" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="31590" end="31597" title="Odyssey" label="Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q814466" start="32072" end="32104" title="Behemoth (Hobbes book)" label="Behemoth, or The Long Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q218322" start="33568" end="33581" title="Joseph Butler" label="Joseph Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q10263552" start="33587" end="33601" title="Hobbesian trap" label="Hobbesian trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q60456878" start="33604" end="33648" title="Hobbes&amp;#x27;s moral and political philosophy" label="Hobbes&amp;#x27;s moral and political philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6535599" start="33657" end="33683" title="Leviathan and the Air-Pump" label="Leviathan and the Air-Pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306124" start="33692" end="33706" title="Social physics" label="Social physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q711342" start="34785" end="34802" title="C. B. Macpherson" label="Macpherson, C. B."/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="34898" end="34921" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290092" start="34925" end="34938" title="Noel Malcolm" label="Malcolm, Noel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3386096" start="35272" end="35286" title="Pierre Manent" label="Manent, Pierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734711" start="35387" end="35403" title="A.P. Martinich" label="Martinich, A. P."/>
<link wikidata="Q2077283" start="35573" end="35577" title="Gale (publisher)" label="Gale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445044" start="35738" end="35761" title="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Press" label="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="35880" end="35906" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q959541" start="36009" end="36027" title="Michael Oakeshott" label="Oakeshott, Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867117" start="36085" end="36100" title="Basil Blackwell" label="Basil Blackwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q967777" start="36612" end="36626" title="Steven Shapin" label="Shapin, Steven"/>
<link wikidata="Q547039" start="36631" end="36646" title="Simon Schaffer" label="Schaffer, Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6535599" start="36661" end="36687" title="Leviathan and the Air-Pump" label="Leviathan and the Air-Pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708210" start="36706" end="36732" title="Princeton University Press" label="Princeton University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q465807" start="36736" end="36752" title="Quentin Skinner" label="Skinner, Quentin"/>
<link wikidata="Q120861832" start="37244" end="37259" title="Devin Stauffer" label="Stauffer, Devin"/>
<link wikidata="Q77144" start="37495" end="37507" title="Leo Strauss" label="Strauss, Leo"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="37599" end="37614" title="Clarendon Press" label="Clarendon Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499961" start="37761" end="37771" title="Free Press (publisher)" label="Free Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q21163" start="37784" end="37802" title="Ferdinand Tönnies" label="Tönnies, Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="" start="37859" end="37867" title=":de:Frommann-Holzboog Verlag" label="Frommann"/>
<link wikidata="Q917031" start="38178" end="38194" title="Brill Publishers" label="Brill Publishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167918" start="38198" end="38212" title="Perez Zagorin" label="Zagorin, Perez"/>
<link wikidata="Q824553" start="38622" end="38657" title="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy" label="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q259513" start="38777" end="38812" title="Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" label="Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q212730" start="39121" end="39134" title="Steven Pinker" label="Steven Pinker"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="39143" end="39154" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599518" start="39171" end="39182" title="Great Lives" label="Great Lives"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29824" wikidata="Q204520" url="?curid=29824" title="Terraforming">
<text>Terraforming or terraformation (&quot;Earth-shaping&quot;) is the hypothetical process of deliberately modifying the atmosphere, temperature, surface topography or ecology of a planet, moon, or other body to be similar to the environment of Earth to make it habitable for humans to live on.

The concept of terraforming developed from both science fiction and actual science. Carl Sagan, an astronomer, proposed the planetary engineering of Venus in 1961, which is considered one of the first accounts of the concept. The term was coined by Jack Williamson in a science-fiction short story (&quot;Collision Orbit&quot;) published in 1942 in &quot;Astounding Science Fiction&quot;.

Even if the environment of a planet could be altered deliberately, the feasibility of creating an unconstrained planetary environment that mimics Earth on another planet has yet to be verified. While Venus, Earth, Mars, and even the Moon have been studied in relation to the subject, Mars is usually considered to be the most likely candidate for terraforming. Much study has been done concerning the possibility of heating the planet and altering its atmosphere, and NASA has even hosted debates on the subject. Several potential methods for the terraforming of Mars may be within humanity&#x27;s technological capabilities, but according to Martin Beech, the economic attitude of preferring short-term profits over long-term investments will not support a terraforming project.

The long timescales and practicality of terraforming are also the subject of debate. As the subject has gained traction, research has expanded to other possibilities including biological terraforming, para-terraforming, and modifying humans to better suit the environments of planets and moons. Despite this, questions still remain in areas relating to the ethics, logistics, economics, politics, and methodology of altering the environment of an extraterrestrial world, presenting issues to the implementation of the concept.

==History of scholarly study==
The astronomer Carl Sagan proposed the planetary engineering of Venus in an article published in the journal &quot;Science&quot; in 1961. Sagan imagined seeding the atmosphere of Venus with algae, which would convert water, nitrogen and carbon dioxide into organic compounds. As this process removed carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, the greenhouse effect would be reduced until surface temperatures dropped to &quot;comfortable&quot; levels. The resulting plant matter, Sagan proposed, would be pyrolyzed by the high surface temperatures of Venus, and thus be sequestered in the form of &quot;graphite or some involatile form of carbon&quot; on the planet&#x27;s surface. However, later discoveries about the conditions on Venus made this particular approach impossible. One problem is that the clouds of Venus are composed of a highly concentrated sulfuric acid solution. Even if atmospheric algae could thrive in the hostile environment of Venus&#x27;s upper atmosphere, an even more insurmountable problem is that its atmosphere is simply far too thick: the high atmospheric pressure would result in a &quot;atmosphere of nearly pure molecular oxygen&quot; at high pressure. This volatile combination could not be sustained through time. Any carbon that had been reduced by photosynthesis would be quickly oxidized in this atmosphere through combustion, &quot;short-circuiting&quot; the terraforming process.

Sagan also visualized making Mars habitable for human life in an article published in the journal &quot;Icarus&quot;, &quot;Planetary Engineering on Mars&quot; (1973). Three years later, NASA addressed the issue of planetary engineering officially in a study, but used the term &quot;planetary ecosynthesis&quot; instead. The study concluded that it was possible for Mars to support life and be made into a habitable planet. The first conference session on terraforming, then referred to as &quot;Planetary Modeling&quot;, was organized that same year.

In March 1979, NASA engineer and author James Oberg organized the First Terraforming Colloquium, a special session at the Lunar and Planetary Science Conference in Houston. Oberg popularized the terraforming concepts discussed at the colloquium to the general public in his book &quot;New Earths&quot; (1981). Not until 1982 was the word &quot;terraforming&quot; used in the title of a published journal article. Planetologist Christopher McKay wrote &quot;Terraforming Mars&quot;, a paper for the &quot;Journal of the British Interplanetary Society&quot;. The paper discussed the prospects of a self-regulating Martian biosphere, and the word &quot;terraforming&quot; has since become the preferred term.

In 1984, James Lovelock and Michael Allaby published &quot;The Greening of Mars&quot;. Lovelock&#x27;s book was one of the first to describe a novel method of warming Mars, where chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) are added to the atmosphere to produce a strong greenhouse effect.

Motivated by Lovelock&#x27;s book, biophysicist Robert Haynes worked behind the scenes to promote terraforming, and contributed the neologism Ecopoiesis, forming the word from the Greek , &quot;oikos&quot;, &quot;house&quot;, and , &quot;poiesis&quot;, &quot;production&quot;. Ecopoiesis refers to the &quot;origin of an ecosystem&quot;. In the context of space exploration, Haynes describes ecopoiesis as the &quot;fabrication of a sustainable ecosystem on a currently lifeless, sterile planet&quot;. Fogg defines ecopoiesis as a type of planetary engineering and is one of the first stages of terraformation. This primary stage of ecosystem creation is usually restricted to the initial seeding of microbial life. A 2019 opinion piece by Lopez, Peixoto and Rosado has reintroduced microbiology as a necessary component of any possible colonization strategy based on the principles of microbial symbiosis and their beneficial ecosystem services. As conditions approach that of Earth, plant life could be brought in, and this will accelerate the production of oxygen, theoretically making the planet eventually able to support animal life.

===Aspects and definitions===
In 1985, Martyn Fogg started publishing several articles on terraforming. He also served as editor for a full issue on terraforming for the &quot;Journal of the British Interplanetary Society&quot; in 1992. In his book &quot;Terraforming: Engineering Planetary Environments&quot; (1995), Fogg proposed the following definitions for different aspects related to terraforming:

* Planetary engineering: the application of technology for the purpose of influencing the global properties of a planet.
* Geoengineering: planetary engineering applied specifically to Earth. It includes only those macro engineering concepts that deal with the alteration of some global parameter, such as the greenhouse effect, atmospheric composition, insolation or impact flux.
* Terraforming: a process of planetary engineering, specifically directed at enhancing the capacity of an extraterrestrial planetary environment to support life as we know it. The ultimate achievement in terraforming would be to create an open planetary ecosystem emulating all the functions of the biosphere of Earth, one that would be fully habitable for human beings.

Fogg also devised definitions for candidate planets of varying degrees of human compatibility:

* Habitable Planet (HP): A world with an environment sufficiently similar to Earth&#x27;s as to allow comfortable and free human habitation.
* Biocompatible Planet (BP): A planet possessing the necessary physical parameters for life to flourish on its surface. If initially lifeless, then such a world could host a biosphere of considerable complexity without the need for terraforming.
* Easily Terraformable Planet (ETP): A planet that might be rendered biocompatible, or possibly habitable, and maintained so by modest planetary engineering techniques and with the limited resources of a starship or robot precursor mission.

Fogg suggests that Mars was a biologically compatible planet in its youth, but is not now in any of these three categories, because it can only be terraformed with greater difficulty.

== Habitability requirements ==

Planetary habitability, broadly defined as the capacity for an astronomical body to sustain life, requires that various geophysical, geochemical, and astrophysical criteria must be met before the surface of such a body is considered habitable. Modifying a planetary surface such that it is able to sustain life, particularly for humans, is generally the end-goal of the hypothetical process of terraforming. Of particular interest in the context of terraforming is the set of factors that have sustained complex, multicellular animals in addition to simpler organisms on Earth. Research and theory in this regard is a component of planetary science and the emerging discipline of astrobiology.

Classifications of the criteria of habitability can be varied, but it is generally agreed upon that the presence of water, non-extreme temperatures, and an energy source put broad constraints on habitability. Other requirements for habitability have been defined as the presence of raw materials, a solvent, and clement conditions, or elemental requirements (such as carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, phosphorus and sulfur), and reasonable physiochemical conditions. When applied to organisms present on the earth, including humans, these constraints can substantially narrow.

In its astrobiology roadmap, NASA has defined the principal habitability criteria as &quot;extended regions of liquid water, conditions favorable for the assembly of complex organic molecules, and energy sources to sustain metabolism.&quot;

=== Temperature ===
The general temperature range for all life on Earth is -20 °C to 122 °C, set primarily by the ability of water (possibly saline, or under high pressure in the ocean bottom) to be available in liquid form. This may constitute a bounding range for the development of life on other planets, in the context of terraforming. For Earth, the temperature is set by the equilibrium of incident solar radiation absorbed and outgoing infrared radiation, including the effect of greenhouse gasses in modifying the planetary equilibrium temperature; terraforming concepts may include modifying temperature by methods including solar reflectors to increase or decrease the amount of solar illumination, and hence modify temperature.

=== Water ===
All known life requires water; thus the capacity for planetary body to sustain water is a critical aspect of habitability. The &quot;Habitable Zone&quot; of a solar system is generally defined as the region in which stable surface liquid water may be present on a planetary body. The boundaries of the Habitable Zone were originally defined by water loss by photolysis and hydrogen escape, setting a limit on how close a planet may be to its orbited star, and the prevalence of CO2 clouds that would increase albedo, setting an outer boundary on stable liquid water. These constraints are applicable in particular to Earth-like planets, and would not as easily apply to moons like Europa and Enceladus with ice-covered oceans, where the energy source to keep the water liquid is from tidal heating, rather than solar energy.

=== Energy ===
On the most fundamental level, the only absolute requirement of life may be thermodynamic disequilibrium, or the presence of Gibbs Free Energy. It has been argued that habitability can be conceived of as a balance between life&#x27;s demand for energy and the capacity for the environment to provide such energy. For humans, energy comes in the form of sugars, fats, and proteins provided by consuming plants and animals, necessitating in turn that a habitable planet for humans can sustain such organisms.

Much of earth&#x27;s biomass (~60%) relies on photosynthesis for an energy source, while a further ~40% is chemotropic. For the development of life on other planetary bodies, chemical energy may have been critical, while for sustaining life on another planetary body in our solar system, sufficiently high solar energy may also be necessary for phototrophic organisms.

=== Elements ===
On Earth, life generally requires six elements in high abundance: carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, phosphorus, and sulfur. These elements are considered &quot;essential&quot; for all known life and plentiful within biological systems. Additional elements crucial to life include the cations Mg2+, Ca2+, K+ and Na+ and the anion Cl−. Many of these elements may undergo biologically facilitated oxidation or reduction to produce usable metabolic energy.

==Preliminary stages==

Terraforming a planet would involve making it fit the habitability requirements listed in the previous section. For example, a planet may be too cold for liquid water to exist on its surface. Its temperature could be raised by adding greenhouse gases to the atmosphere, using orbiting mirrors to reflect more sunlight onto the planet, or lowering the albedo of the planet. Conversely, a planet too hot for liquid water could be cooled down by removing greenhouse gases (if these are present), placing a sunshade in the L1 point to reduce sunlight reaching the planet, or increasing the albedo.
Atmospheric pressure is another issue: various celestial bodies including Mars, Mercury and most moons have lower pressure than Earth. At pressures below the triple point of water (611.7 Pa), water cannot be liquid at any temperature. Human survival requires a still-higher pressure of at least 6.3 kPa, the Armstrong limit; below this pressure, exposed body fluids boil at body temperature. Furthermore, a thick atmosphere protects the surface from cosmic rays. A thin atmosphere could be thickened using gases produced locally (e.g. the Moon could be given an atmosphere of oxygen by reducing lunar rock) or gases could be imported from elsewhere.

Once conditions become more suitable for life of the introduced species, the importation of microbial life could begin. As conditions approach that of Earth, plant life could also be brought in. This would accelerate the production of oxygen, which theoretically would make the planet eventually able to support animal life.

==Prospective targets==

===Mars===


In many respects, Mars is the most Earth-like planet in the Solar System. It is thought that Mars once had a more Earth-like environment early in its history, with a thicker atmosphere and abundant water that was lost over the course of hundreds of millions of years.

The exact mechanism of this loss is still unclear, though three mechanisms, in particular, seem likely: First, whenever surface water is present, carbon dioxide () reacts with rocks to form carbonates, thus drawing atmosphere off and binding it to the planetary surface. On Earth, this process is counteracted when plate tectonics works to cause volcanic eruptions that vent carbon dioxide back to the atmosphere. On Mars, the lack of such tectonic activity worked to prevent the recycling of gases locked up in sediments.

Second, the lack of a magnetosphere around Mars may have allowed the solar wind to gradually erode the atmosphere. Convection within the core of Mars, which is made mostly of iron, originally generated a magnetic field. However the dynamo ceased to function long ago, and the magnetic field of Mars has largely disappeared, probably due to &quot;loss of core heat, solidification of most of the core, and/or changes in the mantle convection regime.&quot; Results from the NASA MAVEN mission show that the atmosphere is removed primarily due to Coronal Mass Ejection events, where outbursts of high-velocity protons from the Sun impact the atmosphere. Mars does still retain a limited magnetosphere that covers approximately 40% of its surface. Rather than uniformly covering and protecting the atmosphere from solar wind, however, the magnetic field takes the form of a collection of smaller, umbrella-shaped fields, mainly clustered together around the planet&#x27;s southern hemisphere.

Finally, between approximately 4.1 and 3.8 billion years ago, asteroid impacts during the Late Heavy Bombardment caused significant changes to the surface environment of objects in the Solar System. The low gravity of Mars suggests that these impacts could have ejected much of the Martian atmosphere into deep space.

Terraforming Mars would entail two major interlaced changes: building the atmosphere and heating it. A thicker atmosphere of greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide would trap incoming solar radiation. Because the raised temperature would add greenhouse gases to the atmosphere, the two processes would augment each other. Carbon dioxide alone would not suffice to sustain a temperature above the freezing point of water, so a mixture of specialized greenhouse molecules might be manufactured.

===Venus===

Terraforming Venus requires two major changes: removing most of the planet&#x27;s dense carbon dioxide atmosphere, and reducing the planet&#x27;s surface temperature. These goals are closely interrelated because Venus&#x27;s extreme temperature may result from the greenhouse effect caused by its dense atmosphere. 
Venus&#x27;s atmosphere currently contains little oxygen, so an additional step would be to inject breathable O2 into the atmosphere. An early proposal for such a process comes from Carl Sagan, who suggested the injection of floating, photosynthetic bacteria into the Venusian atmosphere to reduce CO2 to organic form, and increase the atmospheric concentration of O2 in the atmosphere. This concept, however, was based in a flawed 1960s understanding of Venus&#x27;s atmosphere as much lower pressure; in reality, the Venusian atmospheric pressure (93 bars) is far higher than early estimates. Sagan&#x27;s idea is therefore untenable, as he later conceded.

An additional step noted by Martin Beech includes the injection of water and/or hydrogen into the planetary atmosphere; this step follows after sequestering CO2 and reducing the mass of the atmosphere. In order to combine hydrogen with O2 produced by other means, an estimated 4*1019 kg of hydrogen is necessary; this may need to be mined from another source, such as Uranus or Neptune.

=== Moon ===
Although the gravity on Earth&#x27;s Moon is too low to hold an atmosphere for geological spans of time, if given one, it would retain it for spans of time that are long compared to human lifespans. Landis and others have thus proposed that it could be feasible to terraform the moon, although not all agree with that proposal. Landis estimates that a 1 PSI atmosphere of pure oxygen on the Moon would require on the order of two hundred trillion tons of oxygen, and suggests it could be produced by reducing the oxygen from an amount of lunar rock equivalent to a cube about fifty kilometers on an edge. Alternatively, he suggests that the water content of &quot;fifty to a hundred comets&quot; the size of Halley&#x27;s comet would do the job, &quot;assuming that the water doesn&#x27;t splash away when the comets hit the moon.&quot; Likewise, Benford calculates that terraforming the moon would require &quot;about 100 comets the size of Halley&#x27;s.&quot;

=== Mercury ===

Mercury would be difficult to terraform. Beech states &quot;There seems little prospect of terraforming Mercury such that any animals or plants might exist there,&quot; and suggests that its primary use in a terraforming project would be as a mining source for minerals. Nevertheless, terraforming has been considered. Mercury&#x27;s magnetic field is only 1.1% that of Earth&#x27;s, and, being closer to the Sun, any atmosphere would be stripped rapidly unless it can be protected from the solar wind. It is conjectured that Mercury&#x27;s magnetic field should be much stronger, up to 30% of Earth&#x27;s, if it weren&#x27;t being suppressed by certain solar wind feedback effects. If some means of shielding Mercury from solar wind by placing an artificial magnetic shield at Mercury-Sun L1 (similar to the proposal for Mars), then Mercury&#x27;s magnetic field could possibly grow in intensity to a point where Mercury&#x27;s magnetic field could be self-sustaining provided the field wasn&#x27;t made to &quot;stall&quot; by another solar event.

Despite being much smaller than Mars, Mercury has an escape velocity only slightly less than that of Mars due to its higher density and could, if a magnetosphere prevents atmospheric stripping, hold a nitrogen/oxygen atmosphere for millions of years.

To provide one atmosphere of pressure, roughly 1.1×1018 kilograms of gas would be required; or a somewhat lower amount if lower pressure is acceptable. Water could be delivered from the outer solar system. Once this water has been delivered, it would split the water into its constituent oxygen and hydrogen molecules, possibly using a photo-catalytic dust, with the hydrogen rapidly being lost to space. At an oxygen pressure of 0.2-0.3 bar, the atmosphere would be breathable and nitrogen may be added as required to allow for plant growth in the presence of nitrates.

Temperature management would be required, due to the equilibrium average temperature of ~159 Celsius. However, millions of square kilometers at the poles have an average temperature of 0-50 Celsius, or 32-122 Fahrenheit (&quot;i.e.,&quot; an area the size of Mexico at each pole with habitable temperatures). The total habitable area could be even larger if the planetary albedo were increased from 0.12 to ~0.6, potentially increasing the habitable area. Roy proposes that the temperature could be further managed by decreasing the solar flux at Mercury to near the terrestrial value by solar sails reflecting sunlight. He calculates that 16 to 17 million sails, each with an area of one square kilometer would be needed.

===Earth===

It has been recently proposed that due to the effects of climate change, an interventionist program might be designed to return Earth to pre-industrial climate parameters. In order to achieve this, multiple approaches have been proposed, such as the management of solar radiation, the sequestration of carbon dioxide, and the design and release of climate altering genetically engineered organisms. These are typically referred to as geoengineering or climate engineering, rather than terraforming.

===Other bodies in the Solar System===
Other possible candidates for terraforming (possibly only partial or paraterraforming) include large moons of Jupiter or Saturn (Europa, Ganymede, Callisto, Enceladus, Titan), and the dwarf planet Ceres.

The moons are covered in ice, so heating them would make some of this ice sublimate into an atmosphere of water vapour, ammonia and other gases. For Jupiter&#x27;s moons, the intense radiation around Jupiter would cause radiolysis of water vapour, splitting it into hydrogen and oxygen. The former would be rapidly lost to space, leaving behind the oxygen (this already occurs on the moons to a minor extent, giving them thin atmospheres of oxygen). For Saturn&#x27;s moons, the water vapour could be split by using orbital mirrors to focus sunlight, causing photolysis. The ammonia could be converted to nitrogen by introducing bacteria such as &quot;Nitrosomonas&quot;, &quot;Pseudomonas&quot; and &quot;Clostridium&quot;, resulting in an Earth-like nitrogen-oxygen atmosphere. This atmosphere would protect the surface from Jupiter&#x27;s radiation, but it would also be possible to clear said radiation using orbiting tethers or radio waves.

Challenges to terraforming the moons include their high amounts of ice and their low gravity. If all of the ice were fully melted, it would result in deep moon-spanning oceans, meaning any settlements would have to be floating (unless some of the ice was allowed to remain, to serve as land). Low gravity would cause atmospheric escape over time and may cause problems for human health. However, atmospheric escape would take place over spans of time that are long compared to human lifespans, as with the Moon.

One proposal for terraforming Ceres would involve heating it (using orbital mirrors, detonating thermonuclear devices or colliding small asteroids with Ceres), creating an atmosphere and deep ocean. However, this appears to be based on a misconception that Ceres&#x27; surface is icy in a similar way to the gas giant moons. In reality, Ceres&#x27; surface is &quot;a layer of mixed ice, silicates and light strong phases best matched by hydrated salts and clathrates&quot;. It is unclear what the result of heating this up would be.

==Other possibilities==

===Biological terraforming===
Many proposals for planetary engineering involve the use of genetically engineered bacteria.

As synthetic biology matures over the coming decades it may become possible to build designer organisms from scratch that directly manufacture desired products efficiently. Lisa Nip, Ph.D. candidate at the MIT Media Lab&#x27;s Molecular Machines group, said that by synthetic biology, scientists could genetically engineer humans, plants and bacteria to create Earth-like conditions on another planet.

Gary King, microbiologist at Louisiana State University studying the most extreme organisms on Earth, notes that &quot;synthetic biology has given us a remarkable toolkit that can be used to manufacture new kinds of organisms specially suited for the systems we want to plan for&quot; and outlines the prospects for terraforming, saying &quot;we&#x27;ll want to investigate our chosen microbes, find the genes that code for the survival and terraforming properties that we want (like radiation and drought resistance), and then use that knowledge to genetically engineer specifically Martian-designed microbes&quot;. He sees the project&#x27;s biggest bottleneck in the ability to genetically tweak and tailor the right microbes, estimating that this hurdle could take &quot;a decade or more&quot; to be solved. He also notes that it would be best to develop &quot;not a single kind of microbe but a suite of several that work together&quot;.

DARPA is researching the use of photosynthesizing plants, bacteria, and algae grown directly on the Mars surface that could warm up and thicken its atmosphere. In 2015 the agency and some of its research partners created a software called DTA GView − a &#x27;Google Maps of genomes&#x27;, in which genomes of several organisms can be pulled up on the program to immediately show a list of known genes and where they are located in the genome. According to Alicia Jackson, deputy director of DARPA&#x27;s Biological Technologies Office, they have developed a &quot;technological toolkit to transform not just hostile places here on Earth, but to go into space not just to visit, but to stay&quot;.

===Paraterraforming===

Also known as the &quot;world house&quot; concept, para-terraforming involves the construction of a habitable enclosure on a planet that encompasses most of the planet&#x27;s usable area. The enclosure would consist of a transparent roof held one or more kilometers above the surface, pressurized with a breathable atmosphere, and anchored with tension towers and cables at regular intervals. The world house concept is similar to the concept of a domed habitat, but one which covers all (or most) of the planet.

Potential targets for paraterraforming include Mercury, the Moon, Ceres and the gas giant moons.

===Adapting humans===
It has also been suggested that instead of or in addition to terraforming a hostile environment humans might adapt to these places by the use of genetic engineering, biotechnology and cybernetic enhancements. This is known as pantropy.
==Issues==

===Ethical issues===
There is a philosophical debate within biology and ecology as to whether terraforming other worlds is an ethical endeavor. From the point of view of a cosmocentric ethic, this involves balancing the need for the preservation of human life against the intrinsic value of existing planetary ecologies. Lucianne Walkowicz has even called terraforming a &quot;planetary-scale strip mining operation&quot;.

On the pro-terraforming side of the argument, there are those like Robert Zubrin, Martyn J. Fogg, Richard L. S. Taylor, and the late Carl Sagan who believe that it is humanity&#x27;s moral obligation to make other worlds suitable for human life, as a continuation of the history of life-transforming the environments around it on Earth. They also point out that Earth would eventually be destroyed if nature takes its course, so that humanity faces a very long-term choice between terraforming other worlds or allowing all terrestrial life to become extinct. Terraforming totally barren planets, it is asserted, is not morally wrong as it does not affect any other life.

The opposing argument posits that terraforming would be an unethical interference in nature, and that given humanity&#x27;s past treatment of Earth, other planets may be better off without human interference. Still others strike a middle ground, such as Christopher McKay, who argues that terraforming is ethically sound only once we have completely assured that an alien planet does not harbor life of its own; but that if it does, we should not try to reshape it to our own use, but we should engineer its environment to artificially nurture the alien life and help it thrive and co-evolve, or even co-exist with humans. Even this would be seen as a type of terraforming to the strictest of ecocentrists, who would say that all life has the right, in its home biosphere, to evolve without outside interference.

===Economic issues===
The initial cost of such projects as planetary terraforming would be massive, and the infrastructure of such an enterprise would have to be built from scratch. Such technology has not yet been developed, let alone financially feasible at the moment. John Hickman has pointed out that almost none of the current schemes for terraforming incorporate economic strategies, and most of their models and expectations seem highly optimistic.

==In popular culture==

Terraforming is a common concept in science fiction, ranging from television, movies and novels to video games.

A related concept from science fiction is xenoforming – a process in which aliens change the Earth or other planets to suit their own needs, already suggested in the classic &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; (1898) of H.G. Wells.

==See also==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


== Notes ==
== References ==
* 
* Dalrymple, G. Brent (2004). &quot;Ancient Earth, ancient skies: the age of Earth and its cosmic surroundings&quot;. Stanford University Press. 
* Faure, Gunter &amp; Mensing, Teresa M. (2007). &quot;Introduction to planetary science: the geological perspective&quot;. Springer. .
* 
* Fogg, Martyn J. (2000). The Ethical Dimensions of Space Settlement (PDF format). &quot;Space Policy&quot;, 16, 205–211. Also presented (1999) at the 50th International Astronautical Congress, Amsterdam (IAA-99-IAA.7.1.07).
* Forget, François; Costard, François &amp; Lognonné, Philippe (2007). &quot;Planet Mars: Story of Another World&quot;. Springer. .
* Kargel, Jeffrey Stuart (2004). &quot;Mars: a warmer, wetter planet&quot;. Springer. .
* 
* McKay Christopher P. &amp; Haynes, Robert H. (1997). &quot;Implanting Life on Mars as a Long Term Goal for Mars Exploration&quot;, in &quot;The Case for Mars IV: Considerations for Sending Humans&quot;, ed. Thomas R. Meyer (San Diego, California: American Astronautical Society/Univelt), Pp. 209–15.
* Read, Peter L.; Lewis, Stephen R. (2004). &quot;The Martian climate revisited: atmosphere and environment of a desert planet&quot;. Springer. .
* Sagan, Carl &amp; Druyan, Ann (1997). &quot;Pale Blue Dot: A Vision of the Human Future in Space&quot;. Ballantine Books. .
* Schubert, Gerald; Turcotte, Donald L.; Olson, Peter. (2001). &quot;Mantle convection in the Earth and planets&quot;. Cambridge University Press. .
* Taylor, Richard L. S. (1992). &quot;Paraterraforming – The world house concept&quot;. &quot;Journal of the British Interplanetary Society&quot;, vol. 45, no. 8, pp. 341–352. . .
* Thompson, J. M. T. (2001). &quot;Visions of the future: astronomy and Earth science&quot;. Cambridge University Press. .

==External links==

* New Mars forum
* Terraformers Society of Canada
* Visualizing the steps of Solar System terraforming
* Research Paper: Technological Requirements for Terraforming Mars
* Terraformers Australia
* Terraformers UK
* The Terraformation of Worlds 
* Terraformation de Mars
* Fogg, Martyn J. The Terraforming Information Pages
* BBC article on Charles Darwin&#x27;s and Joseph Hooker&#x27;s artificial ecosystem on Ascension Island that may be of interest to terraforming projects
* Robotic Lunar Ecopoiesis Test Bed Principal Investigator: Paul Todd (2004)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q204520" start="0" end="12" title="Terraforming" label="Terraforming"/>
<link wikidata="Q204520" start="16" end="30" title="Terraforming" label="terraformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41719" start="66" end="78" title="hypothesis" label="hypothetical"/>
<link wikidata="Q8104" start="117" end="127" title="atmosphere" label="atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="129" end="140" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q134435" start="150" end="160" title="topography" label="topography"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150" start="164" end="171" title="ecology" label="ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="177" end="183" title="planet" label="planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537" start="185" end="189" title="natural satellite" label="moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="241" end="246" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q846030" start="258" end="267" title="planetary habitability" label="habitable"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="340" end="355" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="367" end="374" title="science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q410" start="376" end="386" title="Carl Sagan" label="Carl Sagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063" start="391" end="401" title="astronomer" label="astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719358" start="416" end="437" title="planetary engineering" label="planetary engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="441" end="446" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q316788" start="541" end="556" title="Jack Williamson" label="Jack Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445965" start="597" end="612" title="Collision Orbit" label="Collision Orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="889" end="894" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="896" end="900" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="915" end="919" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="1150" end="1154" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063232" start="1229" end="1249" title="terraforming of Mars" label="terraforming of Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="1739" end="1746" title="planets" label="planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537" start="1751" end="1756" title="moons" label="moons"/>
<link wikidata="Q11955847" start="1820" end="1826" title="ethics of terraforming" label="ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q177777" start="1828" end="1837" title="logistics" label="logistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="1839" end="1848" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163" start="1850" end="1858" title="politics" label="politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q185698" start="1864" end="1875" title="methodology" label="methodology"/>
<link wikidata="Q410" start="2037" end="2047" title="Carl Sagan" label="Carl Sagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719358" start="2061" end="2082" title="planetary engineering" label="planetary engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q192864" start="2137" end="2144" title="Science (journal)" label="Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="2201" end="2206" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q37868" start="2212" end="2217" title="algae" label="algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="2279" end="2295" title="organic compound" label="organic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="2322" end="2336" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q41560" start="2362" end="2379" title="greenhouse effect" label="greenhouse effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q176848" start="2520" end="2529" title="Pyrolysis" label="pyrolyzed"/>
<link wikidata="Q15305550" start="2585" end="2596" title="Carbon sequestering" label="sequestered"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="2748" end="2753" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="2874" end="2887" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="3467" end="3471" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656088" start="3542" end="3548" title="Icarus (journal)" label="Icarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q846030" start="3845" end="3861" title="Planetary habitability" label="habitable planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806694" start="4032" end="4043" title="James Oberg" label="James Oberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159867" start="4114" end="4152" title="Lunar and Planetary Science Conference" label="Lunar and Planetary Science Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q6296126" start="4496" end="4541" title="Journal of the British Interplanetary Society" label="Journal of the British Interplanetary Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q210898" start="4708" end="4722" title="James Lovelock" label="James Lovelock"/>
<link wikidata="Q960800" start="4878" end="4896" title="chlorofluorocarbon" label="chlorofluorocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157511" start="5021" end="5034" title="Robert Haynes (geneticist)" label="Robert Haynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q130989" start="5105" end="5114" title="neologism" label="neologism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719358" start="5512" end="5533" title="planetary engineering" label="planetary engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q295865" start="5900" end="5917" title="ecosystem service" label="ecosystem service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069636" start="6153" end="6164" title="Martyn Fogg" label="Martyn Fogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719358" start="6522" end="6543" title="Planetary engineering" label="Planetary engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q921851" start="6643" end="6657" title="Climate engineering" label="Geoengineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556707" start="6874" end="6884" title="insolation" label="insolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q37813" start="7155" end="7164" title="ecosystem" label="ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q42762" start="7200" end="7209" title="biosphere" label="biosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q42762" start="7684" end="7693" title="biosphere" label="biosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="8017" end="8021" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q46255" start="8336" end="8347" title="Geophysics" label="geophysical"/>
<link wikidata="Q161764" start="8349" end="8360" title="Geochemistry" label="geochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q37547" start="8366" end="8379" title="Astrophysics" label="astrophysical"/>
<link wikidata="Q36458" start="8729" end="8742" title="Multicellular organism" label="multicellular"/>
<link wikidata="Q104499" start="8847" end="8864" title="planetary science" label="planetary science"/>
<link wikidata="Q411" start="8896" end="8908" title="astrobiology" label="astrobiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3648710" start="9246" end="9268" title="CHON" label="elemental requirements"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="9520" end="9524" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="9665" end="9681" title="organic molecule" label="organic molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="9714" end="9724" title="metabolism" label="metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="10220" end="10237" title="greenhouse gasses" label="greenhouse gasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530267" start="10255" end="10288" title="planetary equilibrium temperature" label="planetary equilibrium temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q215913" start="10620" end="10634" title="Circumstellar habitable zone" label="Habitable Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q16814" start="10845" end="10855" title="photolysis" label="photolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q101038" start="10996" end="11002" title="albedo" label="albedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143" start="11168" end="11174" title="Europa (moon)" label="Europa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303" start="11179" end="11188" title="Enceladus" label="Enceladus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800788" start="11271" end="11284" title="tidal heating" label="tidal heating"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466686" start="11418" end="11432" title="Non-equilibrium thermodynamics" label="disequilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q334631" start="11453" end="11470" title="Gibbs free energy" label="Gibbs Free Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="11882" end="11896" title="photosynthesis" label="photosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q747472" start="11943" end="11954" title="Chemotroph" label="chemotropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="12289" end="12295" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="12297" end="12305" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="12307" end="12315" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="12317" end="12323" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140772" start="12325" end="12335" title="Phosphorus cycle" label="phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="12341" end="12347" title="sulfur" label="sulfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q101038" start="13054" end="13060" title="albedo" label="albedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q190463" start="13222" end="13230" title="Lagrange point" label="L1 point"/>
<link wikidata="Q6478447" start="13455" end="13476" title="triple point of water" label="triple point of water"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739914" start="13605" end="13620" title="Armstrong limit" label="Armstrong limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11547" start="13747" end="13757" title="cosmic ray" label="cosmic ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3" start="13989" end="13993" title="life" label="life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065449" start="14001" end="14019" title="introduced species" label="introduced species"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="14040" end="14049" title="microbial" label="microbial"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="14106" end="14116" title="plants" label="plant life"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="14260" end="14266" title="animal" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="14330" end="14334" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="14727" end="14741" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q181699" start="14771" end="14780" title="carbonate" label="carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="14896" end="14911" title="plate tectonics" label="plate tectonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6915" start="15127" end="15140" title="magnetosphere" label="magnetosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q79833" start="15174" end="15184" title="solar wind" label="solar wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q160329" start="15220" end="15230" title="Convection" label="Convection"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="15280" end="15284" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="15309" end="15323" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269129" start="15337" end="15343" title="dynamo theory" label="dynamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q327075" start="15582" end="15587" title="MAVEN" label="MAVEN"/>
<link wikidata="Q129890" start="15649" end="15670" title="Coronal Mass Ejection" label="Coronal Mass Ejection"/>
<link wikidata="Q6915" start="15789" end="15802" title="magnetosphere" label="magnetosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="16157" end="16165" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q591571" start="16185" end="16207" title="Late Heavy Bombardment" label="Late Heavy Bombardment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="16302" end="16309" title="gravity" label="gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="16564" end="16578" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556707" start="16599" end="16614" title="solar radiation" label="solar radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="16935" end="16940" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41560" start="17187" end="17204" title="greenhouse effect" label="greenhouse effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q410" start="17420" end="17430" title="Carl Sagan" label="Carl Sagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="17473" end="17487" title="Photosynthesis" label="photosynthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q900291" start="17543" end="17555" title="Organic carbon" label="organic form"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="18336" end="18340" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q308" start="19280" end="19287" title="Mercury (planet)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q332007" start="20040" end="20055" title="magnetic shielding" label="magnetic shield"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20071" end="20073" title="Lagrange point#L1" label="L1"/>
<link wikidata="Q166530" start="20385" end="20400" title="escape velocity" label="escape velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6915" start="20480" end="20493" title="magnetosphere" label="magnetosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="20533" end="20541" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="20542" end="20548" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8104" start="20549" end="20559" title="atmosphere" label="atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q11570" start="20640" end="20648" title="kilogram" label="kilogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="20872" end="20878" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="20883" end="20891" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q103510" start="21022" end="21025" title="bar (unit)" label="bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="21066" end="21074" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q182168" start="21145" end="21152" title="nitrate" label="nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="21950" end="21964" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="22021" end="22026" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q17165387" start="22157" end="22172" title="Solar radiation management" label="solar radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15305550" start="22178" end="22201" title="carbon sequestration" label="sequestration of carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q182726" start="22258" end="22280" title="Genetically modified organism" label="genetically engineered"/>
<link wikidata="Q921851" start="22345" end="22364" title="climate engineering" label="climate engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143" start="22561" end="22567" title="Europa (moon)" label="Europa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3169" start="22569" end="22577" title="Ganymede (moon)" label="Ganymede"/>
<link wikidata="Q3134" start="22579" end="22587" title="Callisto (moon)" label="Callisto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303" start="22589" end="22598" title="Enceladus" label="Enceladus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565" start="22600" end="22605" title="Titan (moon)" label="Titan"/>
<link wikidata="Q596" start="22629" end="22634" title="Ceres (dwarf planet)" label="Ceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q788463" start="22857" end="22867" title="radiolysis" label="radiolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16814" start="23196" end="23206" title="photolysis" label="photolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q132206" start="23289" end="23301" title="Nitrosomonas" label="Nitrosomonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q131143" start="23315" end="23326" title="Pseudomonas" label="Pseudomonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q327663" start="23343" end="23354" title="Clostridium" label="Clostridium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568436" start="23901" end="23919" title="atmospheric escape" label="atmospheric escape"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23944" end="23969" title="Effect of spaceflight on the human body#Weightlessness" label="problems for human health"/>
<link wikidata="Q862838" start="24784" end="24801" title="synthetic biology" label="synthetic biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373549" start="24987" end="25000" title="MIT Media Lab" label="MIT Media Lab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521725" start="25213" end="25239" title="Louisiana State University" label="Louisiana State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q12142810" start="25682" end="25700" title="drought tolerance" label="drought resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="26128" end="26133" title="DARPA" label="DARPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q111913020" start="26367" end="26376" title="DTA GView" label="DTA GView"/>
<link wikidata="Q12013" start="26387" end="26398" title="Google Maps" label="Google Maps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="26402" end="26408" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q48797966" start="26619" end="26662" title="Biological Technologies Office (DARPA)" label="DARPA&amp;#x27;s Biological Technologies Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360507" start="27298" end="27311" title="Domed city" label="domed habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q159236" start="27629" end="27648" title="genetic engineering" label="genetic engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108" start="27650" end="27663" title="biotechnology" label="biotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q235799" start="27668" end="27691" title="Cyborg" label="cybernetic enhancements"/>
<link wikidata="Q3362485" start="27710" end="27718" title="pantropy" label="pantropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="27792" end="27799" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150" start="27804" end="27811" title="ecology" label="ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="27858" end="27865" title="ethics" label="ethical"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27904" end="27922" title="cosmocentric ethic" label="cosmocentric ethic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23656158" start="28053" end="28071" title="Lucianne Walkowicz" label="Lucianne Walkowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q756944" start="28125" end="28137" title="strip mining" label="strip mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q504677" start="28223" end="28236" title="Robert Zubrin" label="Robert Zubrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069636" start="28238" end="28252" title="Martyn J. Fogg" label="Martyn J. Fogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q410" start="28289" end="28299" title="Carl Sagan" label="Carl Sagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3" start="28396" end="28400" title="life" label="life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003654" start="28518" end="28580" title="Future of the Earth" label="Earth would eventually be destroyed if nature takes its course"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509" start="28706" end="28713" title="extinction" label="extinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860" start="28913" end="28919" title="nature" label="nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q56894" start="29082" end="29099" title="Christopher McKay" label="Christopher McKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q181508" start="29376" end="29386" title="Extraterrestrial life" label="alien life"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="29829" end="29839" title="technology" label="technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q159810" start="30012" end="30031" title="economy" label="economic strategies"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="30160" end="30175" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q336059" start="30190" end="30200" title="science fiction television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q471839" start="30202" end="30208" title="science fiction film" label="movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644061" start="30213" end="30219" title="science fiction novels" label="novels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="30223" end="30234" title="video games" label="video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q181508" start="30312" end="30318" title="Extraterrestrial life" label="aliens"/>
<link wikidata="Q213019" start="30417" end="30438" title="The War of the Worlds" label="The War of the Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="30455" end="30465" title="H. G. Wells" label="H.G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479937" start="30654" end="30679" title="Stanford University Press" label="Stanford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263568" start="30977" end="31013" title="International Astronautical Congress" label="International Astronautical Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="31015" end="31024" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q410" start="31719" end="31730" title="Carl Sagan" label="Sagan, Carl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6296126" start="32086" end="32131" title="Journal of the British Interplanetary Society" label="Journal of the British Interplanetary Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="32265" end="32291" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29826" wikidata="Q455310" url="?curid=29826" title="Trial de novo">
<text>In law, the expression trial &quot;de novo&quot; means a &quot;new trial&quot; by a different tribunal (&quot;de novo&quot; is a Latin expression meaning &quot;afresh&quot;, &quot;anew&quot;, &quot;beginning again&quot;, hence the literal meaning &quot;new trial&quot;). A trial &quot;de novo&quot; is usually ordered by an appellate court when the original trial failed to decide in a manner dictated by law.

==Common law==
In common law systems, one feature that distinguishes a trial &quot;de novo&quot; from an appellate proceeding is that new evidence may not ordinarily be presented in an appeal (though there are rare instances when it may be allowed—usually evidence that came to light only after the trial and could not, in all diligence, have been presented in the lower court). The general rule, is that an appeal must be based solely on &quot;points of law&quot;, and not on &quot;points of fact&quot;. Appeals are frequently based on a claim that the trial judge or jury did not allow or appreciate all the facts; if that claim is successful the appeal judges will often order a trial &quot;de novo&quot;. In order to protect the individual&#x27;s rights against double jeopardy, ordering a trial &quot;de novo&quot; is often the exclusive right of an appeal judge.

For example, a system may relegate a claim of a certain amount to a judge but preserve the right to a new trial before a jury.

In American federal courts, &quot;de novo&quot; can also refer to a standard of review for courts of appeal. Sometimes, particularly potent issues are brought before an appeals court, such as a constitutional determination made by a lower court, or summary judgment granted by a lower court. When this sort of issue is on appeal, the court of appeals will review the lower court decision &quot;de novo&quot; or from the beginning. In this process, the panel of judges for the court of appeals will review the lower court&#x27;s reasoning and fact-finding from the beginning, based on the record. This is a high level of scrutiny that is more likely to result in reversal or remand of an issue.

This is in contrast to more relaxed standards of review such as &quot;clearly erroneous&quot; or &quot;substantial evidence.&quot; These relaxed standards usually do not result in reversals, as the court of appeals grants more deference to the judgment of the lower courts.

===United Kingdom===
In the law of England and Wales, appeals to the Crown Court against convictions in a magistrates&#x27; court are held &quot;de novo&quot;.

&quot;De novo&quot; review refers to the appellate court&#x27;s authority to review the trial court&#x27;s conclusions on questions of the application, interpretation, and construction of law. Generally, the proper standard of review for employee benefit decisions, such as the denial of benefit claims, is &quot;de novo&quot;. Also, where the appellate court undertakes judicial review of compulsory arbitration proceedings that were required by statute, the reviewing court must conduct a &quot;de novo&quot; review of the interpretation and application of the law by the arbitrators.

===United States===
In the United States, some states provide for bench trials only for small claims, traffic offenses, and criminal offenses with a penalty of imprisonment of less than six months, then provide the ability to appeal a loss to the trial court of general jurisdiction for a brand-new trial. Unlike the appellate court which only examines the issues raised in the original trial, in a trial de novo a brand new trial takes place. The Supreme Court of Virginia said this in &quot;Santen v. Tuthill&quot;, 265 Va. 492 (2003), about the practice of an appeal from district court &quot;trial de novo&quot; to circuit court: &quot;This Court has repeatedly held that the effect of an appeal to circuit court is to &#x27;annul the judgment of the inferior tribunal as completely as if there had been no previous trial.&#x27;&quot; Some states use a system combining aspects of traditional appeal and absolute trial &quot;de novo&quot;; for instance, in New Jersey, decisions in minor criminal and traffic cases heard in the state&#x27;s municipal courts may be appealed to the Law Division, Criminal Part of the Superior Court for &quot;trial &quot;de novo&quot; on the record,&quot; in which the Law Division makes new findings of fact and conclusions of law based on the record produced in the municipal court&#x27;s trial (i.e. based on the transcript of the municipal court proceeding and any physical or documentary evidence presented to the Municipal Court), but does not hold any evidentiary hearings itself.

It is often used in the review of &quot;administrative proceedings&quot; or the judgements of a &quot;small claims court&quot;. If the determination made by a lower body is overturned, it may be renewed &quot;de novo&quot; in the review process (this is usually before it reaches the court system). Sometimes administrative decisions may be reviewed by the courts on a &quot;de novo&quot; basis.

== See also ==
* New trial
* Appeal

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="3" end="6" title="law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q455310" start="23" end="42" title="Trial de novo" label="trial &amp;quot;de novo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016240" start="67" end="72" title="trial (law)" label="trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959031" start="324" end="339" title="appellate court" label="appellate court"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="429" end="439" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253920" start="1177" end="1192" title="double jeopardy" label="double jeopardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16533" start="1349" end="1354" title="judge" label="judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q837675" start="1402" end="1406" title="jury" label="jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598368" start="1477" end="1495" title="standard of review" label="standard of review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156248" start="2414" end="2431" title="England and Wales" label="England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2433" end="2440" title="Crown Court#Appeals from magistrates&amp;#x27; courts" label="appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q203895" start="2448" end="2459" title="Crown Court" label="Crown Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q986172" start="2485" end="2508" title="Magistrates&amp;#x27; court (England and Wales)" label="magistrates&amp;#x27; court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3637977" start="3194" end="3205" title="bench trial" label="bench trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916251" start="3216" end="3228" title="small claims court" label="small claims"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832495" start="3230" end="3246" title="Traffic court" label="traffic offenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q15695164" start="3390" end="3410" title="general jurisdiction" label="general jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398783" start="3576" end="3601" title="Supreme Court of Virginia" label="Supreme Court of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q908639" start="3646" end="3657" title="case citation" label="265 Va. 492"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="4089" end="4099" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7009501" start="4248" end="4262" title="New Jersey Superior Court" label="Superior Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q171251" start="4693" end="4718" title="administrative proceeding" label="administrative proceeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916251" start="4755" end="4773" title="small claims court" label="small claims court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5317910" start="5067" end="5076" title="New trial" label="New trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q329777" start="5079" end="5085" title="Appeal" label="Appeal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29831" wikidata="Q289" url="?curid=29831" title="Television">
<text>Television (TV) is a telecommunication medium for transmitting moving images and sound. Additionally, the term can refer to a physical television set rather than the medium of transmission. Television is a mass medium for advertising, entertainment, news, and sports. The medium is capable of more than &quot;radio broadcasting,&quot; which refers to an audio signal sent to radio receivers.

Television became available in crude experimental forms in the 1920s, but only after several years of further development was the new technology marketed to consumers. After World War II, an improved form of black-and-white television broadcasting became popular in the United Kingdom and the United States, and television sets became commonplace in homes, businesses, and institutions. During the 1950s, television was the primary medium for influencing public opinion. In the mid-1960s, color broadcasting was introduced in the U.S. and most other developed countries.

The availability of various types of archival storage media such as Betamax and VHS tapes, LaserDiscs, high-capacity hard disk drives, CDs, DVDs, flash drives, high-definition HD DVDs and Blu-ray Discs, and cloud digital video recorders has enabled viewers to watch pre-recorded material—such as movies—at home on their own time schedule. For many reasons, especially the convenience of remote retrieval, the storage of television and video programming now also occurs on the cloud (such as the video-on-demand service by Netflix). At the beginning of the 2010s, digital television transmissions greatly increased in popularity. Another development was the move from standard-definition television (SDTV) (576i, with 576 interlaced lines of resolution and 480i) to high-definition television (HDTV), which provides a resolution that is substantially higher. HDTV may be transmitted in different formats: 1080p, 1080i and 720p. Since 2010, with the invention of smart television, Internet television has increased the availability of television programs and movies via the Internet through streaming video services such as Netflix, Amazon Prime Video, iPlayer and Hulu.

In 2013, 79% of the world&#x27;s households owned a television set. The replacement of earlier cathode-ray tube (CRT) screen displays with compact, energy-efficient, flat-panel alternative technologies such as LCDs (both fluorescent-backlit and LED), OLED displays, and plasma displays was a hardware revolution that began with computer monitors in the late 1990s. Most television sets sold in the 2000s were still CRT, it was only in early 2010s that flat-screen TVs decisively overtook CRT. Major manufacturers announced the discontinuation of CRT, Digital Light Processing (DLP), plasma, and even fluorescent-backlit LCDs by the mid-2010s. LEDs are being gradually replaced by OLEDs. Also, major manufacturers have started increasingly producing smart TVs in the mid-2010s. Smart TVs with integrated Internet and Web 2.0 functions became the dominant form of television by the late 2010s.

Television signals were initially distributed only as terrestrial television using high-powered radio-frequency television transmitters to broadcast the signal to individual television receivers. Alternatively, television signals are distributed by coaxial cable or optical fiber, satellite systems, and, since the 2000s, via the Internet. Until the early 2000s, these were transmitted as analog signals, but a transition to digital television was expected to be completed worldwide by the late 2010s. A standard television set consists of multiple internal electronic circuits, including a tuner for receiving and decoding broadcast signals. A visual display device that lacks a tuner is correctly called a video monitor rather than a television.

The television broadcasts are mainly a simplex broadcast meaning that the transmitter cannot receive and the receiver cannot transmit.

==Etymology==
The word &quot;television&quot; comes . The first documented usage of the term dates back to 1900, when the Russian scientist Constantin Perskyi used it in a paper that he presented in French at the first International Congress of Electricity, which ran from 18 to 25 August 1900 during the International World Fair in Paris.

The anglicized version of the term is first attested in 1907, when it was still &quot;...a theoretical system to transmit moving images over telegraph or telephone wires&quot;. It was &quot;...formed in English or borrowed from French .&quot; In the 19th century and early 20th century, other &quot;...proposals for the name of a then-hypothetical technology for sending pictures over distance were telephote (1880) and televista (1904).&quot;

The abbreviation &quot;TV&quot; is from 1948. The use of the term to mean &quot;a television set&quot; dates from 1941. The use of the term to mean &quot;television as a medium&quot; dates from 1927.

The term &quot;telly&quot; is more common in the UK. The slang term &quot;the tube&quot; or the &quot;boob tube&quot; derives from the bulky cathode-ray tube used on most TVs until the advent of flat-screen TVs. Another slang term for the TV is &quot;idiot box.&quot;

==History==
===Mechanical===
Facsimile transmission systems for still photographs pioneered methods of mechanical scanning of images in the early 19th century. Alexander Bain introduced the facsimile machine between 1843 and 1846. Frederick Bakewell demonstrated a working laboratory version in 1851. Willoughby Smith discovered the photoconductivity of the element selenium in 1873. As a 23-year-old German university student, Paul Julius Gottlieb Nipkow proposed and patented the Nipkow disk in 1884 in Berlin. This was a spinning disk with a spiral pattern of holes, so each hole scanned a line of the image. Although he never built a working model of the system, variations of Nipkow&#x27;s spinning-disk &quot;image rasterizer&quot; became exceedingly common. Constantin Perskyi had coined the word &quot;television&quot; in a paper read to the International Electricity Congress at the International World Fair in Paris on 24 August 1900. Perskyi&#x27;s paper reviewed the existing electromechanical technologies, mentioning the work of Nipkow and others. However, it was not until 1907 that developments in amplification tube technology by Lee de Forest and Arthur Korn, among others, made the design practical.

The first demonstration of the live transmission of images was by Georges Rignoux and A. Fournier in Paris in 1909. A matrix of 64 selenium cells, individually wired to a mechanical commutator, served as an electronic retina. In the receiver, a type of Kerr cell modulated the light, and a series of differently angled mirrors attached to the edge of a rotating disc scanned the modulated beam onto the display screen. A separate circuit regulated synchronization. The 8x8 pixel resolution in this proof-of-concept demonstration was just sufficient to clearly transmit individual letters of the alphabet. An updated image was transmitted &quot;several times&quot; each second.

In 1911, Boris Rosing and his student Vladimir Zworykin created a system that used a mechanical mirror-drum scanner to transmit, in Zworykin&#x27;s words, &quot;very crude images&quot; over wires to the &quot;Braun tube&quot; (cathode-ray tube or &quot;CRT&quot;) in the receiver. Moving images were not possible because, in the scanner: &quot;the sensitivity was not enough and the selenium cell was very laggy&quot;.

In 1921, Édouard Belin sent the first image via radio waves with his belinograph.

By the 1920s, when amplification made television practical, Scottish inventor John Logie Baird employed the Nipkow disk in his prototype video systems. On 25 March 1925, Baird gave the first public demonstration of televised silhouette images in motion at Selfridges&#x27;s department store in London. Since human faces had inadequate contrast to show up on his primitive system, he televised a ventriloquist&#x27;s dummy named &quot;Stooky Bill,&quot; whose painted face had higher contrast, talking and moving. By 26 January 1926, he had demonstrated before members of the Royal Institution the transmission of an image of a face in motion by radio. This is widely regarded as the world&#x27;s first true public television demonstration, exhibiting light, shade, and detail. Baird&#x27;s system used the Nipkow disk for both scanning the image and displaying it. A brightly illuminated subject was placed in front of a spinning Nipkow disk set with lenses that swept images across a static photocell. The thallium sulfide (thalofide) cell, developed by Theodore Case in the U.S., detected the light reflected from the subject and converted it into a proportional electrical signal. This was transmitted by AM radio waves to a receiver unit, where the video signal was applied to a neon light behind a second Nipkow disk rotating synchronized with the first. The brightness of the neon lamp was varied in proportion to the brightness of each spot on the image. As each hole in the disk passed by, one scan line of the image was reproduced. Baird&#x27;s disk had 30 holes, producing an image with only 30 scan lines, just enough to recognize a human face. In 1927, Baird transmitted a signal over of telephone line between London and Glasgow. Baird&#x27;s original &#x27;televisor&#x27; now resides in the Science Museum, South Kensington.

In 1928, Baird&#x27;s company (Baird Television Development Company/Cinema Television) broadcast the first transatlantic television signal between London and New York and the first shore-to-ship transmission. In 1929, he became involved in the first experimental mechanical television service in Germany. In November of the same year, Baird and Bernard Natan of Pathé established France&#x27;s first television company, Télévision-Baird-Natan. In 1931, he made the first outdoor remote broadcast of The Derby. In 1932, he demonstrated ultra-short wave television. Baird&#x27;s mechanical system reached a peak of 240 lines of resolution on BBC telecasts in 1936, though the mechanical system did not scan the televised scene directly. Instead, a 17.5 mm film was shot, rapidly developed, and then scanned while the film was still wet. 

A U.S. inventor, Charles Francis Jenkins, also pioneered the television. He published an article on &quot;Motion Pictures by Wireless&quot; in 1913, transmitted moving silhouette images for witnesses in December 1923, and on 13 June 1925, publicly demonstrated synchronized transmission of silhouette pictures. In 1925, Jenkins used the Nipkow disk and transmitted the silhouette image of a toy windmill in motion over a distance of 5 miles (8 km), from a naval radio station in Maryland to his laboratory in Washington, D.C., using a lensed disk scanner with a 48-line resolution. He was granted U.S. Patent No. 1,544,156 (Transmitting Pictures over Wireless) on 30 June 1925 (filed 13 March 1922).

Herbert E. Ives and Frank Gray of Bell Telephone Laboratories gave a dramatic demonstration of mechanical television on 7 April 1927. Their reflected-light television system included both small and large viewing screens. The small receiver had a 2-inch-wide by 2.5-inch-high screen (5 by 6 cm). The large receiver had a screen 24 inches wide by 30 inches high (60 by 75 cm). Both sets could reproduce reasonably accurate, monochromatic, moving images. Along with the pictures, the sets received synchronized sound. The system transmitted images over two paths: first, a copper wire link from Washington to New York City, then a radio link from Whippany, New Jersey. Comparing the two transmission methods, viewers noted no difference in quality. Subjects of the telecast included Secretary of Commerce Herbert Hoover. A flying-spot scanner beam illuminated these subjects. The scanner that produced the beam had a 50-aperture disk. The disc revolved at a rate of 18 frames per second, capturing one frame about every 56 milliseconds. (Today&#x27;s systems typically transmit 30 or 60 frames per second, or one frame every 33.3 or 16.7 milliseconds, respectively.) Television historian Albert Abramson underscored the significance of the Bell Labs demonstration: &quot;It was, in fact, the best demonstration of a mechanical television system ever made to this time. It would be several years before any other system could even begin to compare with it in picture quality.&quot;

In 1928, WRGB, then W2XB, was started as the world&#x27;s first television station. It broadcast from the General Electric facility in Schenectady, NY. It was popularly known as &quot;WGY Television.&quot; Meanwhile, in the Soviet Union, Leon Theremin had been developing a mirror drum-based television, starting with 16 lines resolution in 1925, then 32 lines, and eventually 64 using interlacing in 1926. As part of his thesis, on 7 May 1926, he electrically transmitted and then projected near-simultaneous moving images on a screen.

By 1927 Theremin had achieved an image of 100 lines, a resolution that was not surpassed until May 1932 by RCA, with 120 lines.

On 25 December 1926, Kenjiro Takayanagi demonstrated a television system with a 40-line resolution that employed a Nipkow disk scanner and CRT display at Hamamatsu Industrial High School in Japan. This prototype is still on display at the Takayanagi Memorial Museum in Shizuoka University, Hamamatsu Campus. His research in creating a production model was halted by the SCAP after World War II.

Because only a limited number of holes could be made in the disks, and disks beyond a certain diameter became impractical, image resolution on mechanical television broadcasts was relatively low, ranging from about 30 lines up to 120 or so. Nevertheless, the image quality of 30-line transmissions steadily improved with technical advances, and by 1933 the UK broadcasts using the Baird system were remarkably clear. A few systems ranging into the 200-line region also went on the air. Two of these were the 180-line system that Compagnie des Compteurs (CDC) installed in Paris in 1935 and the 180-line system that Peck Television Corp. started in 1935 at station VE9AK in Montreal. The advancement of all-electronic television (including image dissectors and other camera tubes and cathode-ray tubes for the reproducer) marked the start of the end for mechanical systems as the dominant form of television. Mechanical television, despite its inferior image quality and generally smaller picture, would remain the primary television technology until the 1930s. The last mechanical telecasts ended in 1939 at stations run by a lot of public universities in the United States.

===Electronic===
In 1897, English physicist J. J. Thomson was able, in his three well-known experiments, to deflect cathode rays, a fundamental function of the modern cathode-ray tube (CRT). The earliest version of the CRT was invented by the German physicist Ferdinand Braun in 1897 and is also known as the &quot;Braun&quot; tube. It was a cold-cathode diode, a modification of the Crookes tube, with a phosphor-coated screen. Braun was the first to conceive the use of a CRT as a display device. The &quot;Braun tube&quot; became the foundation of 20th century television. In 1906 the Germans Max Dieckmann and Gustav Glage produced raster images for the first time in a CRT. In 1907, Russian scientist Boris Rosing used a CRT in the receiving end of an experimental video signal to form a picture. He managed to display simple geometric shapes onto the screen.

In 1908, Alan Archibald Campbell-Swinton, a fellow of the Royal Society (UK), published a letter in the scientific journal &quot;Nature&quot; in which he described how &quot;distant electric vision&quot; could be achieved by using a cathode-ray tube, or Braun tube, as both a transmitting and receiving device, he expanded on his vision in a speech given in London in 1911 and reported in &quot;The Times&quot; and the Journal of the Röntgen Society. In a letter to &quot;Nature&quot; published in October 1926, Campbell-Swinton also announced the results of some &quot;not very successful experiments&quot; he had conducted with G. M. Minchin and J. C. M. Stanton. They had attempted to generate an electrical signal by projecting an image onto a selenium-coated metal plate that was simultaneously scanned by a cathode ray beam. These experiments were conducted before March 1914, when Minchin died, but they were later repeated by two different teams in 1937, by H. Miller and J. W. Strange from EMI, and by H. Iams and A. Rose from RCA. Both teams successfully transmitted &quot;very faint&quot; images with the original Campbell-Swinton&#x27;s selenium-coated plate. Although others had experimented with using a cathode-ray tube as a receiver, the concept of using one as a transmitter was novel. The first cathode-ray tube to use a hot cathode was developed by John B. Johnson (who gave his name to the term Johnson noise) and Harry Weiner Weinhart of Western Electric, and became a commercial product in 1922.

In 1926, Hungarian engineer Kálmán Tihanyi designed a television system using fully electronic scanning and display elements and employing the principle of &quot;charge storage&quot; within the scanning (or &quot;camera&quot;) tube. The problem of low sensitivity to light resulting in low electrical output from transmitting or &quot;camera&quot; tubes would be solved with the introduction of charge-storage technology by Kálmán Tihanyi beginning in 1924. His solution was a camera tube that accumulated and stored electrical charges (&quot;photoelectrons&quot;) within the tube throughout each scanning cycle. The device was first described in a patent application he filed in Hungary in March 1926 for a television system he called &quot;Radioskop&quot;. After further refinements included in a 1928 patent application, Tihanyi&#x27;s patent was declared void in Great Britain in 1930, so he applied for patents in the United States. Although his breakthrough would be incorporated into the design of RCA&#x27;s &quot;iconoscope&quot; in 1931, the U.S. patent for Tihanyi&#x27;s transmitting tube would not be granted until May 1939. The patent for his receiving tube had been granted the previous October. Both patents had been purchased by RCA prior to their approval. Charge storage remains a basic principle in the design of imaging devices for television to the present day. On 25 December 1926, at Hamamatsu Industrial High School in Japan, Japanese inventor Kenjiro Takayanagi demonstrated a TV system with a 40-line resolution that employed a CRT display. This was the first working example of a fully electronic television receiver and Takayanagi&#x27;s team later made improvements to this system parallel to other television developments. Takayanagi did not apply for a patent.

In the 1930s, Allen B. DuMont made the first CRTs to last 1,000 hours of use, one of the factors that led to the widespread adoption of television.

On 7 September 1927, U.S. inventor Philo Farnsworth&#x27;s image dissector camera tube transmitted its first image, a simple straight line, at his laboratory at 202 Green Street in San Francisco. By 3 September 1928, Farnsworth had developed the system sufficiently to hold a demonstration for the press. This is widely regarded as the first electronic television demonstration. In 1929, the system was improved further by eliminating a motor generator so that his television system had no mechanical parts. That year, Farnsworth transmitted the first live human images with his system, including a three and a half-inch image of his wife Elma (&quot;Pem&quot;) with her eyes closed (possibly due to the bright lighting required).
Meanwhile, Vladimir Zworykin also experimented with the cathode-ray tube to create and show images. While working for Westinghouse Electric in 1923, he began to develop an electronic camera tube. However, in a 1925 demonstration, the image was dim, had low contrast and poor definition, and was stationary. Zworykin&#x27;s imaging tube never got beyond the laboratory stage. However, RCA, which acquired the Westinghouse patent, asserted that the patent for Farnsworth&#x27;s 1927 image dissector was written so broadly that it would exclude any other electronic imaging device. Thus, based on Zworykin&#x27;s 1923 patent application, RCA filed a patent interference suit against Farnsworth. The U.S. Patent Office examiner disagreed in a 1935 decision, finding priority of invention for Farnsworth against Zworykin. Farnsworth claimed that Zworykin&#x27;s 1923 system could not produce an electrical image of the type to challenge his patent. Zworykin received a patent in 1928 for a color transmission version of his 1923 patent application. He also divided his original application in 1931. Zworykin was unable or unwilling to introduce evidence of a working model of his tube that was based on his 1923 patent application. In September 1939, after losing an appeal in the courts and being determined to go forward with the commercial manufacturing of television equipment, RCA agreed to pay Farnsworth US$1 million over ten years, in addition to license payments, to use his patents.

In 1933, RCA introduced an improved camera tube that relied on Tihanyi&#x27;s charge storage principle. Called the &quot;Iconoscope&quot; by Zworykin, the new tube had a light sensitivity of about 75,000 lux, and thus was claimed to be much more sensitive than Farnsworth&#x27;s image dissector. However, Farnsworth had overcome his power issues with his Image Dissector through the invention of a completely unique &quot;Multipactor&quot; device that he began work on in 1930, and demonstrated in 1931. This small tube could amplify a signal reportedly to the 60th power or better and showed great promise in all fields of electronics. Unfortunately, an issue with the multipactor was that it wore out at an unsatisfactory rate.
At the Berlin Radio Show in August 1931 in Berlin, Manfred von Ardenne gave a public demonstration of a television system using a CRT for both transmission and reception, the first completely electronic television transmission. However, Ardenne had not developed a camera tube, using the CRT instead as a flying-spot scanner to scan slides and film. Ardenne achieved his first transmission of television pictures on 24 December 1933, followed by test runs for a public television service in 1934. The world&#x27;s first electronically scanned television service then started in Berlin in 1935, the Fernsehsender Paul Nipkow, culminating in the live broadcast of the 1936 Summer Olympic Games from Berlin to public places all over Germany.

Philo Farnsworth gave the world&#x27;s first public demonstration of an all-electronic television system, using a live camera, at the Franklin Institute of Philadelphia on 25 August 1934 and for ten days afterward. Mexican inventor Guillermo González Camarena also played an important role in early television. His experiments with television (known as telectroescopía at first) began in 1931 and led to a patent for the &quot;trichromatic field sequential system&quot; color television in 1940. In Britain, the EMI engineering team led by Isaac Shoenberg applied in 1932 for a patent for a new device they called &quot;the Emitron&quot;, which formed the heart of the cameras they designed for the BBC. On 2 November 1936, a 405-line broadcasting service employing the Emitron began at studios in Alexandra Palace and transmitted from a specially built mast atop one of the Victorian building&#x27;s towers. It alternated briefly with Baird&#x27;s mechanical system in adjoining studios but was more reliable and visibly superior. This was the world&#x27;s first regular &quot;high-definition&quot; television service.

The original U.S. iconoscope was noisy, had a high ratio of interference to signal, and ultimately gave disappointing results, especially compared to the high-definition mechanical scanning systems that became available. The EMI team, under the supervision of Isaac Shoenberg, analyzed how the iconoscope (or Emitron) produced an electronic signal and concluded that its real efficiency was only about 5% of the theoretical maximum. They solved this problem by developing and patenting in 1934 two new camera tubes dubbed super-Emitron and CPS Emitron. The super-Emitron was between ten and fifteen times more sensitive than the original Emitron and iconoscope tubes, and, in some cases, this ratio was considerably greater. It was used for outside broadcasting by the BBC, for the first time, on Armistice Day 1937, when the general public could watch on a television set as the King laid a wreath at the Cenotaph. This was the first time that anyone had broadcast a live street scene from cameras installed on the roof of neighboring buildings because neither Farnsworth nor RCA would do the same until the 1939 New York World&#x27;s Fair.
On the other hand, in 1934, Zworykin shared some patent rights with the German licensee company Telefunken. The &quot;image iconoscope&quot; (&quot;Superikonoskop&quot; in Germany) was produced as a result of the collaboration. This tube is essentially identical to the super-Emitron. The production and commercialization of the super-Emitron and image iconoscope in Europe were not affected by the patent war between Zworykin and Farnsworth because Dieckmann and Hell had priority in Germany for the invention of the image dissector, having submitted a patent application for their &quot;Lichtelektrische Bildzerlegerröhre für Fernseher&quot; (&quot;Photoelectric Image Dissector Tube for Television&quot;) in Germany in 1925, two years before Farnsworth did the same in the United States. The image iconoscope (Superikonoskop) became the industrial standard for public broadcasting in Europe from 1936 until 1960, when it was replaced by the vidicon and plumbicon tubes. Indeed, it represented the European tradition in electronic tubes competing against the American tradition represented by the image orthicon. The German company Heimann produced the Superikonoskop for the 1936 Berlin Olympic Games, later Heimann also produced and commercialized it from 1940 to 1955; finally the Dutch company Philips produced and commercialized the image iconoscope and multicon from 1952 to 1958.

U.S. television broadcasting, at the time, consisted of a variety of markets in a wide range of sizes, each competing for programming and dominance with separate technology until deals were made and standards agreed upon in 1941. RCA, for example, used only Iconoscopes in the New York area, but Farnsworth Image Dissectors in Philadelphia and San Francisco. In September 1939, RCA agreed to pay the Farnsworth Television and Radio Corporation royalties over the next ten years for access to Farnsworth&#x27;s patents. With this historic agreement in place, RCA integrated much of what was best about the Farnsworth Technology into their systems. In 1941, the United States implemented 525-line television. Electrical engineer Benjamin Adler played a prominent role in the development of television.

The world&#x27;s first 625-line television standard was designed in the Soviet Union in 1944 and became a national standard in 1946. The first broadcast in 625-line standard occurred in Moscow in 1948. The concept of 625 lines per frame was subsequently implemented in the European CCIR standard. In 1936, Kálmán Tihanyi described the principle of plasma display, the first flat-panel display system.

Early electronic television sets were large and bulky, with analog circuits made of vacuum tubes. Following the invention of the first working transistor at Bell Labs, Sony founder Masaru Ibuka predicted in 1952 that the transition to electronic circuits made of transistors would lead to smaller and more portable television sets. The first fully transistorized, portable solid-state television set was the 8-inch Sony TV8-301, developed in 1959 and released in 1960. This began the transformation of television viewership from a communal viewing experience to a solitary viewing experience. By 1960, Sony had sold over 4million portable television sets worldwide.
===Color===
The basic idea of using three monochrome images to produce a color image had been experimented with almost as soon as black-and-white televisions had first been built. Although he gave no practical details, among the earliest published proposals for television was one by Maurice Le Blanc in 1880 for a color system, including the first mentions in television literature of line and frame scanning. Polish inventor Jan Szczepanik patented a color television system in 1897, using a selenium photoelectric cell at the transmitter and an electromagnet controlling an oscillating mirror and a moving prism at the receiver. But his system contained no means of analyzing the spectrum of colors at the transmitting end and could not have worked as he described it. Another inventor, Hovannes Adamian, also experimented with color television as early as 1907. The first color television project is claimed by him, and was patented in Germany on 31 March 1908, patent No. 197183, then in Britain, on 1 April 1908, patent No. 7219, in France (patent No. 390326) and in Russia in 1910 (patent No. 17912).

Scottish inventor John Logie Baird demonstrated the world&#x27;s first color transmission on 3 July 1928, using scanning discs at the transmitting and receiving ends with three spirals of apertures, each spiral with filters of a different primary color, and three light sources at the receiving end, with a commutator to alternate their illumination. Baird also made the world&#x27;s first color broadcast on 4 February 1938, sending a mechanically scanned 120-line image from Baird&#x27;s Crystal Palace studios to a projection screen at London&#x27;s Dominion Theatre. Mechanically scanned color television was also demonstrated by Bell Laboratories in June 1929 using three complete systems of photoelectric cells, amplifiers, glow-tubes, and color filters, with a series of mirrors to superimpose the red, green, and blue images into one full-color image.

The first practical hybrid system was again pioneered by John Logie Baird. In 1940 he publicly demonstrated a color television combining a traditional black-and-white display with a rotating colored disk. This device was very &quot;deep&quot; but was later improved with a mirror folding the light path into an entirely practical device resembling a large conventional console. However, Baird was unhappy with the design, and, as early as 1944, had commented to a British government committee that a fully electronic device would be better.

In 1939, Hungarian engineer Peter Carl Goldmark introduced an electro-mechanical system while at CBS, which contained an Iconoscope sensor. The CBS field-sequential color system was partly mechanical, with a disc made of red, blue, and green filters spinning inside the television camera at 1,200 rpm and a similar disc spinning in synchronization in front of the cathode-ray tube inside the receiver set. The system was first demonstrated to the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) on 29 August 1940 and shown to the press on 4 September.

CBS began experimental color field tests using film as early as 28 August 1940 and live cameras by 12 November. NBC (owned by RCA) made its first field test of color television on 20 February 1941. CBS began daily color field tests on 1 June 1941. These color systems were not compatible with existing black-and-white television sets, and, as no color television sets were available to the public at this time, viewing of the color field tests was restricted to RCA and CBS engineers and the invited press. The War Production Board halted the manufacture of television and radio equipment for civilian use from 22 April 1942 to 20 August 1945, limiting any opportunity to introduce color television to the general public.

As early as 1940, Baird had started work on a fully electronic system he called Telechrome. Early Telechrome devices used two electron guns aimed at either side of a phosphor plate. The phosphor was patterned so the electrons from the guns only fell on one side of the patterning or the other. Using cyan and magenta phosphors, a reasonable limited-color image could be obtained. He also demonstrated the same system using monochrome signals to produce a 3D image (called &quot;stereoscopic&quot; at the time). A demonstration on 16 August 1944 was the first example of a practical color television system. Work on the Telechrome continued, and plans were made to introduce a three-gun version for full color. However, Baird&#x27;s untimely death in 1946 ended the development of the Telechrome system.
Similar concepts were common through the 1940s and 1950s, differing primarily in the way they re-combined the colors generated by the three guns. The Geer tube was similar to Baird&#x27;s concept but used small pyramids with the phosphors deposited on their outside faces instead of Baird&#x27;s 3D patterning on a flat surface. The Penetron used three layers of phosphor on top of each other and increased the power of the beam to reach the upper layers when drawing those colors. The Chromatron used a set of focusing wires to select the colored phosphors arranged in vertical stripes on the tube.

One of the great technical challenges of introducing color broadcast television was the desire to conserve bandwidth, potentially three times that of the existing black-and-white standards, and not use an excessive amount of radio spectrum. In the United States, after considerable research, the National Television Systems Committee approved an all-electronic system developed by RCA, which encoded the color information separately from the brightness information and significantly reduced the resolution of the color information to conserve bandwidth. As black-and-white televisions could receive the same transmission and display it in black-and-white, the color system adopted is [backwards] &quot;compatible.&quot; (&quot;Compatible Color,&quot; featured in RCA advertisements of the period, is mentioned in the song &quot;America,&quot; of West Side Story, 1957.) The brightness image remained compatible with existing black-and-white television sets at slightly reduced resolution. In contrast, color televisions could decode the extra information in the signal and produce a limited-resolution color display. The higher-resolution black-and-white and lower-resolution color images combine in the brain to produce a seemingly high-resolution color image. The NTSC standard represented a significant technical achievement.
The first color broadcast (the first episode of the live program &quot;The Marriage&quot;) occurred on 8 July 1954. However, during the following ten years, most network broadcasts and nearly all local programming continued to be black-and-white. It was not until the mid-1960s that color sets started selling in large numbers, due in part to the color transition of 1965, in which it was announced that over half of all network prime-time programming would be broadcast in color that fall. The first all-color prime-time season came just one year later. In 1972, the last holdout among daytime network programs converted to color, resulting in the first completely all-color network season.

Early color sets were either floor-standing console models or tabletop versions nearly as bulky and heavy, so in practice they remained firmly anchored in one place. GE&#x27;s relatively compact and lightweight Porta-Color set was introduced in the spring of 1966. It used a transistor-based UHF tuner. The first fully transistorized color television in the United States was the Quasar television introduced in 1967. These developments made watching color television a more flexible and convenient proposition.

In 1972, sales of color sets finally surpassed sales of black-and-white sets. Color broadcasting in Europe was not standardized on the PAL format until the 1960s, and broadcasts did not start until 1967. By this point, many of the technical issues in the early sets had been worked out, and the spread of color sets in Europe was fairly rapid. By the mid-1970s, the only stations broadcasting in black-and-white were a few high-numbered UHF stations in small markets and a handful of low-power repeater stations in even smaller markets such as vacation spots. By 1979, even the last of these had converted to color. By the early 1980s, B&amp;W sets had been pushed into niche markets, notably low-power uses, small portable sets, or for use as video monitor screens in lower-cost consumer equipment. By the late 1980s, even these last holdout niche B&amp;W environments had inevitably shifted to color sets.

===Digital===

Digital television (DTV) is the transmission of audio and video by digitally processed and multiplexed signals, in contrast to the analog and channel-separated signals used by analog television. Due to data compression, digital television can support more than one program in the same channel bandwidth. It is an innovative service that represents the most significant evolution in television broadcast technology since color television emerged in the 1950s. Digital television&#x27;s roots have been tied very closely to the availability of inexpensive, high performance computers. It was not until the 1990s that digital television became possible. Digital television was previously not practically possible due to the impractically high bandwidth requirements of uncompressed digital video, requiring around 200Mbit/s for a standard-definition television (SDTV) signal, and over 1Gbit/s for high-definition television (HDTV).

A digital television service was proposed in 1986 by Nippon Telegraph and Telephone (NTT) and the Ministry of Posts and Telecommunication (MPT) in Japan, where there were plans to develop an &quot;Integrated Network System&quot; service. However, it was not possible to implement such a digital television service practically until the adoption of DCT video compression technology made it possible in the early 1990s.

In the mid-1980s, as Japanese consumer electronics firms forged ahead with the development of HDTV technology, the MUSE analog format proposed by NHK, a Japanese company, was seen as a pacesetter that threatened to eclipse U.S. electronics companies&#x27; technologies. Until June 1990, the Japanese MUSE standard, based on an analog system, was the front-runner among the more than 23 other technical concepts under consideration. Then, a U.S. company, General Instrument, demonstrated the possibility of a digital television signal. This breakthrough was of such significance that the FCC was persuaded to delay its decision on an ATV standard until a digitally-based standard could be developed.

In March 1990, when it became clear that a digital standard was possible, the FCC made several critical decisions. First, the Commission declared that the new ATV standard must be more than an enhanced analog signal but be able to provide a genuine HDTV signal with at least twice the resolution of existing television images. (7) Then, to ensure that viewers who did not wish to buy a new digital television set could continue to receive conventional television broadcasts, it dictated that the new ATV standard must be capable of being &quot;simulcast&quot; on different channels. (8) The new ATV standard also allowed the new DTV signal to be based on entirely new design principles. Although incompatible with the existing NTSC standard, the new DTV standard would be able to incorporate many improvements.

The last standards adopted by the FCC did not require a single standard for scanning formats, aspect ratios, or lines of resolution. This compromise resulted from a dispute between the consumer electronics industry (joined by some broadcasters) and the computer industry (joined by the film industry and some public interest groups) over which of the two scanning processes—interlaced or progressive—would be best suited for the newer digital HDTV compatible display devices. Interlaced scanning, which had been specifically designed for older analog CRT display technologies, scans even-numbered lines first, then odd-numbered ones. Interlaced scanning can be regarded as the first video compression model. It was partly developed in the 1940s to double the image resolution to exceed the limitations of television broadcast bandwidth. Another reason for its adoption was to limit the flickering on early CRT screens, whose phosphor-coated screens could only retain the image from the electron scanning gun for a relatively short duration. However, interlaced scanning does not work as efficiently on newer display devices such as Liquid-crystal (LCD), for example, which are better suited to a more frequent progressive refresh rate.

Progressive scanning, the format that the computer industry had long adopted for computer display monitors, scans every line in sequence, from top to bottom. Progressive scanning, in effect, doubles the amount of data generated for every full screen displayed in comparison to interlaced scanning by painting the screen in one pass in 1/60-second instead of two passes in 1/30-second. The computer industry argued that progressive scanning is superior because it does not &quot;flicker&quot; on the new standard of display devices in the manner of interlaced scanning. It also argued that progressive scanning enables easier connections with the Internet and is more cheaply converted to interlaced formats than vice versa. The film industry also supported progressive scanning because it offered a more efficient means of converting filmed programming into digital formats. For their part, the consumer electronics industry and broadcasters argued that interlaced scanning was the only technology that could transmit the highest quality pictures then (and currently) feasible, i.e., 1,080 lines per picture and 1,920 pixels per line. Broadcasters also favored interlaced scanning because their vast archive of interlaced programming is not readily compatible with a progressive format. William F. Schreiber, who was director of the Advanced Television Research Program at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology from 1983 until his retirement in 1990, thought that the continued advocacy of interlaced equipment originated from consumer electronics companies that were trying to get back the substantial investments they made in the interlaced technology.

Digital television transition started in late 2000s. All governments across the world set the deadline for analog shutdown by the 2010s. Initially, the adoption rate was low, as the first digital tuner-equipped television sets were costly. However, as the price of digital-capable television sets dropped, more and more households started converting to digital television sets. The transition is expected to be completed worldwide by the mid to late 2010s.

===Smart television===

The advent of digital television allowed innovations like smart television sets. A smart television sometimes referred to as a &quot;connected TV&quot; or &quot;hybrid TV,&quot; is a television set or set-top box with integrated Internet and Web 2.0 features and is an example of technological convergence between computers, television sets, and set-top boxes. Besides the traditional functions of television sets and set-top boxes provided through traditional Broadcasting media, these devices can also provide Internet TV, online interactive media, over-the-top content, as well as on-demand streaming media, and home networking access. These TVs come pre-loaded with an operating system.

Smart TV is not to be confused with Internet TV, Internet Protocol television (IPTV), or with Web TV. Internet television refers to receiving television content over the Internet instead of through traditional systems—terrestrial, cable, and satellite. IPTV is one of the emerging Internet television technology standards for television networks. Web television (WebTV) is a term used for programs created by a wide variety of companies and individuals for broadcast on Internet TV. A first patent was filed in 1994 (and extended the following year) for an &quot;intelligent&quot; television system, linked with data processing systems, using a digital or analog network. Apart from being linked to data networks, one key point is its ability to automatically download necessary software routines according to a user&#x27;s demand and process their needs. Major TV manufacturers announced the production of smart TVs only for middle-end and high-end TVs in 2015. Smart TVs have gotten more affordable compared to when they were first introduced, with 46 million U.S. households having at least one as of 2019.

===3D===

3D television conveys depth perception to the viewer by employing techniques such as stereoscopic display, multi-view display, 2D-plus-depth, or any other form of 3D display. Most modern 3D television sets use an active shutter 3D system or a polarized 3D system, and some are autostereoscopic without the need for glasses. Stereoscopic 3D television was demonstrated for the first time on 10 August 1928, by John Logie Baird in his company&#x27;s premises at 133 Long Acre, London. Baird pioneered a variety of 3D television systems using electromechanical and cathode-ray tube techniques. The first 3D television was produced in 1935. The advent of digital television in the 2000s greatly improved 3D television sets. Although 3D television sets are quite popular for watching 3D home media, such as on Blu-ray discs, 3D programming has largely failed to make inroads with the public. As a result, many 3D television channels that started in the early 2010s were shut down by the mid-2010s. According to DisplaySearch 3D television shipments totaled 41.45 million units in 2012, compared with 24.14 in 2011 and 2.26 in 2010. As of late 2013, the number of 3D TV viewers started to decline.

==Broadcast systems==
===Terrestrial television===


Programming is broadcast by television stations, sometimes called &quot;channels,&quot; as stations are licensed by their governments to broadcast only over assigned channels in the television band. At first, terrestrial broadcasting was the only way television could be widely distributed, and because bandwidth was limited, i.e., there were only a small number of channels available, government regulation was the norm. In the U.S., the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) allowed stations to broadcast advertisements beginning in July 1941 but required public service programming commitments as a requirement for a license. By contrast, the United Kingdom chose a different route, imposing a television license fee on owners of television reception equipment to fund the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC), which had public service as part of its Royal Charter.

WRGB claims to be the world&#x27;s oldest television station, tracing its roots to an experimental station founded on 13 January 1928, broadcasting from the General Electric factory in Schenectady, NY, under the call letters W2XB. It was popularly known as &quot;WGY Television&quot; after its sister radio station. Later, in 1928, General Electric started a second facility, this one in New York City, which had the call letters W2XBS and which today is known as WNBC. The two stations were experimental and had no regular programming, as receivers were operated by engineers within the company. The image of a Felix the Cat doll rotating on a turntable was broadcast for 2 hours every day for several years as engineers tested new technology. On 2 November 1936, the BBC began transmitting the world&#x27;s first public regular high-definition service from the Victorian Alexandra Palace in north London. It therefore claims to be the birthplace of television broadcasting as we now know it.

With the widespread adoption of cable across the United States in the 1970s and 1980s, terrestrial television broadcasts have been in decline; in 2013 it was estimated that about 7% of US households used an antenna. A slight increase in use began around 2010 due to switchover to digital terrestrial television broadcasts, which offered pristine image quality over very large areas, and offered an alternative to cable television (CATV) for cord cutters. All other countries around the world are also in the process of either shutting down analog terrestrial television or switching over to digital terrestrial television.

===Cable television===

Cable television is a system of broadcasting television programming to paying subscribers via radio frequency (RF) signals transmitted through coaxial cables or light pulses through fiber-optic cables. This contrasts with traditional terrestrial television, in which the television signal is transmitted over the air by radio waves and received by a television antenna attached to the television. In the 2000s, FM radio programming, high-speed Internet, telephone service, and similar non-television services may also be provided through these cables. The abbreviation CATV is sometimes used for cable television in the United States. It originally stood for Community Access Television or Community Antenna Television, from cable television&#x27;s origins in 1948: in areas where over-the-air reception was limited by distance from transmitters or mountainous terrain, large &quot;community antennas&quot; were constructed, and cable was run from them to individual homes.

===Satellite television===

Satellite television is a system of supplying television programming using broadcast signals relayed from communication satellites. The signals are received via an outdoor parabolic reflector antenna, usually referred to as a satellite dish and a low-noise block downconverter (LNB). A satellite receiver then decodes the desired television program for viewing on a television set. Receivers can be external set-top boxes, or a built-in television tuner. Satellite television provides a wide range of channels and services, especially to geographic areas without terrestrial television or cable television.

The most common method of reception is direct-broadcast satellite television (DBSTV), also known as &quot;direct to home&quot; (DTH). In DBSTV systems, signals are relayed from a direct broadcast satellite on the Ku wavelength and are completely digital. Satellite TV systems formerly used systems known as television receive-only. These systems received analog signals transmitted in the C-band spectrum from FSS type satellites and required the use of large dishes. Consequently, these systems were nicknamed &quot;big dish&quot; systems and were more expensive and less popular.

The direct-broadcast satellite television signals were earlier analog signals and later digital signals, both of which require a compatible receiver. Digital signals may include high-definition television (HDTV). Some transmissions and channels are free-to-air or free-to-view, while many other channels are pay television requiring a subscription.
In 1945, British science fiction writer Arthur C. Clarke proposed a worldwide communications system that would function by means of three satellites equally spaced apart in Earth orbit. This was published in the October 1945 issue of the &quot;Wireless World&quot; magazine and won him the Franklin Institute&#x27;s Stuart Ballantine Medal in 1963.

The first satellite television signals from Europe to North America were relayed via the Telstar satellite over the Atlantic Ocean on 23 July 1962. The signals were received and broadcast in North American and European countries and watched by over 100 million. Launched in 1962, the &quot;Relay 1&quot; satellite was the first satellite to transmit television signals from the US to Japan. The first geosynchronous communication satellite, Syncom 2, was launched on 26 July 1963.

The world&#x27;s first commercial communications satellite, called Intelsat I and nicknamed &quot;Early Bird&quot;, was launched into geosynchronous orbit on 6 April 1965. The first national network of television satellites, called Orbita, was created by the Soviet Union in October 1967, and was based on the principle of using the highly elliptical Molniya satellite for rebroadcasting and delivering of television signals to ground downlink stations. The first commercial North American satellite to carry television transmissions was Canada&#x27;s geostationary Anik 1, which was launched on 9 November 1972. ATS-6, the world&#x27;s first experimental educational and Direct Broadcast Satellite (DBS), was launched on 30 May 1974. It transmitted at 860 MHz using wideband FM modulation and had two sound channels. The transmissions were focused on the Indian subcontinent, but experimenters were able to receive the signal in Western Europe using home-constructed equipment that drew on UHF television design techniques already in use.

The first in a series of Soviet geostationary satellites to carry Direct-To-Home television, Ekran 1, was launched on 26 October 1976. It used a 714 MHz UHF downlink frequency so that the transmissions could be received with existing UHF television technology rather than microwave technology.

===Internet television===

Internet television (Internet TV) (or online television) is the digital distribution of television content via the Internet as opposed to traditional systems like terrestrial, cable, and satellite, although the Internet itself is received by terrestrial, cable, or satellite methods. Internet television is a general term that covers the delivery of television series and other video content over the Internet by video streaming technology, typically by major traditional television broadcasters. Internet television should not be confused with Smart TV, IPTV, or with Web TV. Smart television refers to the television set which has a built-in operating system. Internet Protocol television (IPTV) is one of the emerging Internet television technology standards for use by television networks. Web television is a term used for programs created by a wide variety of companies and individuals for broadcast on Internet television.

Traditional cable and satellite television providers began to offer services such as Sling TV, owned by Dish Network, which was unveiled in January 2015. DirecTV, another satellite television provider, launched their own streaming service, DirecTV Stream, in 2016. Sky launched a similar streaming service in the UK called Now. In 2013, Video on demand website Netflix earned the first Primetime Emmy Award nominations for original streaming television at the 65th Primetime Emmy Awards. Three of its series, &quot;House of Cards&quot;, &quot;Arrested Development&quot;, and &quot;Hemlock Grove&quot;, earned nominations that year. On July 13, 2015, cable company Comcast announced an HBO plus broadcast TV package at a price discounted from basic broadband plus basic cable.

In 2017, YouTube launched YouTube TV, a streaming service that allows users to watch live television programs from popular cable or network channels and record shows to stream anywhere, anytime. As of 2017, 28% of US adults cite streaming services as their main means for watching television, and 61% of those ages 18 to 29 cite it as their main method. As of 2018, Netflix is the world&#x27;s largest streaming TV network and also the world&#x27;s largest Internet media and entertainment company with 117 million paid subscribers, and by revenue and market cap. In 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic had a strong impact in the television streaming business with the lifestyle changes such as staying at home and lockdowns.

==Sets==

A television set, also called a television receiver, television, TV set, TV, or &quot;telly,&quot; is a device that combines a tuner, display, amplifier, and speakers for the purpose of viewing television and hearing its audio components. Introduced in the late 1920s in mechanical form, television sets became a popular consumer product after World War II in electronic form, using cathode-ray tubes. The addition of color to broadcast television after 1953 further increased the popularity of television sets, and an outdoor antenna became a common feature of suburban homes. The ubiquitous television set became the display device for recorded media in the 1970s, such as Betamax and VHS, which enabled viewers to record TV shows and watch prerecorded movies. In the subsequent decades, Television sets were used to watch DVDs and Blu-ray Discs of movies and other content. Major TV manufacturers announced the discontinuation of CRT, DLP, plasma, and fluorescent-backlit LCDs by the mid-2010s. Televisions since 2010s mostly use LEDs. LEDs are expected to be gradually replaced by OLEDs in the near future.

===Display technologies===
====Disk====

The earliest systems employed a spinning disk to create and reproduce images. These usually had a low resolution and screen size and never became popular with the public.

====CRT====
The cathode-ray tube (CRT) is a vacuum tube containing one or more electron guns (a source of electrons or electron emitter) and a fluorescent screen used to view images. It has the means to accelerate and deflect the electron beam(s) onto the screen to create the images. The images may represent electrical waveforms (oscilloscope), pictures (television, computer monitor), radar targets or others. The CRT uses an evacuated glass envelope that is large, deep (i.e., long from front screen face to rear end), fairly heavy, and relatively fragile. As a matter of safety, the face is typically made of thick lead glass so as to be highly shatter-resistant and to block most X-ray emissions, particularly if the CRT is used in a consumer product.

In television sets and computer monitors, the entire front area of the tube is scanned repetitively and systematically in a fixed pattern called a raster. An image is produced by controlling the intensity of each of the three electron beams, one for each additive primary color (red, green, and blue) with a video signal as a reference. In all modern CRT monitors and televisions, the beams are bent by &quot;magnetic deflection&quot;, a varying magnetic field generated by coils and driven by electronic circuits around the neck of the tube, although electrostatic deflection is commonly used in oscilloscopes, a type of diagnostic instrument.

====DLP====
Digital Light Processing (DLP) is a type of video projector technology that uses a digital micromirror device. Some DLPs have a TV tuner, which makes them a type of TV display. It was originally developed in 1987 by Dr. Larry Hornbeck of Texas Instruments. While the DLP imaging device was invented by Texas Instruments, the first DLP-based projector was introduced by Digital Projection Ltd in 1997. Digital Projection and Texas Instruments were both awarded Emmy Awards in 1998 for the invention of the DLP projector technology. DLP is used in a variety of display applications, from traditional static displays to interactive displays and also non-traditional embedded applications, including medical, security, and industrial uses. DLP technology is used in DLP front projectors (standalone projection units for classrooms and businesses primarily) but also in private homes; in these cases, the image is projected onto a projection screen. DLP is also used in DLP rear projection television sets and digital signs. It is also used in about 85% of digital cinema projection.

====Plasma====
A plasma display panel (PDP) is a type of flat-panel display common to large television displays or larger. They are called &quot;plasma&quot; displays because the technology uses small cells containing electrically charged ionized gases, or what are in essence chambers more commonly known as fluorescent lamps.
====LCD====
Liquid-crystal-display televisions (LCD TVs) are television sets that use liquid-crystal display technology to produce images. LCD televisions are much thinner and lighter than cathode-ray tube (CRTs) of similar display size and are available in much larger sizes (e.g., 90-inch diagonal). When manufacturing costs fell, this combination of features made LCDs practical for television receivers. LCDs come in two types: those using cold cathode fluorescent lamps, simply called LCDs, and those using LED as backlight called LEDs.

In 2007, LCD television sets surpassed sales of CRT-based television sets worldwide for the first time, and their sales figures relative to other technologies accelerated. LCD television sets have quickly displaced the only major competitors in the large-screen market, the Plasma display panel and rear-projection television. In mid 2010s LCDs especially LEDs became, by far, the most widely produced and sold television display type. LCDs also have disadvantages. Other technologies address these weaknesses, including OLEDs, FED and SED, but none of these have entered widespread production.

====OLED====

An OLED (organic light-emitting diode) is a light-emitting diode (LED) in which the emissive electroluminescent layer is a film of organic compound which emits light in response to an electric current. This layer of organic semiconductor is situated between two electrodes. Generally, at least one of these electrodes is transparent. OLEDs are used to create digital displays in devices such as television screens. It is also used for computer monitors and portable systems such as mobile phones, handheld game console, and PDAs.

There are two main groups of OLED: those based on small molecules and those employing polymers. Adding mobile ions to an OLED creates a light-emitting electrochemical cell or LEC, which has a slightly different mode of operation. OLED displays can use either passive-matrix (PMOLED) or active-matrix (AMOLED) addressing schemes. Active-matrix OLEDs require a thin-film transistor backplane to switch each individual pixel on or off but allow for higher resolution and larger display sizes.

An OLED display works without a backlight. Thus, it can display deep black levels and can be thinner and lighter than a liquid crystal display (LCD). In low ambient light conditions such as a dark room, an OLED screen can achieve a higher contrast ratio than an LCD, whether the LCD uses cold cathode fluorescent lamps or LED backlight. OLEDs are expected to replace other forms of display in the near future.

===Display resolution===
====LD====
Low-definition television or LDTV refers to television systems that have a lower screen resolution than standard-definition television systems such 240p (320*240). It is used in handheld television. The most common source of LDTV programming is the Internet, where mass distribution of higher-resolution video files could overwhelm computer servers and take too long to download. Many mobile phones and portable devices such as Apple&#x27;s iPod Nano, or Sony&#x27;s PlayStation Portable use LDTV video, as higher-resolution files would be excessive to the needs of their small screens (320×240 and 480×272 pixels respectively). The current generation of iPod Nanos has LDTV screens, as do the first three generations of iPod Touch and iPhone (480×320). For the first years of its existence, YouTube offered only one low-definition resolution of 320x240p at 30fps or less. A standard, consumer-grade videotape can be considered SDTV due to its resolution (approximately 360 × 480i/576i).

====SD====
Standard-definition television or SDTV refers to two different resolutions: 576i, with 576 interlaced lines of resolution, derived from the European-developed PAL and SECAM systems, and 480i based on the American National Television System Committee NTSC system. SDTV is a television system that uses a resolution that is not considered to be either high-definition television (720p, 1080i, 1080p, 1440p, 4K UHDTV, and 8K UHD) or enhanced-definition television (EDTV 480p). In North America, digital SDTV is broadcast in the same 4:3 aspect ratio as NTSC signals, with widescreen content being center cut. However, in other parts of the world that used the PAL or SECAM color systems, standard-definition television is now usually shown with a 16:9 aspect ratio, with the transition occurring between the mid-1990s and mid-2000s. Older programs with a 4:3 aspect ratio are shown in the United States as 4:3, with non-ATSC countries preferring to reduce the horizontal resolution by anamorphically scaling a pillarboxed image.

====HD====
High-definition television (HDTV) provides a resolution that is substantially higher than that of standard-definition television.

HDTV may be transmitted in various formats:
* 1080p: 1920×1080p: 2,073,600 pixels (~2.07 megapixels) per frame
* 1080i: 1920×1080i: 1,036,800 pixels (~1.04 MP) per field or 2,073,600 pixels (~2.07 MP) per frame
** A non-standard CEA resolution exists in some countries such as 1440×1080i: 777,600 pixels (~0.78 MP) per field or 1,555,200 pixels (~1.56 MP) per frame
* 720p: 1280×720p: 921,600 pixels (~0.92 MP) per frame

====UHD====
Ultra-high-definition television (also known as Super Hi-Vision, Ultra HD television, UltraHD, UHDTV, or UHD) includes 4K UHD (2160p) and 8K UHD (4320p), which are two digital video formats proposed by NHK Science &amp; Technology Research Laboratories and defined and approved by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU). The Consumer Electronics Association announced on 17 October 2012 that &quot;Ultra High Definition,&quot; or &quot;Ultra HD,&quot; would be used for displays that have an aspect ratio of at least 16:9 and at least one digital input capable of carrying and presenting natural video at a minimum resolution of 3840×2160 pixels.

===Market share===
North American consumers purchase a new television set on average every seven years, and the average household owns 2.8 televisions. , 48 million are sold each year at an average price of $460 and size of .

==Content==
===Programming===

Getting TV programming shown to the public can happen in many other ways. After production, the next step is to market and deliver the product to whichever markets are open to using it. This typically happens on two levels:

# Original run or First run: a producer creates a program of one or multiple episodes and shows it on a station or network that has either paid for the production itself or granted a license by the television producers to do the same.
# Broadcast syndication: this is the terminology rather broadly used to describe secondary programming usages (beyond the original run). It includes secondary runs in the country of the first issue, but also international usage, which may not be managed by the originating producer. In many cases, other companies, television stations, or individuals are engaged to do the syndication work, in other words, to sell the product into the markets they are allowed to sell into by contract from the copyright holders; in most cases, the producers.

First-run programming is increasing on subscription services outside of the United States, but few domestically produced programs are syndicated on domestic free-to-air (FTA) elsewhere. This practice is increasing, however, generally on digital-only FTA channels or with subscriber-only, first-run material appearing on FTA. Unlike the United States, repeat FTA screenings of an FTA network program usually only occur on that network. Also, affiliates rarely buy or produce non-network programming that is not focused on local programming.

===Genres===

Television genres include a broad range of programming types that entertain, inform, and educate viewers. The most expensive entertainment genres to produce are usually dramas and dramatic miniseries. However, other genres, such as historical Western genres, may also have high production costs.

Pop culture entertainment genres include action-oriented shows such as police, crime, detective dramas, horror, or thriller shows. As well, there are also other variants of the drama genre, such as medical dramas and daytime soap operas. Sci-fi series can fall into either the drama or action category, depending on whether they emphasize philosophical questions or high adventure. Comedy is a popular genre that includes situation comedy (sitcom) and animated series for the adult demographic, such as Comedy Central&#x27;s &quot;South Park&quot;.

The least expensive forms of entertainment programming genres are game shows, talk shows, variety shows, and reality television. Game shows feature contestants answering questions and solving puzzles to win prizes. Talk shows contain interviews with film, television, music, and sports celebrities and public figures. Variety shows feature a range of musical performers and other entertainers, such as comedians and magicians, introduced by a host or Master of Ceremonies. There is some crossover between some talk shows and variety shows because leading talk shows often feature performances by bands, singers, comedians, and other performers in between the interview segments. Reality television series &quot;regular&quot; people (i.e., not actors) facing unusual challenges or experiences ranging from arrest by police officers (&quot;COPS&quot;) to significant weight loss (&quot;The Biggest Loser&quot;). A derived version of reality shows depicts celebrities doing mundane activities such as going about their everyday life (&quot;The Osbournes&quot;, &quot;Snoop Dogg&#x27;s Father Hood&quot;) or doing regular jobs (&quot;The Simple Life&quot;).

Fictional television programs that some television scholars and broadcasting advocacy groups argue are &quot;quality television&quot;, include series such as &quot;Twin Peaks&quot; and &quot;The Sopranos&quot;. Kristin Thompson argues that some of these television series exhibit traits also found in art films, such as psychological realism, narrative complexity, and ambiguous plotlines. Nonfiction television programs that some television scholars and broadcasting advocacy groups argue are &quot;quality television&quot; include a range of serious, noncommercial programming aimed at a niche audience, such as documentaries and public affairs shows.

===Funding===
Around the world, broadcast television is financed by government, advertising, licensing (a form of tax), subscription, or any combination of these. To protect revenues, subscription television channels are usually encrypted to ensure that only subscribers receive the decryption codes to see the signal. Unencrypted channels are known as free-to-air or FTA. In 2009, the global TV market represented 1,217.2 million TV households with at least one TV and total revenues of 268.9 billion EUR (declining 1.2% compared to 2008). North America had the biggest TV revenue market share with 39% followed by Europe (31%), Asia-Pacific (21%), Latin America (8%), and Africa and the Middle East (2%). Globally, the different TV revenue sources are divided into 45–50% TV advertising revenues, 40–45% subscription fees, and 10% public funding.

====Advertising====
Television&#x27;s broad reach makes it a powerful and attractive medium for advertisers. Many television networks and stations sell blocks of broadcast time to advertisers (&quot;sponsors&quot;) to fund their programming. Television advertisements (variously called a television commercial, commercial, or ad in American English, and known in British English as an advert) is a span of television programming produced and paid for by an organization, which conveys a message, typically to market a product or service. Advertising revenue provides a significant portion of the funding for most privately owned television networks. The vast majority of television advertisements today consist of brief advertising spots, ranging in length from a few seconds to several minutes (as well as program-length infomercials). Advertisements of this sort have been used to promote a wide variety of goods, services, and ideas since the beginning of television.

The effects of television advertising upon the viewing public (and the effects of mass media in general) have been the subject of discourse by philosophers, including Marshall McLuhan. The viewership of television programming, as measured by companies such as Nielsen Media Research, is often used as a metric for television advertisement placement and, consequently, for the rates charged to advertisers to air within a given network, television program, or time of day (called a &quot;daypart&quot;). In many countries, including the United States, television campaign advertisements is considered indispensable for a political campaign. In other countries, such as France, political advertising on television is heavily restricted, while some countries, such as Norway, completely ban political advertisements.

The first official, paid television advertisement was broadcast in the United States on 1 July 1941, over New York station WNBT (now WNBC) before a baseball game between the Brooklyn Dodgers and Philadelphia Phillies. The announcement for Bulova watches, for which the company paid anywhere from $4.00 to $9.00 (reports vary), displayed a WNBT test pattern modified to look like a clock with the hands showing the time. The Bulova logo, with the phrase &quot;Bulova Watch Time,&quot; was shown in the lower right-hand quadrant of the test pattern while the second hand swept around the dial for one minute. The first TV ad broadcast in the U.K. was on ITV on 22 September 1955, advertising Gibbs SR toothpaste. The first TV ad broadcast in Asia was on Nippon Television in Tokyo on 28 August 1953, advertising Seikosha (now Seiko), which also displayed a clock with the current time.

====United States====
Since inception in the US in 1941, television commercials have become one of the most effective, persuasive, and popular methods of selling products of many sorts, especially consumer goods. During the 1940s and into the 1950s, programs were hosted by single advertisers. This, in turn, gave great creative control to the advertisers over the content of the show. Perhaps due to the quiz show scandals in the 1950s, networks shifted to the magazine concept, introducing advertising breaks with other advertisers.

U.S. advertising rates are determined primarily by Nielsen ratings. The time of the day and popularity of the channel determine how much a TV commercial can cost. For example, it can cost approximately $750,000 for a 30-second block of commercial time during the highly popular singing competition &quot;American Idol&quot;, while the same amount of time for the Super Bowl can cost several million dollars. Conversely, lesser-viewed time slots, such as early mornings and weekday afternoons, are often sold in bulk to producers of infomercials at far lower rates. In recent years, paid programs or infomercials have become common, usually in lengths of 30 minutes or one hour. Some drug companies and other businesses have even created &quot;news&quot; items for broadcast, known in the industry as video news releases, paying program directors to use them.

Some television programs also deliberately place products into their shows as advertisements, a practice started in feature films and known as product placement. For example, a character could be drinking a certain kind of soda, going to a particular chain restaurant, or driving a certain make of car. (This is sometimes very subtle, with shows having vehicles provided by manufacturers for low cost in exchange as a product placement). Sometimes, a specific brand or trade mark, or music from a certain artist or group, is used. (This excludes guest appearances by artists who perform on the show.)

====United Kingdom====
The TV regulator oversees TV advertising in the United Kingdom. Its restrictions have applied since the early days of commercially funded TV. Despite this, an early TV mogul, Roy Thomson, likened the broadcasting license as being a &quot;license to print money&quot;. Restrictions mean that the big three national commercial TV channels: ITV, Channel 4, and Channel 5 can show an average of only seven minutes of advertising per hour (eight minutes in the peak period). Other broadcasters must average no more than nine minutes (twelve in the peak). This means that many imported TV shows from the U.S. have unnatural pauses where the British company does not use the narrative breaks intended for more frequent U.S. advertising. Advertisements must not be inserted in the course of certain specific proscribed types of programs that last less than half an hour in scheduled duration; this list includes any news or current affairs programs, documentaries, and programs for children; additionally, advertisements may not be carried in a program designed and broadcast for reception in schools or in any religious broadcasting service or other devotional program or during a formal Royal ceremony or occasion. There also must be clear demarcations in time between the programs and the advertisements. The BBC, being strictly non-commercial, is not allowed to show adverts on television in the U.K., though it has advertising-funded channels abroad. The majority of its budget comes from television license fees (see below) and broadcast syndication, the sale of content to other broadcasters.

====Ireland====
Broadcast advertising is regulated by the Broadcasting Authority of Ireland.

====Subscription====
Some TV channels are partly funded from subscriptions; therefore, the signals are encrypted during the broadcast to ensure that only the paying subscribers have access to the decryption codes to watch pay television or specialty channels. Most subscription services are also funded by advertising.

====Taxation or license====
Television services in some countries may be funded by a television licence or a form of taxation, which means that advertising plays a lesser role or no role at all. For example, some channels may carry no advertising at all and some very little, including:
* Australia (ABC Television)
* Belgium (VRT for Flanders and RTBF for Wallonia)
* Denmark (DR)
* Ireland (RTÉ)
* Japan (NHK)
* Norway (NRK)
* Sweden (SVT)
* Switzerland (SRG SSR)
* Republic of China (Taiwan) (PTS)
* United Kingdom (BBC Television)
* United States (PBS)

The British Broadcasting Corporation&#x27;s TV service carries no television advertising on its UK channels and is funded by an annual television license paid by the occupiers of premises receiving live telecasts. it was estimated that approximately 26.8 million UK private domestic households owned televisions, with approximately 25 million TV licences in all premises in force as of 2010. This television license fee is set by the government, but the BBC is not answerable to or controlled by the government. two main BBC TV channels were watched by almost 90% of the population each week and overall had 27% share of total viewing, despite the fact that 85% of homes were multi-channel, with 42% of these having access to 200 free-to-air channels via satellite and another 43% having access to 30 or more channels via Freeview. the licence that funds the advertising-free BBC TV channels cost £159 for a colour TV Licence and £53.50 for a black and white TV Licence (free or reduced for some groups).

The Australian Broadcasting Corporation&#x27;s television services in Australia carry no advertising by external sources; it is banned under the &quot;Australian Broadcasting Corporation Act 1983&quot;, which also ensures its editorial independence. The ABC receives most of its funding from the Australian Government (some revenue is received from its Commercial division), but it has suffered progressive funding cuts under Liberal governments since the 1996 Howard government, with particularly deep cuts in 2014 under the Turnbull government, and an ongoing indexation freeze . The funds provide for the ABC&#x27;s television, radio, online, and international outputs, although ABC Australia, which broadcasts throughout the Asia-Pacific region, receives additional funds through DFAT and some advertising on the channel.

In France, government-funded channels carry advertisements, yet those who own television sets have to pay an annual tax (&quot;la redevance audiovisuelle&quot;).

In Japan, NHK is paid for by license fees (known in Japanese as ). The broadcast law that governs NHK&#x27;s funding stipulates that any television equipped to receive NHK is required to pay. The fee is standardized, with discounts for office workers and students who commute, as well as a general discount for residents of Okinawa prefecture.

===Broadcast programming===
Broadcast programming, or TV listings in the United Kingdom, is the practice of organizing television programs in a schedule, with broadcast automation used to regularly change the scheduling of TV programs to build an audience for a new show, retain that audience, or compete with other broadcasters&#x27; programs.

==Social aspects==
Television has played a pivotal role in the socialization of the 20th and 21st centuries. There are many aspects of television that can be addressed, including negative issues such as media violence. Current research is discovering that individuals suffering from social isolation can employ television to create what is termed a parasocial or faux relationship with characters from their favorite television shows and movies as a way of deflecting feelings of loneliness and social deprivation. Several studies have found that educational television has many advantages. The article &quot;The Good Things about Television&quot; argues that television can be a very powerful and effective learning tool for children if used wisely. With respect to faith, many Christian denominations use television for religious broadcasting.

===Religious opposition===
Methodist denominations in the conservative holiness movement, such as the Allegheny Wesleyan Methodist Connection and the Evangelical Wesleyan Church, eschew the use of the television. Some Baptists, such as those affiliated with Pensacola Christian College, also eschew television. Many Traditional Catholic congregations such as the Society of Saint Pius X (SSPX), as with Laestadian Lutherans, and Conservative Anabaptists such as the Dunkard Brethren Church, oppose the presence of television in the household, teaching that it is an occasion of sin.

==Negative impacts==
Children, especially those aged five or younger, are at risk of injury from falling televisions. A CRT-style television that falls on a child will, because of its weight, hit with the equivalent force of falling multiple stories from a building. Newer flat-screen televisions are &quot;top-heavy and have narrow bases&quot;, which means that a small child can easily pull one over. , TV tip-overs were responsible for more than 10,000 injuries per year to children in the United States, at a cost of more than million per year (equivalent to million per year in ) in emergency care.

A 2017 study in &quot;The Journal of Human Resources&quot; found that exposure to cable television reduced cognitive ability and high school graduation rates for boys. This effect was stronger for boys from more educated families. The article suggests a mechanism where light television entertainment crowds out more cognitively stimulating activities.

With high lead content in CRTs and the rapid diffusion of new flat-panel display technologies, some of which (LCDs) use lamps which contain mercury, there is growing concern about electronic waste from discarded televisions. Related occupational health concerns exist, as well, for disassemblers removing copper wiring and other materials from CRTs. Further environmental concerns related to television design and use relate to the devices&#x27; increasing electrical energy requirements.

==See also==
* B-television
* Broadcast-safe
* Broadcast television systems
* Content discovery platform
* Information-action ratio
* List of countries by number of television broadcast stations
* List of television manufacturers
* List of years in television
* Lists of television channels
* Media psychology
* MicroLED
* Sign language on television
* Telephilia
* Television addiction
* Television studies
* Test card
* TV accessory
==References==
==Further reading==
* Pierre Bourdieu, &quot;On Television&quot;, The New Press, 2001.
* Tim Brooks and Earle March, &quot;The Complete Guide to Prime Time Network and Cable TV Shows&quot;, 8th ed., Ballantine, 2002.
* Jacques Derrida and Bernard Stiegler, &quot;Echographies of Television&quot;, Polity Press, 2002.
* David E. Fisher and Marshall J. Fisher, &quot;Tube: the Invention of Television&quot;, Counterpoint, Washington, D.C., 1996, .
* Steven Johnson, &quot;Everything Bad is Good for You: How Today&#x27;s Popular Culture Is Actually Making Us Smarter&quot;, New York, Riverhead (Penguin), 2005, 2006, .
* Jerry Mander, &quot;Four Arguments for the Elimination of Television&quot;, Perennial, 1978.
* Jerry Mander, &quot;In the Absence of the Sacred&quot;, Sierra Club Books, 1992, .
* Neil Postman, &quot;Amusing Ourselves to Death: Public Discourse in the Age of Show Business&quot;, New York, Penguin US, 1985, .
* Evan I. Schwartz, &quot;The Last Lone Inventor: A Tale of Genius, Deceit, and the Birth of Television&quot;, New York, Harper Paperbacks, 2003, .
* Beretta E. Smith-Shomade, &quot;Shaded Lives: African-American Women and Television&quot;, Rutgers University Press, 2002.
* Alan Taylor, &quot;We, the Media: Pedagogic Intrusions into US Mainstream Film and Television News Broadcasting Rhetoric&quot;, Peter Lang, 2005, .
* Amanda D. Lotz, &quot;The Television Will Be Revolutionized&quot;, New York University Press, 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="0" end="10" title="Television" label="Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="12" end="14" title="Television" label="TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="21" end="38" title="telecommunications" label="telecommunication"/>
<link wikidata="Q15824073" start="39" end="45" title="media (communication)" label="medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q190157" start="50" end="62" title="transmitting" label="transmitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075" start="135" end="149" title="television set" label="television set"/>
<link wikidata="Q118093" start="176" end="188" title="signal transmission" label="transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033" start="206" end="217" title="mass media" label="mass medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="309" end="327" title="radio broadcasting" label="radio broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q159391" start="375" end="389" title="radio receiver" label="radio receiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="567" end="579" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q17946" start="848" end="862" title="public opinion" label="public opinion"/>
<link wikidata="Q690148" start="1033" end="1040" title="Betamax" label="Betamax"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="1045" end="1048" title="VHS" label="VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q273309" start="1056" end="1065" title="LaserDisc" label="LaserDisc"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="1082" end="1098" title="hard disk drives" label="hard disk drives"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="1100" end="1103" title="Compact disc" label="CDs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="1105" end="1108" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427183" start="1111" end="1123" title="flash drives" label="flash drives"/>
<link wikidata="Q178990" start="1141" end="1147" title="HD DVD" label="HD DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="1153" end="1165" title="Blu-ray Disc" label="Blu-ray Disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q865042" start="1178" end="1201" title="digital video recorders" label="digital video recorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q483639" start="1437" end="1446" title="Cloud computing" label="the cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="1487" end="1494" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q202255" start="1528" end="1546" title="digital television" label="digital television"/>
<link wikidata="Q243314" start="1632" end="1662" title="standard-definition television" label="standard-definition television"/>
<link wikidata="Q244581" start="1671" end="1675" title="576i" label="576i"/>
<link wikidata="Q184915" start="1686" end="1696" title="interlaced video" label="interlaced"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195242" start="1721" end="1725" title="480i" label="480i"/>
<link wikidata="Q133454" start="1730" end="1756" title="high-definition television" label="high-definition television"/>
<link wikidata="Q210521" start="1782" end="1792" title="Image resolution" label="resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q17211" start="1869" end="1874" title="1080p" label="1080p"/>
<link wikidata="Q168614" start="1876" end="1881" title="1080i" label="1080i"/>
<link wikidata="Q263187" start="1886" end="1890" title="720p" label="720p"/>
<link wikidata="Q564635" start="1926" end="1942" title="smart television" label="smart television"/>
<link wikidata="Q841645" start="1944" end="1963" title="Internet television" label="Internet television"/>
<link wikidata="Q723685" start="2054" end="2069" title="streaming video" label="streaming video"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740856" start="2096" end="2114" title="Amazon Prime Video" label="Amazon Prime Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557489" start="2116" end="2123" title="iPlayer" label="iPlayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630304" start="2128" end="2132" title="Hulu" label="Hulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q259059" start="2168" end="2178" title="households" label="households"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="2230" end="2246" title="cathode-ray tube" label="cathode-ray tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q83341" start="2345" end="2349" title="Liquid-crystal display" label="LCDs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2356" end="2375" title="Cold cathode#Lamps" label="fluorescent-backlit"/>
<link wikidata="Q12810597" start="2380" end="2383" title="LED-backlit LCD display" label="LED"/>
<link wikidata="Q209593" start="2386" end="2390" title="OLED" label="OLED"/>
<link wikidata="Q185146" start="2405" end="2419" title="plasma display" label="plasma display"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="2550" end="2553" title="Cathode-ray tube" label="CRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q19022" start="2576" end="2581" title="2010s" label="2010s"/>
<link wikidata="Q523366" start="2686" end="2710" title="Digital Light Processing" label="Digital Light Processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q131164" start="2951" end="2958" title="Web 2.0" label="Web 2.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396184" start="3124" end="3139" title="Radio frequency" label="radio-frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285993" start="3140" end="3162" title="television transmitter" label="television transmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q15078788" start="3167" end="3176" title="broadcasting" label="broadcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="3277" end="3307" title="Cable television" label="coaxial cable or optical fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q209588" start="3309" end="3318" title="Satellite television" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q258137" start="3417" end="3423" title="analog television" label="analog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330048" start="3439" end="3449" title="Digital television transition" label="transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815901" start="3586" end="3604" title="electronic circuit" label="electronic circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544018" start="3619" end="3624" title="Tuner (radio)" label="tuner"/>
<link wikidata="Q327065" start="3680" end="3694" title="display device" label="display device"/>
<link wikidata="Q327065" start="3736" end="3749" title="video monitor" label="video monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q190157" start="3851" end="3862" title="transmitter" label="transmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995013" start="4053" end="4071" title="Constantin Perskyi" label="Constantin Perskyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q753646" start="4218" end="4242" title="Exposition Universelle (1900)" label="International World Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q540885" start="4258" end="4268" title="anglicized" label="anglicized"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="4395" end="4404" title="telegraph" label="telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373572" start="4408" end="4422" title="telephone wire" label="telephone wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075" start="4781" end="4795" title="television set" label="television set"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="5041" end="5057" title="cathode-ray tube" label="cathode-ray tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q125171" start="5095" end="5109" title="flat-screen TV" label="flat-screen TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q132744" start="5198" end="5220" title="Facsimile transmission" label="Facsimile transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q524036" start="5329" end="5343" title="Alexander Bain (inventor)" label="Alexander Bain"/>
<link wikidata="Q326419" start="5400" end="5418" title="Frederick Bakewell" label="Frederick Bakewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q434488" start="5470" end="5486" title="Willoughby Smith" label="Willoughby Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601129" start="5502" end="5519" title="photoconductivity" label="photoconductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q876" start="5535" end="5543" title="selenium" label="selenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q63709" start="5597" end="5624" title="Paul Gottlieb Nipkow" label="Paul Julius Gottlieb Nipkow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137563" start="5651" end="5662" title="Nipkow disk" label="Nipkow disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="5674" end="5680" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524612" start="5884" end="5900" title="rasterizer" label="image rasterizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995013" start="5934" end="5952" title="Constantin Perskyi" label="Constantin Perskyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q753646" start="6061" end="6085" title="Exposition Universelle (1900)" label="International World Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q354863" start="6316" end="6329" title="Lee de Forest" label="Lee de Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q68533" start="6334" end="6345" title="Arthur Korn" label="Arthur Korn"/>
<link wikidata="Q876" start="6520" end="6528" title="selenium" label="selenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q840916" start="6571" end="6581" title="commutator (electric)" label="commutator"/>
<link wikidata="Q169342" start="6607" end="6613" title="retina" label="retina"/>
<link wikidata="Q883038" start="6642" end="6651" title="Kerr effect" label="Kerr cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q355198" start="6862" end="6867" title="pixel" label="pixel"/>
<link wikidata="Q276286" start="7076" end="7088" title="Boris Rosing" label="Boris Rosing"/>
<link wikidata="Q296545" start="7105" end="7122" title="Vladimir K. Zworykin" label="Vladimir Zworykin"/>
<link wikidata="Q57077" start="7276" end="7281" title="Karl Ferdinand Braun" label="Braun"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="7294" end="7310" title="cathode-ray tube" label="cathode-ray tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q18417" start="7496" end="7509" title="Édouard Belin" label="Édouard Belin"/>
<link wikidata="Q117833347" start="7556" end="7567" title="belinograph" label="belinograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q133544" start="7648" end="7664" title="John Logie Baird" label="John Logie Baird"/>
<link wikidata="Q898700" start="7795" end="7805" title="silhouette" label="silhouette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475656" start="7826" end="7836" title="Selfridges" label="Selfridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="7864" end="7870" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983921" start="8577" end="8593" title="thallium sulfide" label="thallium sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523686" start="8625" end="8638" title="Theodore Case" label="Theodore Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240002" start="9072" end="9081" title="scan line" label="scan line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="9304" end="9311" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q822630" start="9756" end="9769" title="Bernard Natan" label="Bernard Natan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544011" start="9773" end="9778" title="Pathé" label="Pathé"/>
<link wikidata="Q133544" start="9842" end="9847" title="John Logie Baird" label="Baird"/>
<link wikidata="Q55629" start="9910" end="9919" title="Epsom Derby" label="The Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q152466" start="9946" end="9962" title="ultra-short wave" label="ultra-short wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="10051" end="10054" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072028" start="10157" end="10169" title="17.5 mm film" label="17.5 mm film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064424" start="10265" end="10288" title="Charles Francis Jenkins" label="Charles Francis Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459541" start="10845" end="10856" title="United States Patent and Trademark Office" label="U.S. Patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383002" start="10949" end="10964" title="Herbert E. Ives" label="Herbert E. Ives"/>
<link wikidata="Q731959" start="10969" end="10979" title="Frank Gray (researcher)" label="Frank Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="10983" end="11010" title="Bell Labs" label="Bell Telephone Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811078" start="11519" end="11530" title="copper wire" label="copper wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002645" start="11593" end="11613" title="Whippany, New Jersey" label="Whippany, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003296" start="11729" end="11750" title="Secretary of Commerce" label="Secretary of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="11751" end="11765" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823487" start="11769" end="11788" title="flying-spot scanner" label="flying-spot scanner"/>
<link wikidata="Q723733" start="11969" end="11980" title="millisecond" label="millisecond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955018" start="12437" end="12441" title="WRGB" label="WRGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="12534" end="12550" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q331380" start="12563" end="12578" title="Schenectady, NY" label="Schenectady, NY"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950020" start="12612" end="12615" title="WGY (AM)" label="WGY"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="12652" end="12664" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q333265" start="12666" end="12679" title="Leon Theremin" label="Leon Theremin"/>
<link wikidata="Q184915" start="12814" end="12825" title="interlaced video" label="interlacing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473588" start="13116" end="13134" title="Kenjiro Takayanagi" label="Kenjiro Takayanagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151045" start="13364" end="13383" title="Shizuoka University" label="Shizuoka University"/>
<link wikidata="Q471889" start="13465" end="13469" title="Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers" label="SCAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="13476" end="13488" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q17111872" start="14106" end="14127" title="Peck Television Corp." label="Peck Television Corp."/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="14164" end="14172" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14230" end="14246" title="Video camera tube#Image dissector" label="image dissectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="14274" end="14290" title="cathode-ray tube" label="cathode-ray tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q169470" start="14701" end="14710" title="physicist" label="physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q47285" start="14711" end="14724" title="J. J. Thomson" label="J. J. Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="14834" end="14850" title="cathode-ray tube" label="cathode-ray tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q57077" start="14927" end="14942" title="Ferdinand Braun" label="Ferdinand Braun"/>
<link wikidata="Q814902" start="15009" end="15021" title="cold cathode" label="cold-cathode"/>
<link wikidata="Q11656" start="15022" end="15027" title="diode" label="diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537374" start="15051" end="15063" title="Crookes tube" label="Crookes tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q11248330" start="15072" end="15080" title="phosphor" label="phosphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641959" start="15303" end="15316" title="Raster scan" label="raster images"/>
<link wikidata="Q276286" start="15373" end="15385" title="Boris Rosing" label="Boris Rosing"/>
<link wikidata="Q34508" start="15437" end="15449" title="video signal" label="video signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q260729" start="15542" end="15573" title="Alan Archibald Campbell-Swinton" label="Alan Archibald Campbell-Swinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="15591" end="15604" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q180445" start="15662" end="15668" title="Nature (journal)" label="Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="15928" end="15937" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q180445" start="16005" end="16011" title="Nature (journal)" label="Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q207340" start="16346" end="16357" title="cathode ray" label="cathode ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="16532" end="16535" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q218038" start="16569" end="16572" title="RCA" label="RCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365473" start="16872" end="16883" title="hot cathode" label="hot cathode"/>
<link wikidata="Q202881" start="16901" end="16916" title="John Bertrand Johnson" label="John B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337490" start="16948" end="16961" title="Johnson–Nyquist noise" label="Johnson noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031258" start="16992" end="17008" title="Western Electric" label="Western Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047948" start="17080" end="17094" title="Kálmán Tihanyi" label="Kálmán Tihanyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="17732" end="17739" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q218038" start="18057" end="18060" title="RCA" label="RCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570706" start="18074" end="18084" title="iconoscope" label="iconoscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473588" start="18521" end="18539" title="Kenjiro Takayanagi" label="Kenjiro Takayanagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423842" start="18860" end="18875" title="Allen B. DuMont" label="Allen B. DuMont"/>
<link wikidata="Q360098" start="19030" end="19046" title="Philo Farnsworth" label="Philo Farnsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q9247728" start="19054" end="19069" title="image dissector" label="image dissector"/>
<link wikidata="Q632404" start="19844" end="19865" title="Westinghouse Electric (1886)" label="Westinghouse Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q13847185" start="20373" end="20392" title="patent interference" label="patent interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459541" start="20422" end="20440" title="United States Patent and Trademark Office" label="U.S. Patent Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q179836" start="21419" end="21422" title="lux" label="lux"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049016" start="21637" end="21648" title="multipactor effect" label="Multipactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q695795" start="21952" end="21969" title="Berlin Radio Show" label="Berlin Radio Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="21988" end="21994" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q70999" start="21996" end="22015" title="Manfred von Ardenne" label="Manfred von Ardenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823487" start="22250" end="22269" title="flying-spot scanner" label="flying-spot scanner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407241" start="22543" end="22568" title="Fernsehsender Paul Nipkow" label="Fernsehsender Paul Nipkow"/>
<link wikidata="Q8150" start="22611" end="22636" title="1936 Summer Olympic Games" label="1936 Summer Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q339484" start="22819" end="22837" title="Franklin Institute" label="Franklin Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="22841" end="22853" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q142582" start="22917" end="22944" title="Guillermo González Camarena" label="Guillermo González Camarena"/>
<link wikidata="Q849194" start="23155" end="23171" title="color television" label="color television"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="23197" end="23200" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q376888" start="23225" end="23240" title="Isaac Shoenberg" label="Isaac Shoenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291066" start="23411" end="23432" title="405-line television system" label="405-line broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q254650" start="23483" end="23499" title="Alexandra Palace" label="Alexandra Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="24031" end="24034" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q376888" start="24066" end="24081" title="Isaac Shoenberg" label="Isaac Shoenberg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24328" end="24341" title="Video camera tube#Super-Emitron and image iconoscope" label="super-Emitron"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24346" end="24357" title="Video camera tube#Orthicon and CPS Emitron" label="CPS Emitron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760378" start="24547" end="24567" title="outside broadcasting" label="outside broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6597183" start="24603" end="24616" title="Armistice Day" label="Armistice Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q207420" start="24915" end="24946" title="1939 New York World&amp;#x27;s Fair" label="1939 New York World&amp;#x27;s Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144530" start="25347" end="25357" title="patent war" label="patent war"/>
<link wikidata="Q18670447" start="25892" end="25899" title="Video camera tube" label="vidicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18670447" start="25904" end="25913" title="Video camera tube" label="plumbicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q170416" start="26248" end="26255" title="Philips" label="Philips"/>
<link wikidata="Q27178438" start="27065" end="27079" title="Benjamin Adler" label="Benjamin Adler"/>
<link wikidata="Q376047" start="27421" end="27425" title="Comité consultatif international pour la radio" label="CCIR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047948" start="27445" end="27459" title="Kálmán Tihanyi" label="Kálmán Tihanyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q185146" start="27487" end="27501" title="plasma display" label="plasma display"/>
<link wikidata="Q125171" start="27513" end="27531" title="flat-panel display" label="flat-panel display"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075" start="27558" end="27573" title="television sets" label="television sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q174925" start="27601" end="27616" title="analog circuits" label="analog circuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="27625" end="27637" title="vacuum tubes" label="vacuum tubes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="27684" end="27694" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="27698" end="27707" title="Bell Labs" label="Bell Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="27709" end="27713" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q352496" start="27722" end="27734" title="Masaru Ibuka" label="Masaru Ibuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815901" start="27776" end="27795" title="electronic circuits" label="electronic circuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q611957" start="27914" end="27925" title="solid-state electronics" label="solid-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562520" start="27956" end="27968" title="Sony TV8-301" label="Sony TV8-301"/>
<link wikidata="Q706295" start="28634" end="28648" title="Jan Szczepanik" label="Jan Szczepanik"/>
<link wikidata="Q876" start="28701" end="28709" title="selenium" label="selenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624768" start="28997" end="29013" title="Hovannes Adamian" label="Hovannes Adamian"/>
<link wikidata="Q133544" start="29334" end="29350" title="John Logie Baird" label="John Logie Baird"/>
<link wikidata="Q840916" start="29623" end="29633" title="commutator (electric)" label="commutator"/>
<link wikidata="Q202902" start="29806" end="29820" title="The Crystal Palace" label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2173732" start="29869" end="29885" title="Dominion Theatre" label="Dominion Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="29950" end="29967" title="Bell Laboratories" label="Bell Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q58803" start="30013" end="30032" title="Solar cell" label="photoelectric cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q943577" start="30747" end="30766" title="Peter Carl Goldmark" label="Peter Carl Goldmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="30816" end="30819" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570706" start="30840" end="30850" title="Iconoscope" label="Iconoscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="31166" end="31199" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="Federal Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="31376" end="31379" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075" start="31582" end="31597" title="television sets" label="television sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536750" start="31775" end="31795" title="War Production Board" label="War Production Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q25304973" start="32067" end="32077" title="Telechrome" label="Telechrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q35158" start="32465" end="32477" title="Stereoscopy" label="stereoscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529892" start="32940" end="32949" title="Geer tube" label="Geer tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162632" start="33123" end="33131" title="Penetron" label="Penetron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087616" start="33276" end="33286" title="Chromatron" label="Chromatron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144899" start="33450" end="33470" title="broadcast television" label="broadcast television"/>
<link wikidata="Q249998" start="33498" end="33507" title="bandwidth (signal processing)" label="bandwidth"/>
<link wikidata="Q838368" start="33554" end="33569" title="black-and-white" label="black-and-white"/>
<link wikidata="Q902174" start="33616" end="33630" title="radio spectrum" label="radio spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q185796" start="33687" end="33724" title="NTSC" label="National Television Systems Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q218038" start="33772" end="33775" title="RCA" label="RCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742729" start="34219" end="34226" title="America (West Side Story song)" label="America"/>
<link wikidata="Q669010" start="34237" end="34252" title="West Side Story" label="West Side Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750396" start="34791" end="34803" title="The Marriage (American TV series)" label="The Marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="35579" end="35581" title="General Electric" label="GE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908945" start="35624" end="35635" title="Porta-Color" label="Porta-Color"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="35688" end="35698" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251994" start="35705" end="35714" title="UHF television broadcasting" label="UHF tuner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269418" start="35793" end="35799" title="Quasar (brand)" label="Quasar"/>
<link wikidata="Q105973" start="36061" end="36064" title="PAL" label="PAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q327065" start="36670" end="36683" title="video monitor" label="video monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q258137" start="37026" end="37043" title="analog television" label="analog television"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493" start="37052" end="37068" title="data compression" label="data compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="37422" end="37431" title="computers" label="computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576430" start="37590" end="37599" title="Bandwidth (computing)" label="bandwidth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4011369" start="37616" end="37628" title="uncompressed video" label="uncompressed"/>
<link wikidata="Q173131" start="37629" end="37642" title="digital video" label="digital video"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351621" start="37664" end="37670" title="Mbit/s" label="Mbit/s"/>
<link wikidata="Q243314" start="37677" end="37707" title="standard-definition television" label="standard-definition television"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351621" start="37733" end="37739" title="Gbit/s" label="Gbit/s"/>
<link wikidata="Q133454" start="37744" end="37770" title="high-definition television" label="high-definition television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054787" start="37833" end="37863" title="Nippon Telegraph and Telephone" label="Nippon Telegraph and Telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q905554" start="37878" end="37917" title="Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications (Japan)" label="Ministry of Posts and Telecommunication"/>
<link wikidata="Q581105" start="38229" end="38249" title="consumer electronics" label="consumer electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q133454" start="38293" end="38297" title="High-definition television" label="HDTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145017" start="38314" end="38318" title="Multiple sub-Nyquist sampling encoding" label="MUSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q212128" start="38345" end="38348" title="NHK" label="NHK"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="38786" end="38789" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="FCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933770" start="39443" end="39452" title="simulcast" label="simulcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q185796" start="39626" end="39630" title="NTSC" label="NTSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3420076" start="39805" end="39818" title="aspect ratios" label="aspect ratios"/>
<link wikidata="Q581105" start="39896" end="39916" title="consumer electronics" label="consumer electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11661" start="39964" end="39981" title="computer industry" label="computer industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415395" start="39997" end="40010" title="film industry" label="film industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q83341" start="40843" end="40863" title="Lcd" label="Liquid-crystal (LCD)"/>
<link wikidata="Q685264" start="40948" end="40968" title="Progressive scanning" label="Progressive scanning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358497" start="41852" end="41872" title="electronics industry" label="electronics industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008872" start="42235" end="42255" title="William F. Schreiber" label="William F. Schreiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="42325" end="42362" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330048" start="42608" end="42637" title="Digital television transition" label="Digital television transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q842729" start="43291" end="43302" title="set-top box" label="set-top box"/>
<link wikidata="Q131164" start="43332" end="43339" title="Web 2.0" label="Web 2.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q2207328" start="43370" end="43395" title="technological convergence" label="technological convergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186952" start="43622" end="43639" title="interactive media" label="interactive media"/>
<link wikidata="Q829548" start="43641" end="43661" title="over-the-top content" label="over-the-top content"/>
<link wikidata="Q723685" start="43674" end="43683" title="video on demand" label="on-demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q220499" start="43684" end="43699" title="streaming media" label="streaming media"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324289" start="43705" end="43717" title="home network" label="home network"/>
<link wikidata="Q841645" start="43818" end="43829" title="Internet TV" label="Internet TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q177518" start="43831" end="43859" title="Internet Protocol television" label="Internet Protocol television"/>
<link wikidata="Q841645" start="43876" end="43882" title="Web TV" label="Web TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q841645" start="43884" end="43903" title="Internet television" label="Internet television"/>
<link wikidata="Q841645" start="44129" end="44143" title="Web television" label="Web television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749840" start="44925" end="44941" title="depth perception" label="depth perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q35158" start="44988" end="45000" title="stereoscopy" label="stereoscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q967795" start="45010" end="45020" title="free viewpoint television" label="multi-view"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633081" start="45030" end="45043" title="2D-plus-depth" label="2D-plus-depth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191960" start="45066" end="45076" title="3D display" label="3D display"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075" start="45093" end="45107" title="television set" label="television set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156879" start="45116" end="45140" title="active shutter 3D system" label="active shutter 3D system"/>
<link wikidata="Q229381" start="45146" end="45165" title="polarized 3D system" label="polarized 3D system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462910" start="45180" end="45196" title="Autostereoscopy" label="autostereoscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q133544" start="45312" end="45328" title="John Logie Baird" label="John Logie Baird"/>
<link wikidata="Q15078788" start="46164" end="46173" title="Broadcasting" label="broadcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455619" start="46253" end="46261" title="Frequency allocation" label="licensed"/>
<link wikidata="Q16858953" start="46315" end="46323" title="Channel (broadcasting)" label="channels"/>
<link wikidata="Q902174" start="46342" end="46346" title="band (radio)" label="band"/>
<link wikidata="Q175122" start="46358" end="46382" title="Terrestrial television" label="terrestrial broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q249998" start="46452" end="46461" title="Bandwidth (signal processing)" label="bandwidth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001305" start="46515" end="46523" title="Television channel" label="channels"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="46588" end="46621" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="Federal Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q25821" start="46848" end="46866" title="television license" label="television license"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="46927" end="46959" title="British Broadcasting Corporation" label="British Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="47007" end="47020" title="Royal Charter" label="Royal Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955018" start="47023" end="47027" title="WRGB" label="WRGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="47180" end="47196" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q331380" start="47208" end="47223" title="Schenectady, NY" label="Schenectady, NY"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731065" start="47453" end="47458" title="W2XBS" label="W2XBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731065" start="47487" end="47491" title="WNBC" label="WNBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q692603" start="47635" end="47648" title="Felix the Cat" label="Felix the Cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="47792" end="47795" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q254650" start="47896" end="47912" title="Alexandra Palace" label="Alexandra Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083894" start="48298" end="48328" title="digital terrestrial television" label="digital terrestrial television"/>
<link wikidata="Q11303396" start="48459" end="48471" title="cord cutters" label="cord cutters"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="48848" end="48859" title="fiber-optic" label="fiber-optic"/>
<link wikidata="Q374638" start="49715" end="49737" title="television programming" label="television programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q149918" start="49775" end="49798" title="communication satellite" label="communication satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q253843" start="49895" end="49909" title="satellite dish" label="satellite dish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129382" start="49916" end="49945" title="low-noise block downconverter" label="low-noise block downconverter"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075" start="50035" end="50049" title="television set" label="television set"/>
<link wikidata="Q842729" start="50077" end="50088" title="set-top box" label="set-top box"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544018" start="50106" end="50122" title="television tuner" label="television tuner"/>
<link wikidata="Q209588" start="50316" end="50353" title="direct-broadcast satellite television" label="direct-broadcast satellite television"/>
<link wikidata="Q209588" start="50456" end="50482" title="direct broadcast satellite" label="direct broadcast satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q306639" start="50490" end="50492" title="Ku band" label="Ku"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697098" start="50584" end="50607" title="television receive-only" label="television receive-only"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344775" start="50666" end="50672" title="C band (IEEE)" label="C-band"/>
<link wikidata="Q4483656" start="50687" end="50690" title="Fixed Service Satellite" label="FSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q851691" start="51010" end="51025" title="Digital signal (broadcasting)" label="Digital signals"/>
<link wikidata="Q133454" start="51038" end="51064" title="high-definition television" label="high-definition television"/>
<link wikidata="Q848981" start="51109" end="51120" title="free-to-air" label="free-to-air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421111" start="51124" end="51136" title="free-to-view" label="free-to-view"/>
<link wikidata="Q721830" start="51168" end="51182" title="pay television" label="pay television"/>
<link wikidata="Q47087" start="51249" end="51265" title="Arthur C. Clarke" label="Arthur C. Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358489" start="51453" end="51467" title="Wireless World" label="Wireless World"/>
<link wikidata="Q339484" start="51499" end="51517" title="Franklin Institute" label="Franklin Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7626301" start="51525" end="51548" title="Stuart Ballantine Medal" label="Stuart Ballantine Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q63114705" start="51648" end="51655" title="Telstar" label="Telstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="51675" end="51689" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651323" start="51849" end="51856" title="Relay program" label="Relay 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q472251" start="51960" end="51974" title="geosynchronous" label="geosynchronous"/>
<link wikidata="Q149918" start="51975" end="51998" title="communication satellite" label="communication satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q545738" start="52000" end="52008" title="Syncom 2" label="Syncom 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250614" start="52108" end="52118" title="Intelsat I" label="Intelsat I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508872" start="52273" end="52279" title="Orbita (TV system)" label="Orbita"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="52300" end="52312" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q593283" start="52392" end="52399" title="Molniya (satellite)" label="Molniya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3833047" start="52476" end="52484" title="downlink" label="downlink"/>
<link wikidata="Q546687" start="52607" end="52613" title="Anik 1" label="Anik 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819560" start="52654" end="52659" title="ATS-6" label="ATS-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q209588" start="52713" end="52739" title="Direct Broadcast Satellite" label="Direct Broadcast Satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q209588" start="53148" end="53162" title="Direct-To-Home" label="Direct-To-Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q877664" start="53175" end="53180" title="Ekran" label="Ekran"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251994" start="53316" end="53341" title="UHF television broadcasting" label="UHF television technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q269415" start="53468" end="53488" title="digital distribution" label="digital distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q564635" start="53949" end="53957" title="Smart TV" label="Smart TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q177518" start="53959" end="53963" title="IPTV" label="IPTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q841645" start="53973" end="53979" title="Web TV" label="Web TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q564635" start="53981" end="53997" title="Smart television" label="Smart television"/>
<link wikidata="Q841645" start="54198" end="54212" title="Web television" label="Web television"/>
<link wikidata="Q19881755" start="54420" end="54428" title="Sling TV" label="Sling TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056839" start="54489" end="54496" title="DirecTV" label="DirecTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q28126900" start="54575" end="54589" title="DirecTV Stream" label="DirecTV Stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033167" start="54600" end="54603" title="Sky UK" label="Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7065448" start="54658" end="54661" title="Now (Sky)" label="Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q723685" start="54672" end="54687" title="Video on demand" label="Video on demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="54696" end="54703" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="54721" end="54741" title="Primetime Emmy Awards" label="Primetime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4642142" start="54795" end="54821" title="65th Primetime Emmy Awards" label="65th Primetime Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330940" start="54850" end="54864" title="House of Cards (American TV series)" label="House of Cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q11598" start="54878" end="54898" title="Arrested Development" label="Arrested Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q5712285" start="54916" end="54929" title="Hemlock Grove (TV series)" label="Hemlock Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113804" start="54999" end="55006" title="Comcast" label="Comcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="55020" end="55023" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144899" start="55029" end="55041" title="Broadcast television systems" label="broadcast TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q194163" start="55083" end="55092" title="broadband" label="broadband"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015692" start="55098" end="55109" title="Cable television in the United States" label="basic cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q53720737" start="55138" end="55148" title="YouTube TV" label="YouTube TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="55689" end="55706" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638417" start="56112" end="56122" title="Mechanical television" label="mechanical"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="56224" end="56240" title="cathode-ray tube" label="cathode-ray tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q690148" start="56516" end="56523" title="Betamax" label="Betamax"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="56528" end="56531" title="VHS" label="VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="56675" end="56687" title="Blu-ray Disc" label="Blu-ray Disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q12810597" start="56874" end="56878" title="LED-backlit LCD display" label="LEDs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="57210" end="57221" title="vacuum tube" label="vacuum tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128174" start="57245" end="57257" title="electron gun" label="electron gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="57272" end="57281" title="electrons" label="electrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q191807" start="57309" end="57320" title="fluorescent" label="fluorescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165717" start="57487" end="57495" title="waveform" label="waveform"/>
<link wikidata="Q174320" start="57498" end="57510" title="oscilloscope" label="oscilloscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290" start="57535" end="57551" title="computer monitor" label="computer monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="57554" end="57559" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q392551" start="57786" end="57796" title="lead glass" label="lead glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="57852" end="57857" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290" start="57948" end="57964" title="computer monitor" label="computer monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641959" start="58072" end="58078" title="raster scan" label="raster"/>
<link wikidata="Q207340" start="58151" end="58165" title="electron beams" label="electron beams"/>
<link wikidata="Q34508" start="58233" end="58245" title="video signal" label="video signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358557" start="58477" end="58501" title="electrostatic deflection" label="electrostatic deflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q174320" start="58522" end="58534" title="oscilloscope" label="oscilloscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q275568" start="58627" end="58642" title="video projector" label="video projector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369469" start="58666" end="58692" title="digital micromirror device" label="digital micromirror device"/>
<link wikidata="Q6490526" start="58803" end="58817" title="Larry Hornbeck" label="Larry Hornbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q193412" start="58821" end="58838" title="Texas Instruments" label="Texas Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="59043" end="59054" title="Emmy Awards" label="Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q761706" start="59635" end="59649" title="digital cinema" label="digital cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q185146" start="59680" end="59686" title="plasma TV" label="plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q125171" start="59720" end="59738" title="flat-panel display" label="flat-panel display"/>
<link wikidata="Q10251" start="59808" end="59814" title="Plasma (physics)" label="plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725" start="59881" end="59893" title="electrically" label="electrically"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111" start="59894" end="59901" title="electric charge" label="charged"/>
<link wikidata="Q190382" start="59902" end="59909" title="ionized" label="ionized"/>
<link wikidata="Q11432" start="59910" end="59915" title="gases" label="gases"/>
<link wikidata="Q182925" start="59972" end="59988" title="fluorescent lamp" label="fluorescent lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q83341" start="60077" end="60099" title="liquid-crystal display" label="liquid-crystal display"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326790" start="60130" end="60144" title="LCD television" label="LCD television"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="60180" end="60196" title="cathode-ray tube" label="cathode-ray tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q814902" start="60435" end="60447" title="cold cathode" label="cold cathode"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="60503" end="60506" title="LED" label="LED"/>
<link wikidata="Q12810597" start="60527" end="60531" title="LED-backlit LCD television" label="LEDs"/>
<link wikidata="Q185146" start="60808" end="60822" title="Plasma display" label="Plasma display"/>
<link wikidata="Q597070" start="60833" end="60859" title="rear-projection television" label="rear-projection television"/>
<link wikidata="Q209593" start="61055" end="61060" title="organic light-emitting diode" label="OLEDs"/>
<link wikidata="Q971766" start="61062" end="61065" title="Field-emission display" label="FED"/>
<link wikidata="Q972851" start="61070" end="61073" title="Surface-conduction electron-emitter display" label="SED"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="61188" end="61208" title="light-emitting diode" label="light-emitting diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q216817" start="61228" end="61236" title="emission (electromagnetic radiation)" label="emissive"/>
<link wikidata="Q215803" start="61237" end="61255" title="electroluminescence" label="electroluminescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="61275" end="61291" title="organic compound" label="organic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933714" start="61360" end="61381" title="organic semiconductor" label="organic semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q327065" start="61503" end="61518" title="digital display" label="digital display"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075" start="61539" end="61549" title="television set" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="61626" end="61639" title="mobile phones" label="mobile phones"/>
<link wikidata="Q941818" start="61641" end="61662" title="handheld game console" label="handheld game console"/>
<link wikidata="Q162768" start="61668" end="61672" title="personal digital assistant" label="PDAs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="61731" end="61739" title="molecule" label="molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q81163" start="61761" end="61768" title="polymer" label="polymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="61785" end="61788" title="ion" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545934" start="61811" end="61846" title="light-emitting electrochemical cell" label="light-emitting electrochemical cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142815" start="61934" end="61948" title="Passive matrix addressing" label="passive-matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142195" start="61961" end="61974" title="Active matrix addressing" label="active-matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271916" start="62034" end="62054" title="thin-film transistor" label="thin-film transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q574291" start="62198" end="62207" title="backlight" label="backlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q10855169" start="62235" end="62246" title="black level" label="black level"/>
<link wikidata="Q83341" start="62286" end="62308" title="liquid crystal display" label="liquid crystal display"/>
<link wikidata="Q353268" start="62405" end="62419" title="contrast ratio" label="contrast ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q814902" start="62454" end="62466" title="cold cathode" label="cold cathode"/>
<link wikidata="Q12810597" start="62488" end="62501" title="LED-backlit LCD television" label="LED backlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q9550275" start="62761" end="62765" title="240p" label="240p"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394898" start="62791" end="62810" title="handheld television" label="handheld television"/>
<link wikidata="Q18359031" start="62917" end="62927" title="video file" label="video file"/>
<link wikidata="Q44127" start="62945" end="62960" title="computer server" label="computer server"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="63041" end="63046" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q268583" start="63054" end="63063" title="iPod Nano" label="iPod Nano"/>
<link wikidata="Q170325" start="63080" end="63100" title="PlayStation Portable" label="PlayStation Portable"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365548" start="63200" end="63207" title="QVGA" label="320×240"/>
<link wikidata="Q355198" start="63220" end="63225" title="pixel" label="pixel"/>
<link wikidata="Q14094" start="63334" end="63344" title="iPod Touch" label="iPod Touch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2766" start="63349" end="63355" title="iPhone" label="iPhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q747779" start="63513" end="63522" title="videotape" label="videotape"/>
<link wikidata="Q244581" start="63689" end="63693" title="576i" label="576i"/>
<link wikidata="Q184915" start="63704" end="63714" title="interlaced video" label="interlaced"/>
<link wikidata="Q105973" start="63772" end="63775" title="PAL" label="PAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q223765" start="63780" end="63785" title="SECAM" label="SECAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195242" start="63799" end="63803" title="480i" label="480i"/>
<link wikidata="Q185796" start="63863" end="63867" title="NTSC" label="NTSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q133454" start="63963" end="63989" title="high-definition television" label="high-definition television"/>
<link wikidata="Q263187" start="63991" end="63995" title="720p" label="720p"/>
<link wikidata="Q168614" start="63997" end="64002" title="1080i" label="1080i"/>
<link wikidata="Q17211" start="64004" end="64009" title="1080p" label="1080p"/>
<link wikidata="Q5650302" start="64011" end="64016" title="1440p" label="1440p"/>
<link wikidata="Q841163" start="64018" end="64026" title="4K UHDTV" label="4K UHDTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q841163" start="64032" end="64038" title="8K UHD" label="8K UHD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348859" start="64043" end="64073" title="enhanced-definition television" label="enhanced-definition television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196954" start="64080" end="64084" title="480p" label="480p"/>
<link wikidata="" start="64143" end="64146" title="4:3" label="4:3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048790" start="64207" end="64217" title="center cut" label="center cut"/>
<link wikidata="" start="64357" end="64361" title="16:9" label="16:9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441762" start="64362" end="64374" title="aspect ratio (image)" label="aspect ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756901" start="64620" end="64629" title="pillarbox" label="pillarbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q210521" start="64696" end="64706" title="Image resolution" label="resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q243314" start="64749" end="64779" title="standard-definition television" label="standard-definition television"/>
<link wikidata="Q17211" start="64828" end="64833" title="1080p" label="1080p"/>
<link wikidata="Q355198" start="64871" end="64880" title="megapixel" label="megapixel"/>
<link wikidata="Q795160" start="64887" end="64892" title="frame (video)" label="frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q168614" start="64895" end="64900" title="1080i" label="1080i"/>
<link wikidata="Q925920" start="64946" end="64951" title="field (video)" label="field"/>
<link wikidata="Q263187" start="65150" end="65154" title="720p" label="720p"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65321" end="65324" title="XVGA#UHD (4K) (3840×2160)" label="UHD"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65335" end="65341" title="4K resolution#Resolutions" label="4K UHD"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65354" end="65360" title="8K resolution#Resolutions" label="8K UHD"/>
<link wikidata="Q173131" start="65384" end="65397" title="digital video" label="digital video"/>
<link wikidata="Q5041577" start="65418" end="65468" title="NHK Science &amp;amp; Technology Research Laboratories" label="NHK Science &amp;amp; Technology Research Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="65501" end="65538" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="International Telecommunication Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128415" start="65550" end="65582" title="Consumer Electronics Association" label="Consumer Electronics Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3420077" start="65717" end="65729" title="display aspect ratio" label="aspect ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572845" start="66593" end="66614" title="Broadcast syndication" label="Broadcast syndication"/>
<link wikidata="Q848981" start="67293" end="67304" title="free-to-air" label="free-to-air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416102" start="67577" end="67587" title="Network affiliate" label="affiliates"/>
<link wikidata="Q11350900" start="67657" end="67674" title="local programming" label="local programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621591" start="67691" end="67707" title="Television genre" label="Television genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259759" start="67880" end="67890" title="miniseries" label="miniseries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786567" start="68186" end="68199" title="medical drama" label="medical drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q16538" start="68519" end="68529" title="South Park" label="South Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q182415" start="68647" end="68665" title="reality television" label="reality television"/>
<link wikidata="Q211236" start="68824" end="68835" title="celebrity" label="celebrities"/>
<link wikidata="Q497240" start="68989" end="69009" title="Master of Ceremonies" label="Master of Ceremonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q797907" start="69376" end="69380" title="Cops (TV series)" label="COPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4110339" start="69422" end="69439" title="The Biggest Loser" label="The Biggest Loser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145002" start="69575" end="69588" title="The Osbournes" label="The Osbournes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3282915" start="69602" end="69631" title="Snoop Dogg&amp;#x27;s Father Hood" label="Snoop Dogg&amp;#x27;s Father Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q696289" start="69668" end="69683" title="The Simple Life" label="The Simple Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268794" start="69802" end="69820" title="quality television" label="quality television"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085" start="69857" end="69867" title="Twin Peaks" label="Twin Peaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q23628" start="69884" end="69896" title="The Sopranos" label="The Sopranos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135802" start="69994" end="70002" title="art film" label="art film"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="71530" end="71546" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979" start="71561" end="71576" title="British English" label="British English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662452" start="72020" end="72031" title="infomercial" label="infomercial"/>
<link wikidata="Q193871" start="72337" end="72353" title="Marshall McLuhan" label="Marshall McLuhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q699413" start="72430" end="72452" title="Nielsen Media Research" label="Nielsen Media Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815888" start="72732" end="72755" title="Campaign advertising" label="campaign advertisements"/>
<link wikidata="Q847301" start="72790" end="72808" title="political campaign" label="political campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="72935" end="72941" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731065" start="73118" end="73122" title="WNBC" label="WNBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869184" start="73159" end="73175" title="Brooklyn Dodgers" label="Brooklyn Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q650840" start="73180" end="73201" title="Philadelphia Phillies" label="Philadelphia Phillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q663300" start="73224" end="73230" title="Bulova" label="Bulova"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="73637" end="73640" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3854745" start="73675" end="73683" title="Gibbs SR" label="Gibbs SR"/>
<link wikidata="Q864910" start="73737" end="73754" title="Nippon Television" label="Nippon Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q625132" start="73795" end="73803" title="Seikosha" label="Seikosha"/>
<link wikidata="Q322601" start="73809" end="73814" title="Seiko" label="Seiko"/>
<link wikidata="Q37038" start="74214" end="74224" title="advertiser" label="advertiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123570" start="74275" end="74293" title="quiz show scandals" label="quiz show scandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q699413" start="74457" end="74472" title="Nielsen ratings" label="Nielsen ratings"/>
<link wikidata="Q201052" start="74710" end="74723" title="American Idol" label="American Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q32096" start="74769" end="74779" title="Super Bowl" label="Super Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q374638" start="74840" end="74849" title="time slot" label="time slot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662452" start="74938" end="74949" title="infomercial" label="infomercial"/>
<link wikidata="Q507443" start="75089" end="75103" title="Pharmaceutical company" label="drug companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927958" start="75206" end="75224" title="video news release" label="video news release"/>
<link wikidata="Q635067" start="75234" end="75250" title="program director" label="program director"/>
<link wikidata="Q749457" start="75409" end="75426" title="product placement" label="product placement"/>
<link wikidata="Q507619" start="75517" end="75533" title="Restaurant chain" label="chain restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q749457" start="75684" end="75701" title="product placement" label="product placement"/>
<link wikidata="Q167270" start="75735" end="75745" title="Trademark" label="trade mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474750" start="76066" end="76077" title="Roy Thomson, 1st Baron Thomson of Fleet" label="Roy Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q674608" start="76229" end="76232" title="ITV (TV channel)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="76234" end="76243" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062280" start="76249" end="76258" title="Channel 5 (UK)" label="Channel 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311336" start="76994" end="77016" title="religious broadcasting" label="religious broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="77195" end="77198" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q25821" start="77377" end="77395" title="television license" label="television license"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572845" start="77417" end="77438" title="broadcast syndication" label="broadcast syndication"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972136" start="77542" end="77575" title="Broadcasting Authority of Ireland" label="Broadcasting Authority of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q322948" start="77639" end="77651" title="subscription" label="subscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q721830" start="77800" end="77814" title="pay television" label="pay television"/>
<link wikidata="Q561068" start="77818" end="77835" title="specialty channel" label="specialty channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q25821" start="77983" end="78001" title="television licence" label="television licence"/>
<link wikidata="Q781365" start="78198" end="78212" title="Australian Broadcasting Corporation" label="ABC Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="78216" end="78223" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q12858" start="78225" end="78228" title="VRT (broadcaster)" label="VRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="78233" end="78241" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190356" start="78246" end="78250" title="RTBF" label="RTBF"/>
<link wikidata="Q231" start="78255" end="78263" title="Wallonia" label="Wallonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="78267" end="78274" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164334" start="78276" end="78278" title="Danmarks Radio" label="DR"/>
<link wikidata="Q329494" start="78291" end="78294" title="RTÉ" label="RTÉ"/>
<link wikidata="Q212128" start="78305" end="78308" title="NHK" label="NHK"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="78312" end="78318" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q190238" start="78320" end="78323" title="NRK" label="NRK"/>
<link wikidata="Q215363" start="78335" end="78338" title="Sveriges Television" label="SVT"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="78342" end="78353" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q651410" start="78355" end="78362" title="Swiss Broadcasting Corporation" label="SRG SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="78366" end="78392" title="Taiwan" label="Republic of China (Taiwan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q712020" start="78394" end="78397" title="Public Television Service" label="PTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q261492" start="78417" end="78431" title="BBC Television" label="BBC Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="78450" end="78453" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="78460" end="78492" title="British Broadcasting Corporation" label="British Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q854995" start="78522" end="78544" title="television advertising" label="television advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156823" start="79278" end="79286" title="Freeview (UK)" label="Freeview"/>
<link wikidata="Q781365" start="79466" end="79501" title="Australian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Australian Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991162" start="79758" end="79779" title="Australian Government" label="Australian Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650144" start="79815" end="79834" title="ABC Commercial" label="Commercial division"/>
<link wikidata="Q241149" start="79888" end="79895" title="Liberal Party of Australia" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5919788" start="79923" end="79940" title="Howard government" label="Howard government"/>
<link wikidata="Q56273917" start="79988" end="80007" title="Turnbull government" label="Turnbull government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038409" start="80024" end="80034" title="indexation" label="indexation"/>
<link wikidata="Q966055" start="80070" end="80091" title="ABC Television (Australian TV network)" label="ABC&amp;#x27;s television"/>
<link wikidata="Q781365" start="80093" end="80098" title="ABC Radio (Australia)" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q781365" start="80100" end="80106" title="ABC Online" label="online"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231014" start="80144" end="80157" title="ABC Australia (Southeast Asian TV channel)" label="ABC Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055310" start="80246" end="80250" title="DFAT" label="DFAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q212128" start="80462" end="80465" title="NHK" label="NHK"/>
<link wikidata="Q4413183" start="81346" end="81360" title="media violence" label="media violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051893" start="81492" end="81502" title="parasocial interaction" label="parasocial"/>
<link wikidata="Q861402" start="81690" end="81712" title="educational television" label="educational television"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="81922" end="81945" title="Christian denominations" label="Christian denominations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311336" start="81965" end="81987" title="religious broadcasting" label="religious broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="82017" end="82026" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163105" start="82048" end="82078" title="conservative holiness movement" label="conservative holiness movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984055" start="82092" end="82131" title="Allegheny Wesleyan Methodist Connection" label="Allegheny Wesleyan Methodist Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611209" start="82140" end="82167" title="Evangelical Wesleyan Church" label="Evangelical Wesleyan Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="82208" end="82216" title="Baptists" label="Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308581" start="82248" end="82275" title="Pensacola Christian College" label="Pensacola Christian College"/>
<link wikidata="Q199993" start="82306" end="82326" title="Traditional Catholic" label="Traditional Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q868160" start="82353" end="82376" title="Society of Saint Pius X" label="Society of Saint Pius X"/>
<link wikidata="Q730475" start="82393" end="82413" title="Laestadianism" label="Laestadian Lutherans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315343" start="82456" end="82479" title="Dunkard Brethren Church" label="Dunkard Brethren Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959801" start="82556" end="82571" title="occasion of sin" label="occasion of sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="82694" end="82703" title="Cathode-ray tube" label="CRT-style"/>
<link wikidata="Q125171" start="82847" end="82858" title="Flat-panel display" label="flat-screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861470" start="83162" end="83176" title="Emergency medicine" label="emergency care"/>
<link wikidata="Q15731511" start="83201" end="83231" title="The Journal of Human Resources" label="The Journal of Human Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="83559" end="83563" title="cathode-ray tube" label="CRTs"/>
<link wikidata="Q83341" start="83643" end="83646" title="LCD" label="LCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="83673" end="83680" title="mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q327400" start="83713" end="83729" title="electronic waste" label="electronic waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q629029" start="83766" end="83785" title="occupational health" label="occupational health"/>
<link wikidata="Q206799" start="83990" end="84007" title="electrical energy" label="electrical energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q55604598" start="84038" end="84050" title="B-television" label="B-television"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972054" start="84053" end="84067" title="Broadcast-safe" label="Broadcast-safe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144899" start="84070" end="84098" title="Broadcast television systems" label="Broadcast television systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q554950" start="84101" end="84127" title="Content discovery platform" label="Content discovery platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q6031284" start="84130" end="84154" title="Information-action ratio" label="Information-action ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6613944" start="84157" end="84217" title="List of countries by number of television broadcast stations" label="List of countries by number of television broadcast stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642591" start="84220" end="84252" title="List of television manufacturers" label="List of television manufacturers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088288" start="84255" end="84282" title="List of years in television" label="List of years in television"/>
<link wikidata="Q18674742" start="84285" end="84313" title="Lists of television channels" label="Lists of television channels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421211" start="84316" end="84332" title="Media psychology" label="Media psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q21041335" start="84335" end="84343" title="MicroLED" label="MicroLED"/>
<link wikidata="Q34228" start="84346" end="84373" title="Sign language on television" label="Sign language on television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092380" start="84376" end="84386" title="Telephilia" label="Telephilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154399" start="84389" end="84409" title="Television addiction" label="Television addiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065951" start="84412" end="84430" title="Television studies" label="Television studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653619" start="84433" end="84442" title="Test card" label="Test card"/>
<link wikidata="Q100897537" start="84445" end="84457" title="TV accessory" label="TV accessory"/>
<link wikidata="Q156268" start="84495" end="84510" title="Pierre Bourdieu" label="Pierre Bourdieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q130631" start="84692" end="84707" title="Jacques Derrida" label="Jacques Derrida"/>
<link wikidata="Q822727" start="84712" end="84728" title="Bernard Stiegler" label="Bernard Stiegler"/>
<link wikidata="Q980046" start="84921" end="84935" title="Steven Berlin Johnson" label="Steven Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="" start="84943" end="85037" title="Everything Bad is Good for You: How Today&amp;#x27;s Popular Culture Is Actually Making Us Smarter" label="Everything Bad is Good for You: How Today&amp;#x27;s Popular Culture Is Actually Making Us Smarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5929383" start="85092" end="85104" title="Jerry Mander" label="Jerry Mander"/>
<link wikidata="Q436131" start="85272" end="85284" title="Neil Postman" label="Neil Postman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916374" start="85292" end="85318" title="Amusing Ourselves to Death" label="Amusing Ourselves to Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739600" start="85827" end="85841" title="Amanda D. Lotz" label="Amanda D. Lotz"/>
</links>
</doc>
