<doc id="31644" wikidata="Q11698" url="?curid=31644" title="Constitution of the United States">
<text>The Constitution of the United States is the supreme law of the United States of America. It superseded the Articles of Confederation, the nation&#x27;s first constitution, on March 4, 1789. Originally including seven articles, the Constitution delineates the frame of the federal government. The Constitution&#x27;s first three articles embody the doctrine of the separation of powers, in which the federal government is divided into three branches: the legislative, consisting of the bicameral Congress (Article I); the executive, consisting of the president and subordinate officers (Article II); and the judicial, consisting of the Supreme Court and other federal courts (Article III). Article IV, Article V, and Article VI embody concepts of federalism, describing the rights and responsibilities of state governments, the states in relationship to the federal government, and the shared process of constitutional amendment. Article VII establishes the procedure subsequently used by the 13 states to ratify it. The Constitution of the United States is the oldest and longest-standing written and codified national constitution in force in the world.

The drafting of the Constitution, often referred to as its framing, was completed at the Constitutional Convention, which assembled at Independence Hall in Philadelphia between May 25 and September 17, 1787. Delegates to the convention were chosen by the state legislatures of 12 of the 13 original states; Rhode Island refused to send delegates. The convention&#x27;s initial mandate was limited to amending the Articles of Confederation, which had proven highly ineffective in meeting the young nation&#x27;s needs. Almost immediately, however, delegates began considering measures to replace the Articles. The first proposal discussed, introduced by delegates from Virginia, called for a bicameral (two-house) Congress that was to be elected on a proportional basis based on state population, an elected chief executive, and an appointed judicial branch. An alternative to the Virginia Plan, known as the New Jersey Plan, also called for an elected executive but retained the legislative structure created by the Articles, a unicameral Congress where all states had one vote.

On June 19, 1787, delegates rejected the New Jersey Plan with three states voting in favor, seven against, and one divided. The plan&#x27;s defeat led to a series of compromises centering primarily on two issues: slavery and proportional representation. The first of these pitted Northern states, where slavery was slowly being abolished, against Southern states, whose agricultural economies depended on slave labor. The issue of proportional representation was of similar concern to less populous states, which under the Articles had the same power as larger states. To satisfy interests in the South, particularly in Georgia and South Carolina, the delegates agreed to protect the slave trade, that is, the importation of slaves, for 20 years. Slavery was protected further by allowing states to count three-fifths of their slaves as part of their populations, for the purpose of representation in the federal government, and by requiring the return of escaped slaves to their owners, even if captured in states where slavery had been abolished. Finally, the delegates adopted the Connecticut Compromise, which proposed a Congress with proportional representation in the lower house and equal representation in the upper house (the Senate) giving each state two senators. While these compromises held the Union together and aided the Constitution&#x27;s ratification, slavery continued for six more decades and the less populous states continue to have disproportional representation in the U.S. Senate and Electoral College.

Since the Constitution became operational in 1789, it has been amended 27 times. The first ten amendments, known collectively as the Bill of Rights, offer specific protections of individual liberty and justice and place restrictions on the powers of government within the U.S. states. The majority of the 17 later amendments expand individual civil rights protections. Others address issues related to federal authority or modify government processes and procedures. Amendments to the United States Constitution, unlike ones made to many constitutions worldwide, are appended to the document. The original U.S. Constitution was handwritten on five pages of parchment by Jacob Shallus.
The first permanent constitution, it is interpreted, supplemented, and implemented by a large body of federal constitutional law and has influenced the constitutions of other nations.

==History==

===Background===

From September 5, 1774, to March 1, 1781, the Second Continental Congress, convened in Philadelphia in what today is called Independence Hall, functioned as the provisional government of the United States. Delegates to the First Continental Congress in 1774 and then the Second Continental Congress from 1775 to 1781 were chosen largely from the revolutionary committees of correspondence in various colonies rather than through the colonial governments of the Thirteen Colonies.

The Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union was the first constitution of the United States. The document was drafted by a committee appointed by the Second Continental Congress in mid-June 1777 and was adopted by the full Congress in mid-November of that year. Ratification by the 13 colonies took more than three years and was completed March 1, 1781. The Articles gave little power to the central government. While the Confederation Congress had some decision-making abilities, it lacked enforcement powers. The implementation of most decisions, including amendments to the Articles, required legislative approval by all 13 of the newly formed states.

Despite these limitations, based on the Congressional authority granted in Article 9, the league of states was considered as strong as any similar republican confederation ever formed. The chief problem was, in the words of George Washington, &quot;no money.&quot; The Confederated Congress could print money, but it was worthless, and while the Congress could borrow money, it could not pay it back. No state paid its share of taxes to support the government, and some paid nothing. A few states did meet the interest payments toward the national debt owed by their citizens, but nothing greater, and no interest was paid on debts owed foreign governments. By 1786, the United States was facing default on its outstanding debts.

Under the Articles, the United States had little ability to defend its sovereignty. Most of the troops in the nation&#x27;s 625-man army were deployed facing non-threatening British forts on American soil. Soldiers were not being paid, some were deserting, and others were threatening mutiny. Spain closed New Orleans to American commerce, despite the protests of U.S. officials. When Barbary pirates began seizing American ships of commerce, the Treasury had no funds to pay toward ransom. If a military crisis required action, the Congress had no credit or taxing power to finance a response.

Domestically, the Articles of Confederation was failing to bring unity to the diverse sentiments and interests of the various states. Although the Treaty of Paris in 1783 was signed between Britain and the U.S., and named each of the American states, various states proceeded to violate it. New York and South Carolina repeatedly prosecuted Loyalists for wartime activity and redistributed their lands. Individual state legislatures independently laid embargoes, negotiated directly with foreign authorities, raised armies, and made war, all violating the letter and the spirit of the Articles.

In September 1786, during an inter–state convention to discuss and develop a consensus about reversing the protectionist trade barriers that each state had erected, James Madison questioned whether the Articles of Confederation was a binding compact or even a viable government. Connecticut paid nothing and &quot;positively refused&quot; to pay U.S. assessments for two years. A rumor at the time was that a seditious party of New York legislators had opened a conversation with the Viceroy of Canada. To the south, the British were said to be openly funding Creek Indian raids on Georgia, and the state was under martial law. Additionally, during Shays&#x27; Rebellion (August 1786June 1787) in Massachusetts, Congress could provide no money to support an endangered constituent state. General Benjamin Lincoln was obliged to raise funds from Boston merchants to pay for a volunteer army.

Congress was paralyzed. It could do nothing significant without nine states, and some legislation required all 13. When a state produced only one member in attendance, its vote was not counted. If a state&#x27;s delegation was evenly divided, its vote could not be counted towards the nine-count requirement. The Congress of the Confederation had &quot;virtually ceased trying to govern.&quot; The vision of a respectable nation among nations seemed to be fading in the eyes of revolutionaries such as George Washington, Benjamin Franklin, and Rufus King. Their dream of a republic, a nation without hereditary rulers, with power derived from the people in frequent elections, was in doubt.

On February 21, 1787, the Confederation Congress called a convention of state delegates in Philadelphia to propose revisions to the Articles. Unlike earlier attempts, the convention was not meant for new laws or piecemeal alterations, but for the &quot;sole and express purpose of revising the Articles of Confederation.&quot; The convention was not limited to commerce; rather, it was intended to &quot;render the federal constitution adequate to the exigencies of government and the preservation of the Union.&quot; The proposal might take effect when approved by Congress and the states.

===1787 drafting===
On the appointed day, May 14, 1787, only the Virginia and Pennsylvania delegations were present, and the convention&#x27;s opening meeting was postponed for lack of a quorum. A quorum of seven states met on May 25, and deliberations began. Eventually 12 states were represented, with Rhode Island refusing to participate. Of the 74 delegates appointed by the states, 55 attended. The delegates were generally convinced that an effective central government with a wide range of enforceable powers must replace the weaker Congress established by the Articles of Confederation.

Two plans for structuring the federal government arose at the convention&#x27;s outset:
* The Virginia Plan, also known as the &quot;Large State Plan&quot; or the &quot;Randolph Plan&quot;, proposed that the legislative department of the national government be composed of a Bicameral Congress, with both chambers elected with apportionment according to population. Generally favoring the most highly populated states, it used the philosophy of John Locke to rely on consent of the governed, Montesquieu for divided government, and Edward Coke to emphasize civil liberties.
* The New Jersey Plan proposed that the legislative department be a unicameral body with one vote per state. Generally favoring the less-populous states, it used the philosophy of English Whigs such as Edmund Burke to rely on received procedure and William Blackstone to emphasize sovereignty of the legislature. This position reflected the belief that the states were independent entities and, as they entered the United States of America freely and individually, remained so.

On May 31, the Convention devolved into the Committee of the Whole, charged with considering the Virginia Plan. On June 13, the Virginia resolutions in amended form were reported out of committee. The New Jersey Plan was put forward in response to the Virginia Plan.

A Committee of Eleven, including one delegate from each state represented, met from July 2 to 16 to work out a compromise on the issue of representation in the federal legislature. All agreed to a republican form of government grounded in representing the people in the states. For the legislature, two issues were to be decided: how the votes were to be allocated among the states in the Congress, and how the representatives should be elected. In its report, now known as the Connecticut Compromise (or &quot;Great Compromise&quot;), the committee proposed proportional representation for seats in the House of Representatives based on population (with the people voting for representatives), and equal representation for each State in the Senate (with each state&#x27;s legislators generally choosing their respective senators), and that all money bills would originate in the House.

The Great Compromise ended the stalemate between patriots and nationalists, leading to numerous other compromises in a spirit of accommodation. There were sectional interests to be balanced by the Three-Fifths Compromise; reconciliation on Presidential term, powers, and method of selection; and jurisdiction of the federal judiciary.

On July 24, a Committee of Detail, including John Rutledge (South Carolina), Edmund Randolph (Virginia), Nathaniel Gorham (Massachusetts), Oliver Ellsworth (Connecticut), and James Wilson (Pennsylvania), was elected to draft a detailed constitution reflective of the resolutions passed by the convention up to that point. The Convention recessed from July 26 to August 6 to await the report of this &quot;Committee of Detail&quot;. Overall, the report of the committee conformed to the resolutions adopted by the convention, adding some elements. A twenty-three article (plus preamble) constitution was presented.

From August 6 to September 10, the report of the committee of detail was discussed, section by section and clause by clause. Details were attended to, and further compromises were effected. Toward the close of these discussions, on September 8, a Committee of Style and Arrangement, including Alexander Hamilton from New York, William Samuel Johnson from Connecticut, Rufus King from Massachusetts, James Madison from Virginia, and Gouverneur Morris from Pennsylvania, was appointed to distill a final draft constitution from the 23 approved articles. The final draft, presented to the convention on September 12, contained seven articles, a preamble and a closing endorsement, of which Morris was the primary author. The committee also presented a proposed letter to accompany the constitution when delivered to Congress.

The final document, engrossed by Jacob Shallus, was taken up on Monday, September 17, at the convention&#x27;s final session. Several of the delegates were disappointed in the result, a makeshift series of unfortunate compromises. Some delegates left before the ceremony and three others refused to sign. Of the thirty-nine signers, Benjamin Franklin summed up, addressing the convention: &quot;There are several parts of this Constitution which I do not at present approve, but I am not sure I shall never approve them.&quot; He would accept the Constitution, &quot;because I expect no better and because I am not sure that it is not the best.&quot;

The advocates of the Constitution were anxious to obtain unanimous support of all twelve states represented in the convention. Their accepted formula for the closing endorsement was &quot;Done in Convention, by the unanimous consent of the States present.&quot; At the end of the convention, the proposal was agreed to by eleven state delegations and the lone remaining delegate from New York, Alexander Hamilton.

===Ratification by the states===

Within three days of its signing on September 17, 1787, the Constitution was submitted to the Congress of the Confederation, then sitting in New York City, the nation&#x27;s temporary capital. The document, originally intended as a revision of the Articles of Confederation, instead introduced a completely new form of government. While members of Congress had the power to reject it, they voted unanimously on September 28 to forward the proposal to the thirteen states for their ratification. Under the process outlined in Article VII of the proposed Constitution, the state legislatures were tasked with organizing &quot;Federal Conventions&quot; to ratify the document. This process ignored the amendment provision of the Articles of Confederation which required unanimous approval of all the states. Instead, Article VII called for ratification by just nine of the 13 states—a two-thirds majority.

Two factions soon emerged, one supporting the Constitution, the Federalists, and the other opposing it, the so-called Anti-Federalists. Over the ensuing months, the proposal was debated, criticized, and expounded upon clause by clause. In the state of New York, at the time a hotbed of anti-Federalism, three delegates from the Philadelphia Convention who were also members of the Congress—Hamilton, Madison, and Jay—published a series of commentaries, now known as &quot;The Federalist Papers&quot;, in support of ratification.

Before year&#x27;s end, three state legislatures voted in favor of ratification. Delaware was first, voting unanimously 30–0; Pennsylvania second, approving the measure 46–23; and New Jersey third, also recording a unanimous vote. As 1788 began, Connecticut and Georgia followed Delaware&#x27;s lead with almost unanimous votes, but the outcome became less certain as leaders in key states such as Virginia, New York, and Massachusetts expressed concerns over the lack of protections for people&#x27;s rights. Fearing the prospect of defeat, the Federalists relented, promising that if the Constitution was adopted, amendments would be added to secure individual liberties. With that, the anti-Federalists&#x27; position collapsed.

On June 21, 1788, New Hampshire became the ninth state to ratify. Three months later, on September 17, the Congress of the Confederation certified the ratification of eleven states, and passed resolutions setting dates for choosing the first senators and representatives, the first Wednesday of January (January 7, 1789); electing the first president, the first Wednesday of February (February 4); and officially starting the new government, the first Wednesday of March (March 4), when the first Congress would convene in New York City. As its final act, the Congress of Confederation agreed to purchase 10 square miles from Maryland and Virginia for establishing a permanent capital.

North Carolina waited to ratify the Constitution until after the Bill of Rights was passed by the new Congress, and Rhode Island&#x27;s ratification would only come after a threatened trade embargo.

==Influences==
The U.S. Constitution was a federal one and was greatly influenced by the study of Magna Carta and other federations, both ancient and extant. The Due Process Clause of the Constitution was partly based on common law and on Magna Carta (1215), which had become a foundation of English liberty against arbitrary power wielded by a ruler. The idea of Separation of Powers inherent in the Constitution was largely inspired by eighteenth-century Enlightenment philosophers, such as Montesquieu and John Locke.

The influence of Montesquieu, Locke, Edward Coke and William Blackstone were evident at the Constitutional Convention. Prior to and during the framing and signing of the Constitution, Blackstone, Hume, Locke and Montesquieu were among the political philosophers most frequently referred to. Historian Herbert W. Schneider held that the Scottish Enlightenment was &quot;probably the most potent single tradition in the American Enlightenment&quot; and the advancement of personal liberties. Historian Jack P. Greene maintains that by 1776 the founders drew heavily upon Magna Carta and the later writings of &quot;Enlightenment rationalism&quot; and English common law. Historian Daniel Walker Howe notes that Benjamin Franklin greatly admired David Hume, an eighteenth-century Scottish philosopher, and had studied many of his works while at Edinburgh in 1760. Both embraced the idea that high-ranking public officials should receive no salary and that the lower class was a better judge of character when it came to choosing their representatives.

In his &quot;Institutes of the Lawes of England&quot;, Coke interpreted Magna Carta protections and rights to apply not just to nobles, but to all British subjects. In writing the Virginia Charter of 1606, he enabled the King in Parliament to give those to be born in the colonies all rights and liberties as though they were born in England. William Blackstone&#x27;s &quot;Commentaries on the Laws of England&quot; are considered the most influential books on law in the new republic. Madison made frequent reference to Blackstone, Locke, and Montesquieu, all of whom were among the most prominent political theorists of the late eighteenth century.

Following the Glorious Revolution of 1688, British political philosopher John Locke was a major influence, expanding on the contract theory of government advanced by Thomas Hobbes, his contemporary. Locke advanced the principle of consent of the governed in his &quot;Two Treatises of Government&quot;. Government&#x27;s duty under a social contract among the sovereign people was to serve the people by protecting their rights. These basic rights were life, liberty, and property.

Montesquieu&#x27;s influence on the framers is evident in Madison&#x27;s &quot;Federalist No. 47&quot; and Hamilton&#x27;s &quot;Federalist No. 78&quot;. Jefferson, Adams, and Mason were known to read Montesquieu. Supreme Court Justices, the ultimate interpreters of the constitution, have cited Montesquieu throughout the Court&#x27;s history. (See, &quot;e.g.&quot;, ) Montesquieu emphasized the need for balanced forces pushing against each other to prevent tyranny (reflecting the influence of Polybius&#x27;s 2nd century BC treatise on the checks and balances of the Roman Republic). In his &quot;The Spirit of Law&quot;, Montesquieu maintained that the separation of state powers should be by its service to the people&#x27;s liberty: legislative, executive and judicial, while also emphasizing that the idea of separation had for its purpose the even distribution of authority among the several branches of government.

The English Bill of Rights (1689) was an inspiration for the American Bill of Rights. Both require jury trials, contain a right to keep and bear arms, prohibit excessive bail and forbid &quot;cruel and unusual punishments&quot;. Many liberties protected by state constitutions and the Virginia Declaration of Rights were incorporated into the Bill of Rights. Upon the arrival of the American Revolution, many of the rights guaranteed by the Federal Bill of Rights were recognized as being inspired by English law. A substantial body of thought had been developed from the literature of republicanism in the United States, typically demonstrated by the works of John Adams, who often quoted Blackstone and Montesquieu verbatim, and applied to the creation of state constitutions.

While the ideas of unalienable rights, the separation of powers and the structure of the Constitution were largely influenced by the European Enlightenment thinkers, like Montesquieu, John Locke and others, Benjamin Franklin and Thomas Jefferson still had reservations about the existing forms of government in Europe. In a speech at the Constitutional Convention Franklin stated, &quot;We have gone back to ancient history for models of Government, and examined different forms of those Republics ... And we have viewed modern States all round Europe but find none of their Constitutions suitable to our circumstances.&quot; Jefferson maintained, that most European governments were autocratic monarchies and not compatible with the egalitarian character of the American people. In a 1787 letter to John Rutledge, Jefferson asserted that &quot;The only condition on earth to be compared with [American government] ... is that of the Indians, where they still have less law than we.&quot;

American Indian history scholars Donald Grinde and Bruce Johansen claim there is &quot;overwhelming evidence&quot; that Iroquois Confederacy political concepts and ideas influenced the U.S. Constitution, and are considered to be the most outspoken supporters of the Iroquois thesis. The idea as to the extent of that influence on the founding, however, varies among historians and has been questioned or criticized by various historians, including Samuel Payne, William Starna, George Hamell, and historian and archaeologist Philip Levy, who claims the evidence is largely coincidental and circumstantial. The most outspoken critic, anthropologist Elisabeth Tooker, claimed the Iroquois influence thesis is largely the product of &quot;white interpretations of Indians&quot; and &quot;scholarly misapprehension&quot;.

John Napoleon Brinton Hewitt, who was born on the Tuscarora Indian Reservation, and was an ethnologist at the Smithsonian Institution&#x27;s Bureau of Ethnology is often cited by historians of Iroquois history. Hewitt, however, rejected the idea that the Iroquois League had a major influence on the Albany Plan of Union, Benjamin Franklin&#x27;s plan to create a unified government for the Thirteen Colonies, which was rejected.

==Constitution&#x27;s provisions==
The Constitution includes four sections: an introductory paragraph titled Preamble, a list of seven Articles that define the government&#x27;s framework, an untitled closing endorsement with the signatures of 39 framers, and 27 amendments that have been adopted under Article V (see below).

===Preamble===

The Preamble, the Constitution&#x27;s introductory paragraph, lays out the purposes of the new government:
The opening words, &quot;We the People&quot;, represented a new thought: the idea that the people and not the states were the source of the government&#x27;s legitimacy. Coined by Gouverneur Morris of Pennsylvania, who chaired the convention&#x27;s Committee of Style, the phrase is considered an improvement on the section&#x27;s original draft which followed the words &quot;We the People&quot; with a list of the 13 states. In place of the names of the states Morris substituted &quot;of the United States&quot; and then listed the Constitution&#x27;s six goals, none of which were mentioned originally.

===Articles===
The Constitution&#x27;s main provisions include seven articles that define the basic framework of the federal government. Articles that have been amended still include the original text, although provisions repealed by amendments under Article V are usually bracketed or italicized to indicate they no longer apply. Despite these changes, the focus of each Article remains the same as when adopted in 1787.

====Article I – The Legislature====

Article I describes the Congress, the legislative branch of the federal government. Section 1 reads, &quot;All legislative powers herein granted shall be vested in a Congress of the United States, which shall consist of a Senate and House of Representatives.&quot; The article establishes the manner of election and the qualifications of members of each body. Representatives must be at least 25 years old, be a citizen of the United States for seven years, and live in the state they represent. Senators must be at least 30 years old, be a citizen for nine years, and live in the state they represent.

Article I, Section 8 enumerates the powers delegated to the legislature. Financially, Congress has the power to tax, borrow, pay debt and provide for the common defense and the general welfare; to regulate commerce, bankruptcies, and coin money. To regulate internal affairs, it has the power to regulate and govern military forces and militias, suppress insurrections and repel invasions. It is to provide for naturalization, standards of weights and measures, post offices and roads, and patents; to directly govern the federal district and cessions of land by the states for forts and arsenals. Internationally, Congress has the power to define and punish piracies and offenses against the Law of Nations, to declare war and make rules of war. The final Necessary and Proper Clause, also known as the Elastic Clause, expressly confers incidental powers upon Congress without the Articles&#x27; requirement for express delegation for each and every power. Article I, Section 9 lists eight specific limits on congressional power.

The Supreme Court has sometimes broadly interpreted the Commerce Clause and the Necessary and Proper Clause in Article One to allow Congress to enact legislation that is neither expressly allowed by the enumerated powers nor expressly denied in the limitations on Congress. In &quot;McCulloch v. Maryland&quot; (1819), the Supreme Court read the Necessary and Proper Clause to permit the federal government to take action that would &quot;enable [it] to perform the high duties assigned to it [by the Constitution] in the manner most beneficial to the people,&quot; even if that action is not itself within the enumerated powers. Chief Justice Marshall clarified: &quot;Let the end be legitimate, let it be within the scope of the Constitution, and all means which are appropriate, which are plainly adapted to that end, which are not prohibited, but consist with the letter and spirit of the Constitution, are Constitutional.&quot;

====Article II – The Executive====

Article II describes the office, qualifications, and duties of the President of the United States and the Vice President. The President is head of the executive branch of the federal government, as well as the nation&#x27;s head of state and head of government.

Article two is modified by the 12th Amendment, which tacitly acknowledges political parties, and the 25th Amendment relating to office succession. The president is to receive only one compensation from the federal government. The inaugural oath is specified to preserve, protect and defend the Constitution.

The president is the Commander in Chief of the United States Armed Forces, as well as of state militias when they are mobilized. The president makes treaties with the advice and consent of a two-thirds quorum of the Senate. To administer the federal government, the president commissions all the offices of the federal government as Congress directs; and may require the opinions of its principal officers and make &quot;recess appointments&quot; for vacancies that may happen during the recess of the Senate. The president ensures the laws are faithfully executed and may grant reprieves and pardons with the exception of Congressional impeachment. The president reports to Congress on the State of the Union, and by the Recommendation Clause, recommends &quot;necessary and expedient&quot; national measures. The president may convene and adjourn Congress under special circumstances.

Section 4 provides for the removal of the president and other federal officers. The president is removed on impeachment for, and conviction of, treason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors.

====Article III – The Judiciary====

Article III describes the court system (the judicial branch), including the Supreme Court. The article describes the kinds of cases the court takes as original jurisdiction. Congress can create lower courts and an appeals process and enacts law defining crimes and punishments. Article Three also protects the right to trial by jury in all criminal cases, and defines the crime of treason.

Section 1 vests the judicial power of the United States in federal courts and, with it, the authority to interpret and apply the law to a particular case. Also included is the power to punish, sentence, and direct future action to resolve conflicts. The Constitution outlines the U.S. judicial system. In the Judiciary Act of 1789, Congress began to fill in details. Currently, Title 28 of the U.S. Code describes judicial powers and administration.

As of the First Congress, the Supreme Court justices rode circuit to sit as panels to hear appeals from the district courts. In 1891, Congress enacted a new system. District courts would have original jurisdiction. Intermediate appellate courts (circuit courts) with exclusive jurisdiction heard regional appeals before consideration by the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court holds discretionary jurisdiction, meaning that it does not have to hear every case that is brought to it.

To enforce judicial decisions, the Constitution grants federal courts both criminal contempt and civil contempt powers. Other implied powers include injunctive relief and the habeas corpus remedy. The Court may imprison for contumacy, bad-faith litigation, and failure to obey a writ of mandamus. Judicial power includes that granted by Acts of Congress for rules of law and punishment. Judicial power also extends to areas not covered by statute. Generally, federal courts cannot interrupt state court proceedings.

Clause1 of Section2 authorizes the federal courts to hear actual cases and controversies only. Their judicial power does not extend to cases that are hypothetical, or which are proscribed due to standing, mootness, or ripeness issues. Generally, a case or controversy requires the presence of adverse parties who have some interest genuinely at stake in the case.

Clause 2 of Section 2 provides that the Supreme Court has original jurisdiction in cases involving ambassadors, ministers, and consuls, for all cases respecting foreign nation-states, and also in those controversies which are subject to federal judicial power because at least one state is a party. Cases arising under the laws of the United States and its treaties come under the jurisdiction of federal courts. Cases under international maritime law and conflicting land grants of different states come under federal courts. Cases between U.S. citizens in different states, and cases between U.S. citizens and foreign states and their citizens, come under federal jurisdiction. The trials will be in the state where the crime was committed.

No part of the Constitution expressly authorizes judicial review, but the Framers did contemplate the idea, and precedent has since established that the courts could exercise judicial review over the actions of Congress or the executive branch. Two conflicting federal laws are under &quot;pendent&quot; jurisdiction if one presents a strict constitutional issue. Federal court jurisdiction is rare when a state legislature enacts something as under federal jurisdiction. To establish a federal system of national law, considerable effort goes into developing a spirit of comity between federal government and states. By the doctrine of &#x27;Res judicata&#x27;, federal courts give &quot;full faith and credit&quot; to State Courts. The Supreme Court will decide Constitutional issues of state law only on a case-by-case basis, and only by strict Constitutional necessity, independent of state legislators&#x27; motives, their policy outcomes or its national wisdom.

Section 3 bars Congress from changing or modifying Federal law on treason by simple majority statute. This section also defines treason as an overt act of making war or materially helping those at war with the United States. Accusations must be corroborated by at least two witnesses. Congress is a political body, and political disagreements routinely encountered should never be considered as treason. This allows for nonviolent resistance to the government because opposition is not a life or death proposition. However, Congress does provide for other lesser subversive crimes, such as conspiracy.

====Article IV – The States====

Article IV outlines the relations among the states and between each state and the federal government. In addition, it provides for such matters as admitting new states and border changes between the states. For instance, it requires states to give &quot;full faith and credit&quot; to the public acts, records, and court proceedings of the other states. Congress is permitted to regulate the manner in which proof of such acts may be admitted. The &quot;privileges and immunities&quot; clause prohibits state governments from discriminating against citizens of other states in favor of resident citizens. For instance, in criminal sentencing, a state may not increase a penalty on the grounds that the convicted person is a non-resident.

It also establishes extradition between the states, as well as laying down a legal basis for freedom of movement and travel among the states. Today, this provision is sometimes taken for granted, but in the days of the Articles of Confederation, crossing state lines was often arduous and costly. The Territorial Clause gives Congress the power to make rules for disposing of federal property and governing non-state territories of the United States. Finally, the fourth section of Article Four requires the United States to guarantee to each state a republican form of government and to protect them from invasion and violence.

====Article V – Amendment Process====
Article V outlines the process for amending the Constitution. Eight state constitutions in effect in 1787 included an amendment mechanism. Amendment-making power rested with the legislature in three of the states, and in the other five it was given to specially elected conventions. The Articles of Confederation provided that amendments were to be proposed by Congress and ratified by the unanimous vote of all 13 state legislatures. This proved to be a major flaw in the Articles, as it created an insurmountable obstacle to constitutional reform. The amendment process crafted during the Philadelphia Constitutional Convention was, according to The Federalist No. 43, designed to establish a balance between pliancy and rigidity:

There are two steps in the amendment process. Proposals to amend the Constitution must be properly adopted and ratified before they change the Constitution. First, there are two procedures for adopting the language of a proposed amendment, either by (a) Congress, by two-thirds majority in both the Senate and the House of Representatives, or (b) national convention (which shall take place whenever two-thirds of the state legislatures collectively call for one). Second, there are two procedures for ratifying the proposed amendment, which requires three-fourths of the states&#x27; (presently 38 of 50) approval: (a) consent of the state legislatures, or (b) consent of state ratifying conventions. The ratification method is chosen by Congress for each amendment. State ratifying conventions were used only once, for the Twenty-first Amendment.

Presently, the Archivist of the United States is charged with responsibility for administering the ratification process under the provisions of 1U.S. Code . The Archivist submits the proposed amendment to the states for their consideration by sending a letter of notification to each Governor. Each Governor then formally submits the amendment to their state&#x27;s legislature. When a state ratifies a proposed amendment, it sends the Archivist an original or certified copy of the state&#x27;s action. Ratification documents are examined by the Office of the Federal Register for facial legal sufficiency and an authenticating signature.

Article Five ends by shielding certain clauses in the new frame of government from being amended. Article One, Section 9, Clause1 prevents Congress from passing any law that would restrict the importation of slaves into the United States prior to 1808, plus the fourth clause from that same section, which reiterates the Constitutional rule that direct taxes must be apportioned according to state populations. These clauses were explicitly shielded from Constitutional amendment prior to 1808. On January 1, 1808, the first day it was permitted to do so, Congress approved legislation prohibiting the importation of slaves into the country. On February 3, 1913, with ratification of the Sixteenth Amendment, Congress gained the authority to levy an income tax without apportioning it among the states or basing it on the United States Census. The third textually entrenched provision is Article One, Section 3, Clauses 1, which provides for equal representation of the states in the Senate. The shield protecting this clause from the amendment process (&quot;no state, without its consent, shall be deprived of its equal Suffrage in the Senate&quot;) is less absolute but it is permanent.

====Article VI – Federal Powers====

Article VI establishes that the Constitution and all federal laws and treaties made in accordance with it have supremacy over state laws, and that &quot;the judges in every state shall be bound thereby, any thing in the laws or constitutions of any state notwithstanding.&quot; It validates national debt created under the Articles of Confederation and requires that all federal and state legislators, officers, and judges take oaths or affirmations to support the Constitution. This means that the states&#x27; constitutions and laws should not conflict with the laws of the federal constitution and that in case of a conflict, state judges are legally bound to honor the federal laws and constitution over those of any state. Article Six also states &quot;no religious Test shall ever be required as a Qualification to any Office or public Trust under the United States.&quot;

====Article VII – Ratification====

Article VII describes the process for establishing the proposed new frame of government. Anticipating that the influence of many state politicians would be Antifederalist, delegates to the Philadelphia Convention provided for ratification of the Constitution by popularly elected ratifying conventions in each state. The convention method also made it possible that judges, ministers and others ineligible to serve in state legislatures, could be elected to a convention. Suspecting that Rhode Island, at least, might not ratify, delegates decided that the Constitution would go into effect as soon as nine states (two-thirds rounded up) ratified. Each of the remaining four states could then join the newly formed union by ratifying.

===Closing endorsement===

The signing of the United States Constitution occurred on September 17, 1787, when 39 delegates endorsed the constitution created during the convention. In addition to signatures, this closing endorsement, the Constitution&#x27;s eschatocol, included a brief declaration that the delegates&#x27; work has been successfully completed and that those whose signatures appear on it subscribe to the final document. Included are a statement pronouncing the document&#x27;s adoption by the states present, a formulaic dating of its adoption, and the delegates&#x27; signatures. Additionally, the convention&#x27;s secretary, William Jackson, added a note to verify four amendments made by hand to the final document, and signed the note to authenticate its validity.

The language of the concluding endorsement, conceived by Gouverneur Morris and presented to the convention by Benjamin Franklin, was made intentionally ambiguous in hopes of winning over the votes of dissenting delegates. Advocates for the new frame of government, realizing the impending difficulty of obtaining the consent of the states needed to make it operational, were anxious to obtain the unanimous support of the delegations from each state. It was feared that many of the delegates would refuse to give their individual assent to the Constitution. Therefore, in order that the action of the convention would appear to be unanimous, the formula, &quot;Done in convention by the unanimous consent of the states present...&quot; was devised.

The document is dated: &quot;the Seventeenth Day of September in the Year of our Lord&quot; 1787, and &quot;of the Independence of the United States of America the Twelfth.&quot; This two-fold epoch dating serves to place the Constitution in the context of the religious traditions of Western civilization and, at the same time, links it to the regime principles proclaimed in the Declaration of Independence. This dual reference can also be found in the Articles of Confederation and the Northwest Ordinance.

The closing endorsement serves an authentication function only. It neither assigns powers to the federal government nor does it provide specific limitations on government action. It does, however, provide essential documentation of the Constitution&#x27;s validity, a statement of &quot;This is what was agreed to.&quot; It records who signed the Constitution, and when and where.

===Amendments===
The procedure for amending the Constitution is outlined in Article V (see above). The process is overseen by the archivist of the United States. Between 1949 and 1985, it was overseen by the administrator of General Services, and before that by the secretary of state.

Under Article Five, a proposal for an amendment must be adopted either by two-thirds of both houses of Congress or by a national convention that had been requested by two-thirds of the state legislatures. Once the proposal has passed by either method, Congress must decide whether the proposed amendment is to be ratified by state legislatures or by state ratifying conventions. The proposed amendment along with the method of ratification is sent to the Office of the Federal Register, which copies it in slip law format and submits it to the states. To date, the convention method of proposal has never been tried and the convention method of ratification has only been used once, for the Twenty-first Amendment.

A proposed amendment becomes an operative part of the Constitution as soon as it is ratified by three-fourths of the States (currently 38 of the 50 states). There is no further step. The text requires no additional action by Congress or anyone else after ratification by the required number of states. Thus, when the Office of the Federal Register verifies that it has received the required number of authenticated ratification documents, it drafts a formal proclamation for the Archivist to certify that the amendment is valid and has become part of the nation&#x27;s frame of government. This certification is published in the &quot;Federal Register&quot; and &quot;United States Statutes at Large&quot; and serves as official notice to Congress and to the nation that the ratification process has been successfully completed.

The Constitution has twenty-seven amendments. Structurally, the Constitution&#x27;s original text and all prior amendments remain untouched. The precedent for this practice was set in 1789, when Congress considered and proposed the first several Constitutional amendments. Among these, Amendments 1–10 are collectively known as the Bill of Rights, and Amendments 13–15 are known as the Reconstruction Amendments. Excluding the Twenty-seventh Amendment, which was pending before the states for , the longest pending amendment that was successfully ratified was the Twenty-second Amendment, which took . The Twenty-sixth Amendment was ratified in the shortest time, days. The average ratification time for the first twenty-six amendments was 1year, 252 days; for all twenty-seven, 9years, 48 days.

The first ten Amendments introduced were referred to as the Bill of Rights which consists of 10 amendments that were added to the Constitution in 1791, as supporters of the Constitution had promised critics during the debates of 1788.

====Safeguards of liberty (Amendments 1, 2, and 3)====
The First Amendment (1791) prohibits Congress from obstructing the exercise of certain individual freedoms: freedom of religion, freedom of speech, freedom of the press, freedom of assembly, and right to petition. Its Free Exercise Clause guarantees a person&#x27;s right to hold whatever religious beliefs they want, and to freely exercise that belief, and its Establishment Clause prevents the federal government from creating an official national church or favoring one set of religious beliefs over another. The amendment guarantees an individual&#x27;s right to express and to be exposed to a wide range of opinions and views. It was intended to ensure a free exchange of ideas, even unpopular ones. It also guarantees an individual&#x27;s right to physically gather or associate with others in groups for economic, political or religious purposes. Additionally, it guarantees an individual&#x27;s right to petition the government for a redress of grievances.

The Second Amendment (1791) protects the right of individuals to keep and bear arms. The Supreme Court has ruled that this right applies to individuals, not merely to collective militias. It has also held that the government may regulate or place some limits on the manufacture, ownership and sale of firearms or other weapons. Requested by several states during the Constitutional ratification debates, the amendment reflected the lingering resentment over the widespread efforts of the British to confiscate the colonists&#x27; firearms at the outbreak of the Revolutionary War. Patrick Henry had rhetorically asked, shall we be stronger, &quot;when we are totally disarmed, and when a British Guard shall be stationed in every house?&quot;

The Third Amendment (1791) prohibits the federal government from forcing individuals to provide lodging to soldiers in their homes during peacetime without their consent. Requested by several states during the Constitutional ratification debates, the amendment reflected the lingering resentment over the Quartering Acts passed by the British Parliament during the Revolutionary War, which had allowed British soldiers to take over private homes for their own use.

====Safeguards of justice (Amendments 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8)====

The Fourth Amendment (1791) protects people against unreasonable searches and seizures of either self or property by government officials. A search can mean everything from a frisking by a police officer or to a demand for a blood test to a search of an individual&#x27;s home or car. A seizure occurs when the government takes control of an individual or something in the possession of the individual. Items that are seized often are used as evidence when the individual is charged with a crime. It also imposes certain limitations on police investigating a crime and prevents the use of illegally obtained evidence at trial.

The Fifth Amendment (1791) establishes the requirement that a trial for a major crime may commence only after an indictment has been handed down by a grand jury; protects individuals from double jeopardy, being tried and put in danger of being punished more than once for the same criminal act; prohibits punishment without due process of law, thus protecting individuals from being imprisoned without fair procedures; and provides that an accused person may not be compelled to reveal to the police, prosecutor, judge, or jury any information that might incriminate or be used against him or her in a court of law. Additionally, the Fifth Amendment also prohibits government from taking private property for public use without &quot;just compensation&quot;, the basis of eminent domain in the United States.

The Sixth Amendment (1791) provides several protections and rights to an individual accused of a crime. The accused has the right to a fair and speedy trial by a local and impartial jury. Likewise, a person has the right to a public trial. This right protects defendants from secret proceedings that might encourage abuse of the justice system, and serves to keep the public informed. This amendment also guarantees a right to legal counsel if accused of a crime, guarantees that the accused may require witnesses to attend the trial and testify in the presence of the accused, and guarantees the accused a right to know the charges against them. In 1966, the Supreme Court ruled that, with the Fifth Amendment, this amendment requires what has become known as the &quot;Miranda&quot; warning.

The Seventh Amendment (1791) extends the right to a jury trial to federal civil cases, and inhibits courts from overturning a jury&#x27;s findings of fact. Although the Seventh Amendment itself says that it is limited to &quot;suits at common law&quot;, meaning cases that triggered the right to a jury under English law, the amendment has been found to apply in lawsuits that are similar to the old common law cases. For example, the right to a jury trial applies to cases brought under federal statutes that prohibit race or gender discrimination in housing or employment. Importantly, this amendment guarantees the right to a jury trial only in federal court, not in state court.

The Eighth Amendment (1791) protects people from having bail or fines set at an amount so high that it would be impossible for all but the richest defendants to pay, and also protects people from being subjected to cruel and unusual punishment. Although this phrase originally was intended to outlaw certain gruesome methods of punishment, it has been broadened over the years to protect against punishments that are grossly disproportionate to or too harsh for the particular crime. This provision has also been used to challenge prison conditions such as extremely unsanitary cells, overcrowding, insufficient medical care and deliberate failure by officials to protect inmates from one another.

====Unenumerated rights and reserved powers (Amendments 9 and 10)====

The Ninth Amendment (1791) declares that individuals have other fundamental rights, in addition to those stated in the Constitution. During the Constitutional ratification debates, Anti-Federalists argued that a Bill of Rights should be added. The Federalists opposed it on grounds that a list would necessarily be incomplete but would be taken as explicit and exhaustive, thus enlarging the power of the federal government by implication. The Anti-Federalists persisted, and several state ratification conventions refused to ratify the Constitution without a more specific list of protections, so the First Congress added what became the Ninth Amendment as a compromise. Because the rights protected by the Ninth Amendment are not specified, they are referred to as &quot;unenumerated&quot;. The Supreme Court has found that unenumerated rights include such important rights as the right to travel, the right to vote, the right to privacy, and the right to make important decisions about one&#x27;s health care or body.

The Tenth Amendment (1791) was included in the Bill of Rights to further define the balance of power between the federal government and the states. The amendment states that the federal government has only those powers specifically granted by the Constitution. These powers include the power to declare war, to collect taxes, to regulate interstate business activities and others that are listed in the articles or in subsequent constitutional amendments. Any power not listed is, says the Tenth Amendment, left to the states or the people. While there is no specific list of what these &quot;reserved powers&quot; may be, the Supreme Court has ruled that laws affecting family relations, commerce within a state&#x27;s own borders, abortion, and local law enforcement activities, are among those specifically reserved to the states or the people.

====Governmental authority (Amendments 11, 16, 18, and 21)====

The Eleventh Amendment (1795) specifically prohibits federal courts from hearing cases in which a state is sued by an individual from another state or another country, thus extending to the states sovereign immunity protection from certain types of legal liability. Article Three, Section 2, Clause 1 has been affected by this amendment, which also overturned the Supreme Court&#x27;s decision in &quot;Chisholm v. Georgia&quot; (1793).

The Sixteenth Amendment (1913) removed existing Constitutional constraints that limited the power of Congress to lay and collect taxes on income. Specifically, the apportionment constraints delineated in Article 1, Section 9, Clause 4 have been removed by this amendment, which also overturned an 1895 Supreme Court decision, in &quot;Pollock v. Farmers&#x27; Loan &amp; Trust Co.&quot;, that declared an unapportioned federal income tax on rents, dividends, and interest unconstitutional. This amendment has become the basis for all subsequent federal income tax legislation and has greatly expanded the scope of federal taxing and spending in the years since.

The Eighteenth Amendment (1919) prohibited the making, transporting, and selling of alcoholic beverages nationwide. It also authorized Congress to enact legislation enforcing this prohibition. Adopted at the urging of a national temperance movement, proponents believed that the use of alcohol was reckless and destructive and that prohibition would reduce crime and corruption, solve social problems, decrease the need for welfare and prisons, and improve the health of all Americans. During prohibition, it is estimated that alcohol consumption and alcohol related deaths declined dramatically. But prohibition had other, more negative consequences. The amendment drove the lucrative alcohol business underground, giving rise to a large and pervasive black market. In addition, prohibition encouraged disrespect for the law and strengthened organized crime. Prohibition came to an end in 1933, when this amendment was repealed.

The Twenty-first Amendment (1933) repealed the Eighteenth Amendment and returned the regulation of alcohol to the states. Each state sets its own rules for the sale and importation of alcohol, including the drinking age. Because a federal law provides federal funds to states that prohibit the sale of alcohol to minors under the age of twenty-one, all fifty states have set their drinking age there. Rules about how alcohol is sold vary greatly from state to state.

====Safeguards of civil rights (Amendments 13, 14, 15, 19, 23, 24, and 26)====

The Thirteenth Amendment (1865) abolished slavery and involuntary servitude, except as punishment for a crime, and authorized Congress to enforce abolition. Though millions of slaves had been declared free by the 1863 Emancipation Proclamation, their post-Civil War status was unclear, as was the status of other millions. Congress intended the Thirteenth Amendment to be a proclamation of freedom for all slaves throughout the nation and to take the question of emancipation away from politics. This amendment rendered inoperative or moot several of the original parts of the constitution.

The Fourteenth Amendment (1868) granted United States citizenship to former slaves and to all persons &quot;subject to U.S. jurisdiction&quot;. It also contained three new limits on state power: a state shall not violate a citizen&#x27;s privileges or immunities; shall not deprive any person of life, liberty, or property without due process of law; and must guarantee all persons equal protection of the laws. These limitations dramatically expanded the protections of the Constitution. This amendment, according to the Supreme Court&#x27;s Doctrine of Incorporation, makes most provisions of the Bill of Rights applicable to state and local governments as well. It superseded the mode of apportionment of representatives delineated in Article 1, Section 2, Clause 3, and also overturned the Supreme Court&#x27;s decision in &quot;Dred Scott v. Sandford&quot; (1857).

The Fifteenth Amendment (1870) prohibits the use of race, color, or previous condition of servitude in determining which citizens may vote. The last of three post Civil War Reconstruction Amendments, it sought to abolish one of the key vestiges of slavery and to advance the civil rights and liberties of former slaves.

The Nineteenth Amendment (1920) prohibits the government from denying women the right to vote on the same terms as men. Prior to the amendment&#x27;s adoption, only a few states permitted women to vote and to hold office.

The Twenty-third Amendment (1961) extends the right to vote in presidential elections to citizens residing in the District of Columbia by granting the District electors in the Electoral College, as if it were a state. When first established as the nation&#x27;s capital in 1800, the District of Columbia&#x27;s five thousand residents had neither a local government, nor the right to vote in federal elections. By 1960 the population of the District had grown to over 760,000.

The Twenty-fourth Amendment (1964) prohibits a poll tax for voting. Although passage of the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth Amendments helped remove many of the discriminatory laws left over from slavery, they did not eliminate all forms of discrimination. Along with literacy tests and durational residency requirements, poll taxes were used to keep low-income (primarily African American) citizens from participating in elections. The Supreme Court has since struck down these discriminatory measures.

The Twenty-sixth Amendment (1971) prohibits the government from denying the right of United States citizens, eighteen years of age or older, to vote on account of age. The drive to lower the voting age was driven in large part by the broader student activism movement protesting the Vietnam War. It gained strength following the Supreme Court&#x27;s decision in &quot;Oregon v. Mitchell&quot; (1970).

====Government processes and procedures (Amendments 12, 17, 20, 22, 25, and 27)====

The Twelfth Amendment (1804) modifies the way the Electoral College chooses the president and vice president. It stipulates that each elector must cast a distinct vote for president and vice president, instead of two votes for president. It also suggests that the president and vice president should not be from the same state. Article II, Section 1, Clause 3 is superseded by this amendment, which also extends the eligibility requirements to become president to the vice president.

The Seventeenth Amendment (1913) modifies the way senators are elected. It stipulates that senators are to be elected by direct popular vote. The amendment supersedes Article 1, Section 3, Clauses1 and 2, under which the two senators from each state were elected by the state legislature. It also allows state legislatures to permit their governors to make temporary appointments until a special election can be held.

The Twentieth Amendment (1933) changes the date on which a new president, Vice President and Congress take office, thus shortening the time between Election Day and the beginning of Presidential, Vice Presidential and Congressional terms. Originally, the Constitution provided that the annual meeting was to be on the first Monday in December unless otherwise provided by law. This meant that, when a new Congress was elected in November, it did not come into office until the following March, with a &quot;lame duck&quot; Congress convening in the interim. By moving the beginning of the president&#x27;s new term from March 4 to January 20 (and in the case of Congress, to January 3), proponents hoped to put an end to lame duck sessions, while allowing for a speedier transition for the new administration and legislators.

The Twenty-second Amendment (1951) limits an elected president to two terms in office, a total of eight years. However, under some circumstances it is possible for an individual to serve more than eight years. Although nothing in the original frame of government limited how many presidential terms one could serve, the nation&#x27;s first president, George Washington, declined to run for a third term, suggesting that two terms of four years were enough for any president. This precedent remained an unwritten rule of the presidency until broken by Franklin D. Roosevelt, who was elected to a third term as president 1940 and in 1944 to a fourth.

The Twenty-fifth Amendment (1967) clarifies what happens upon the death, removal, or resignation of the President or Vice President and how the Presidency is temporarily filled if the President becomes disabled and cannot fulfill the responsibilities of the office. It supersedes the ambiguous succession rule established in Article II, Section 1, Clause 6. A concrete plan of succession has been needed on multiple occasions since 1789. However, for nearly 20% of U.S. history, there has been no vice president in office who could assume the presidency.

The Twenty-seventh Amendment (1992) prevents members of Congress from granting themselves pay raises during the current session. Rather, any raises that are adopted must take effect during the next session of Congress. Its proponents believed that Federal legislators would be more likely to be cautious about increasing congressional pay if they have no personal stake in the vote. Article One, section 6, Clause 1 has been affected by this amendment, which remained pending for over two centuries as it contained no time limit for ratification.

==Unratified amendments==

Collectively, members of the House and Senate propose around 150 amendments during each two-year term of Congress. Most however, never get out of the Congressional committees in which they are proposed, and only a fraction of those approved in committee receive sufficient support to win Congressional approval and actually enter the constitutional ratification process.

Six amendments approved by Congress and proposed to the states for consideration have not been ratified by the required number of states to become part of the Constitution. Four of these are technically still pending, as Congress did not set a time limit (see also &quot;Coleman v. Miller&quot;) for their ratification. The other two are no longer pending, as both had a time limit attached and in both cases the time period set for their ratification expired.

===Pending===

* The Congressional Apportionment Amendment (proposed 1789) would, if ratified, establish a formula for determining the appropriate size of the House of Representatives and the appropriate apportionment of representatives among the states following each constitutionally mandated decennial census. At the time it was sent to the states for ratification, an affirmative vote by ten states would have made this amendment operational. In 1791 and 1792, when Vermont and Kentucky joined the Union, the number climbed to twelve. Thus, the amendment remained one state shy of the number needed for it to become part of the Constitution. No additional states have ratified this amendment since. To become part of the Constitution today, ratification by an additional twenty-seven would be required. The Apportionment Act of 1792 apportioned the House of Representatives at 33,000 persons per representative in consequence of the 1790 census. Reapportionment has since been effected by statute.
* The Titles of Nobility Amendment (proposed 1810) would, if ratified, strip United States citizenship from any citizen who accepted a title of nobility from a foreign country. When submitted to the states, ratification by thirteen states was required for it to become part of the Constitution; eleven had done so by early 1812. However, with the addition of Louisiana into the Union that year (April 30, 1812), the ratification threshold rose to fourteen. Thus, when New Hampshire ratified it in December 1812, the amendment again came within two states of being ratified. No additional states have ratified this amendment since. To become part of the Constitution today, ratification by an additional twenty-six would be required.
* The Corwin Amendment (proposed 1861) would, if ratified, shield &quot;domestic institutions&quot; of the states (which in 1861 included slavery) from the constitutional amendment process and from abolition or interference by Congress. This proposal was one of several measures considered by Congress in an ultimately unsuccessful attempt to attract the seceding states back into the Union and to entice border slave states to stay. Five states ratified the amendment in the early 1860s, but none have since. To become part of the Constitution today, ratification by an additional 33 states would be required. The subject of this proposal was subsequently addressed by the 1865 Thirteenth Amendment, which abolished slavery.
* The Child Labor Amendment (proposed 1924) would, if ratified, specifically authorize Congress to limit, regulate and prohibit labor of persons less than eighteen years of age. The amendment was proposed in response to Supreme Court rulings in &quot;Hammer v. Dagenhart&quot; (1918) and &quot;Bailey v. Drexel Furniture Co.&quot; (1922) that found federal laws regulating and taxing goods produced by employees under the ages of 14 and 16 unconstitutional. When submitted to the states, ratification by 36 states was required for it to become part of the Constitution, as there were forty-eight states. Twenty-eight had ratified the amendment by early 1937, but none have done so since. To become part of the Constitution today, ratification by an additional ten would be required. A federal statute approved June 25, 1938, regulated the employment of those under 16 or 18 years of age in interstate commerce. The Supreme Court, by unanimous vote in &quot;United States v. Darby Lumber Co.&quot; (1941), found this law constitutional, effectively overturning &quot;Hammer v. Dagenhart&quot;. As a result of this development, the movement pushing for the amendment concluded.

===Expired===

* The Equal Rights Amendment (proposed 1972) would have prohibited deprivation of equality of rights (discrimination) by the federal or state governments on account of sex. A seven-year ratification time limit was initially placed on the amendment, but as the deadline approached, Congress granted a three-year extension. Thirty-five states ratified the proposed amendment prior to the original deadline, three short of the number required for it to be implemented (five of them later voted to rescind their ratification). No further states ratified the amendment within the extended deadline. In 2017, Nevada became the first state to ratify the ERA after the expiration of both deadlines, followed by Illinois in 2018, and Virginia in 2020, bringing the number of ratifications to 38. However, experts and advocates have acknowledged legal uncertainty about the consequences of these ratifications, due to the expired deadlines and the five states&#x27; revocations.
* The District of Columbia Voting Rights Amendment (proposed 1978) would have granted the District of Columbia full representation in the United States Congress as if it were a state, repealed the Twenty-third Amendment, granted the District unconditional Electoral College voting rights, and allowed its participation in the process by which the Constitution is amended. A seven-year ratification time limit was placed on the amendment. Sixteen states ratified the amendment (twenty-two short of the number required for it to be implemented) prior to the deadline, thus it failed to be adopted.

==Judicial review==

The way the Constitution is understood is influenced by court decisions, especially those of the Supreme Court. These decisions are referred to as precedents. Judicial review is the power of the Court to examine federal legislation, federal executive, and all state branches of government, to decide their constitutionality, and to strike them down if found unconstitutional.

Judicial review includes the power of the Court to explain the meaning of the Constitution as it applies to particular cases. Over the years, Court decisions on issues ranging from governmental regulation of radio and television to the rights of the accused in criminal cases have changed the way many constitutional clauses are interpreted, without amendment to the actual text of the Constitution.

Legislation passed to implement the Constitution, or to adapt those implementations to changing conditions, broadens and, in subtle ways, changes the meanings given to the words of the Constitution. Up to a point, the rules and regulations of the many federal executive agencies have a similar effect. If an action of Congress or the agencies is challenged, however, the court system ultimately decides whether these actions are permissible under the Constitution.

===Scope and theory===
Courts established by the Constitution can regulate government under the Constitution, the supreme law of the land. First, they have jurisdiction over actions by an officer of government and state law. Second, federal courts may rule on whether coordinate branches of national government conform to the Constitution. Until the twentieth century, the Supreme Court of the United States may have been the only high tribunal in the world to use a court for constitutional interpretation of fundamental law, others generally depending on their national legislature.

The basic theory of American judicial review is summarized by constitutional legal scholars and historians as follows: the written Constitution is fundamental law within the states. It can change only by extraordinary legislative process of national proposal, then state ratification. The powers of all departments are limited to enumerated grants found in the Constitution. Courts are expected (a) to enforce provisions of the Constitution as the supreme law of the land, and (b) to refuse to enforce anything in conflict with it.

As to judicial review and the Congress, the first proposals by Madison (Virginia) and Wilson (Pennsylvania) called for a supreme court veto over national legislation. In this it resembled the system in New York, where the Constitution of 1777 called for a &quot;Council of Revision&quot; by the governor and justices of the state supreme court. The council would review and veto any passed legislation; violating the spirit of the Constitution before it went into effect. The nationalist&#x27;s proposal in convention was defeated three times and replaced by a presidential veto with congressional over-ride. Judicial review relies on the jurisdictional authority in Article III, and the Supremacy Clause.

The justification for judicial review is to be explicitly found in the open ratifications held in the states and reported in their newspapers. John Marshall in Virginia, James Wilson in Pennsylvania and Oliver Ellsworth of Connecticut all argued for Supreme Court judicial review of acts of state legislature. In Federalist No. 78, Alexander Hamilton advocated the doctrine of a written document held as a superior enactment of the people. &quot;A limited constitution can be preserved in practice no other way&quot; than through courts which can declare void any legislation contrary to the Constitution. The preservation of the people&#x27;s authority over legislatures rests &quot;particularly with judges.&quot;

The Supreme Court was initially made up of jurists who had been intimately connected with the framing of the Constitution and the establishment of its government as law. John Jay (New York), a co-author of &quot;The Federalist Papers&quot;, served as chief justice for the first six years. The second chief justice, John Rutledge (South Carolina), was appointed by Washington in 1795 as a recess appointment, but was not confirmed by the Senate. Resigning later that year, he was succeeded in 1796 by the third chief justice, Oliver Ellsworth (Connecticut). Both Rutledge and Ellsworth were delegates to the Constitutional Convention. John Marshall (Virginia), the fourth chief justice, had served in the Virginia Ratification Convention in 1788. His 34 years of service on the Court would see some of the most important rulings to help establish the nation the Constitution had begun. Other early members of the Supreme Court who had been delegates to the Constitutional Convention included James Wilson (Pennsylvania) for ten years, and John Blair Jr. (Virginia) for five years.

===Establishment===

When John Marshall followed Oliver Ellsworth as chief justice of the Supreme Court in 1801, the federal judiciary had been established by the Judiciary Act, but there were few cases, and less prestige. &quot;The fate of judicial review was in the hands of the Supreme Court itself.&quot; Review of state legislation and appeals from state supreme courts was understood. But the Court&#x27;s life, jurisdiction over state legislation was limited. The Marshall Court&#x27;s landmark &quot;Barron v. Baltimore&quot; held that the Bill of Rights restricted only the federal government, and not the states.

In the landmark &quot;Marbury v. Madison&quot; case, the Supreme Court asserted its authority of judicial review over Acts of Congress. Its findings were that Marbury and the others had a right to their commissions as judges in the District of Columbia. Marshall, writing the opinion for the majority, announced his discovered conflict between Section 13 of the Judiciary Act of 1789 and Article III. In this case, both the Constitution and the statutory law applied to the particulars at the same time. &quot;The very essence of judicial duty&quot; according to Marshall was to determine which of the two conflicting rules should govern. The Constitution enumerates powers of the judiciary to extend to cases arising &quot;under the Constitution&quot;. Further, justices take a Constitutional oath to uphold it as &quot;Supreme law of the land.&quot; Therefore, since the United States government as created by the Constitution is a limited government, the federal courts were required to choose the Constitution over congressional law if there were deemed to be a conflict.

&quot;This argument has been ratified by time and by practice...&quot; The Supreme Court did not declare another act of Congress unconstitutional until the controversial Dred Scott decision in 1857, held after the voided Missouri Compromise statute had already been repealed. In the eighty years following the Civil War to World War II, the Court voided congressional statutes in 77 cases, on average almost one a year.

A crisis arose when, in 1935 and 1936, the Supreme Court handed down twelve decisions voiding acts of Congress relating to the New Deal. President Franklin D. Roosevelt then responded with his abortive &quot;court packing plan&quot;. Other proposals have suggested a Court super-majority to overturn Congressional legislation, or a constitutional amendment to require that the justices retire at a specified age by law. To date, the Supreme Court&#x27;s power of judicial review has persisted.

====Self-restraint====

The power of judicial review could not have been preserved long in a democracy unless it had been &quot;wielded with a reasonable measure of judicial restraint, and with some attention, as Mr. Dooley said, to the election returns.&quot; Indeed, the Supreme Court has developed a system of doctrine and practice that self-limit its power of judicial review.

The Court controls almost all of its business by choosing what cases to consider, writs of certiorari. In this way, it can avoid opinions on embarrassing or difficult cases. The Supreme Court limits itself by defining what is a &quot;justiciable question&quot;. First, the Court is fairly consistent in refusing to make any &quot;advisory opinions&quot; in advance of actual cases. Second, &quot;friendly suits&quot; between those of the same legal interest are not considered. Third, the Court requires a &quot;personal interest&quot;, not one generally held, and a legally protected right must be immediately threatened by government action. Cases are not taken up if the litigant has no standing to sue. Simply having the money to sue and being injured by government action are not enough.

These three procedural ways of dismissing cases have led critics to charge that the Supreme Court delays decisions by unduly insisting on technicalities in their &quot;standards of litigability&quot;. They say cases are left unconsidered which are in the public interest, with genuine controversy, and resulting from good faith action. &quot;The Supreme Court is not only a court of law but a court of justice.&quot;

====Separation of powers====

The Supreme Court balances several pressures to maintain its roles in national government. It seeks to be a co-equal branch of government, but its decrees must be enforceable. The Court seeks to minimize situations where it asserts itself superior to either president or Congress, but federal officers must be held accountable. The Supreme Court assumes power to declare acts of Congress as unconstitutional but it self-limits its passing on constitutional questions. But the Court&#x27;s guidance on basic problems of life and governance in a democracy is most effective when American political life reinforces its rulings.

Justice Brandeis summarized four general guidelines that the Supreme Court uses to avoid constitutional decisions relating to Congress: The Court will not anticipate a question of constitutional law nor decide open questions unless a case decision requires it. If it does, a rule of constitutional law is formulated only as the precise facts in the case require. The Court will choose statutes or general law for the basis of its decision if it can without constitutional grounds. If it does, the Court will choose a constitutional construction of an act of Congress, even if its constitutionality is seriously in doubt.

Likewise with the executive department, Edwin Corwin observed that the Court does sometimes rebuff presidential pretensions, but it more often tries to rationalize them. Against Congress, an act is merely &quot;disallowed&quot;. In the executive case, exercising judicial review produces &quot;some change in the external world&quot; beyond the ordinary judicial sphere. The &quot;political question&quot; doctrine especially applies to questions which present a difficult enforcement issue. Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes addressed the Court&#x27;s limitation when political process allowed future policy change, but a judicial ruling would &quot;attribute finality&quot;. Political questions lack &quot;satisfactory criteria for a judicial determination.&quot;

John Marshall recognized that the president holds &quot;important political powers&quot; which as executive privilege allows great discretion. This doctrine was applied in Court rulings on President Grant&#x27;s duty to enforce the law during Reconstruction. It extends to the sphere of foreign affairs. Justice Robert Jackson explained, foreign affairs are inherently political, &quot;wholly confided by our Constitution to the political departments of the government ... [and] not subject to judicial intrusion or inquiry.&quot;

Critics of the Court object in two principal ways to self-restraint in judicial review, deferring as it does as a matter of doctrine to acts of Congress and presidential actions.
# Its inaction is said to allow &quot;a flood of legislative appropriations&quot; which permanently create an imbalance between the states and federal government.
# Supreme Court deference to Congress and the executive compromises American protection of civil rights, political minority groups and aliens.
===Subsequent Courts===

Supreme Courts under the leadership of subsequent chief justices have also used judicial review to interpret the Constitution among individuals, states and federal branches. Notable contributions were made by the Chase Court, the Taft Court, the Warren Court, and the Rehnquist Court.
Salmon P. Chase was a Lincoln appointee, serving as chief justice from 1864 to 1873. His career encompassed service as a U.S. senator and Governor of Ohio. He coined the slogan, &quot;Free soil, free Labor, free men.&quot; One of Lincoln&#x27;s &quot;team of rivals&quot;, he was appointed Secretary of Treasury during the Civil War, issuing &quot;greenbacks&quot;. Partly to appease the Radical Republicans, Lincoln appointed him chief justice upon the death of Roger B. Taney.

In one of his first official acts, Chase admitted John Rock, the first African American to practice before the Supreme Court. The Chase Court is famous for &quot;Texas v. White&quot;, which asserted a permanent Union of indestructible states. &quot;Veazie Bank v. Fenno&quot; upheld the Civil War tax on state banknotes. &quot;Hepburn v. Griswold&quot; found parts of the Legal Tender Acts unconstitutional, though it was reversed under a late Supreme Court majority.

William Howard Taft was a Harding appointment to chief justice from 1921 to 1930. A Progressive Republican from Ohio, he was a one-term President.

As chief justice, he advocated the Judiciary Act of 1925 that brought the Federal District Courts under the administrative jurisdiction of the Supreme Court. Taft successfully sought the expansion of Court jurisdiction over non-states such as District of Columbia and Territories of Alaska and Hawaii.

In 1925, the Taft Court issued a ruling overturning a Marshall Court ruling on the Bill of Rights. In &quot;Gitlow v. New York&quot;, the Court established the doctrine of &quot;incorporation&quot;, which applied the Bill of Rights to the states. Important cases included the &quot;Board of Trade of City of Chicago v. Olsen&quot;, which upheld Congressional regulation of commerce. &quot;Olmstead v. United States&quot; allowed exclusion of evidence obtained without a warrant based on application of the 14th Amendment proscription against unreasonable searches. &quot;Wisconsin v. Illinois&quot; ruled the equitable power of the United States can impose positive action on a state to prevent its inaction from damaging another state.
Earl Warren was an Eisenhower nominee, chief justice from 1953 to 1969. Warren&#x27;s Republican career in the law reached from county prosecutor, California state attorney general, and three consecutive terms as governor. His programs stressed progressive efficiency, expanding state education, re-integrating returning veterans, infrastructure, and highway construction.

In 1954, the Warren Court overturned a landmark Fuller Court ruling on the Fourteenth Amendment interpreting racial segregation as permissible in government and commerce providing &quot;separate but equal&quot; services. Warren built a coalition of justices after 1962 that developed the idea of natural rights as guaranteed in the Constitution. &quot;Brown v. Board of Education&quot; banned segregation in public schools. &quot;Baker v. Carr&quot; and &quot;Reynolds v. Sims&quot; established Court ordered &quot;one-man-one-vote&quot;. Bill of Rights Amendments were incorporated into the states. Due process was expanded in &quot;Gideon v. Wainwright&quot; and &quot;Miranda v. Arizona.&quot; First Amendment rights were addressed in &quot;Griswold v. Connecticut&quot; concerning privacy, and &quot;Engel v. Vitale&quot; relative to free speech.
William Rehnquist was a Reagan-appointed chief justice, serving from 1986 to 2005. While he would concur with overthrowing a state supreme court&#x27;s decision, as in &quot;Bush v. Gore&quot;, he built a coalition of Justices after 1994 that developed the idea of federalism as provided for in the Tenth Amendment. In the hands of the Supreme Court, the Constitution and its amendments were to restrain Congress, as in &quot;City of Boerne v. Flores&quot;.

Nevertheless, the Rehnquist Court was noted in the contemporary &quot;culture wars&quot; for overturning state laws relating to privacy, prohibiting late-term abortions in &quot;Stenberg v. Carhart&quot;, prohibiting sodomy in &quot;Lawrence v. Texas&quot;, or ruling so as to protect free speech in &quot;Texas v. Johnson&quot; or affirmative action in &quot;Grutter v. Bollinger&quot;.

==Civic religion==

There is a viewpoint that some Americans have come to see the documents of the Constitution, along with the Declaration of Independence and the Bill of Rights, as being a cornerstone of a type of civil religion. Some commentators depict the multi-ethnic, multi-sectarian United States as held together by political orthodoxy, in contrast with a nation-state of people having more &quot;natural&quot; ties.

==Worldwide influence==


The United States Constitution has been a notable model for governance worldwide, especially through the 1970s. Its international influence is found in similarities in phrasing and borrowed passages in other constitutions, as well as in the principles of the rule of law, separation of powers, and recognition of individual rights.

The American experience of fundamental law with amendments and judicial review has motivated constitutionalists at times when they were considering the possibilities for their nation&#x27;s future. It informed Abraham Lincoln during the American Civil War, his contemporary and ally Benito Juárez of Mexico, and the second generation of 19th-century constitutional nationalists, José Rizal of the Philippines and Sun Yat-sen of China. The framers of the Australian constitution integrated federal ideas from the U.S. and other constitutions.

Since the 1980s, the influence of the United States Constitution has been waning as other countries have created new constitutions or updated older constitutions, a process which Sanford Levinson believes to be more difficult in the United States than in any other country.

==Criticisms==
The United States Constitution has faced various criticisms since its inception in 1787.

The Constitution did not originally define who was eligible to vote, allowing each state to determine who was eligible. In the early history of the U.S., most states allowed only white male adult property owners to vote; the notable exception was New Jersey, where women were able to vote on the same basis as men. Until the Reconstruction Amendments were adopted between 1865 and 1870, the five years immediately following the American Civil War, the Constitution did not abolish slavery, nor give citizenship and voting rights to former slaves. These amendments did not include a specific prohibition on discrimination in voting on the basis of sex; it took another amendment—the Nineteenth, ratified in 1920—for the Constitution to prohibit any United States citizen from being denied the right to vote on the basis of sex.

According to a 2012 study by David Law and Mila Versteeg published in the &quot;New York University Law Review&quot;, the U.S. Constitution guarantees relatively few rights compared to the constitutions of other countries and contains fewer than half (26 of 60) of the provisions listed in the average bill of rights. It is also one of the few in the world today that still features the right to keep and bear arms; the other two being the constitutions of Guatemala and Mexico.

=== Difficult to amend ===
Sanford Levinson wrote in 2006 that it has been the most difficult constitution in the world to amend since the fall of Yugoslavia. Levitsky and Ziblatt argue that the US Constitution is the most difficult in the world to amend, and that this helps explain why the US still has so many undemocratic institutions that most or all other democracies have reformed, directly allowing significant democratic backsliding in the United States.

==Commemorations==
In 1937, the U.S. Post Office, at the prompting of President Franklin Delano Roosevelt, an avid stamp collector himself, released a commemorative postage stamp celebrating the 150th anniversary of the signing of the U.S. Constitution. The engraving on this issue is after an 1856 painting by Junius Brutus Stearns of Washington and shows delegates signing the Constitution at the 1787 Convention. The following year another commemorative stamp was issued celebrating the 150th anniversary of the ratification of the Constitution. In 1987 the U.S. Government minted a 1987 silver dollar in celebration of the 200th anniversary of the signing of the Constitution.
==See also==

* &quot;Commentaries on the Constitution of the United States&quot; by Joseph Story (1833, three volumes)
* Congressional power of enforcement
* Constitution Day and Citizenship Day
* Constitution Week
* &quot;The Constitution of the United States of America: Analysis and Interpretation&quot;
* Constitution of 3 May 1791
* Constitutionalism in the United States
* Gödel&#x27;s Loophole
* Founding Fathers of the United States
* Founders Online
* History of democracy
* History of the United States Constitution
* List of national constitutions (world countries)
* List of proposed amendments to the United States Constitution
* List of sources of law in the United States
* Pocket Constitution
* Second Constitutional Convention of the United States
* Timeline of drafting and ratification of the United States Constitution
* UK constitutional law
===Related documents===

* Constitution of Massachusetts (1780)
* Fundamental Orders of Connecticut (1639)
* Massachusetts Body of Liberties (1641)
* Mayflower Compact (1620)
* Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom (1779)
==Notes==
==Citations==
==Bibliography==




























* 


* 













* 




==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Dippel, Horst, &quot;British and American Constitutional and Democratic Models (18th–20th Century)&quot;, EGO – European History Online, Mainz: Institute of European History, 2018, retrieved: March 8, 2021 (pdf).
* 
* 
* Pamphlets written between 1787 and 1788 by Elbridge Gerry, Noah Webster, John Jay, Melancthon Smith, Pelatiah Webster, Tench Coxe, James Wilson, John Dickinson, Alexander Contee Hanson, Edmund Randolph, Richard Henry Lee, George Mason, and David Ramsay. The essay attributed to Gerry was in fact written by Mercy Otis Warren.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Menand, Louis, &quot;Move to Trash: Is it time for a new Constitution?&quot;, &quot;The New Yorker&quot;, 30 September 2024, pp. 57–62.
* 
* Rosenfeld, Sam, &quot;The Cracked Foundation: Steven Levitsky and Daniel Ziblatt explained &quot;How Democracies Die&quot;. But the problems went deeper than they thought&quot; (review of Steven Levitsky and Daniel Ziblatt, &quot;Tyranny of the Minority: Why American Democracy Reached the Breaking Point&quot;, Crown, 2023, 384 pp.), &quot;The New Republic&quot;, December 2023, pp. 48–54. &quot;In the name of jettisoning the system&#x27;s counter-majoritarian vestiges, [the authors] advocate such modest reforms as the end of equal representation of states in the Senate; abolition of the Electoral College; cloture reform to eliminate the Senate filibuster; sweeping new voting rights legislation under the aegis of a new constitutional amendment affirming a positive right to vote; and term limits and regularized appointment schedules for Supreme Court justices. Having documented the... difficulty of enacting constitutional change under the U.S. amendment process (the reform of which is &quot;also&quot; on their prescriptive wish list), [the authors] acknowledge the steep odds that such an undertaking faces.&quot; (p. 54.) 
* 


==External links==
===U.S. government sources===
* The Constitution of the United States Explained, U.S. Congress: Legal analysis and interpretation based primarily on Supreme Court case law
* United States Constitution: Library of Congress: Web guide with related primary documents and resources
* America&#x27;s Founding Documents, National Archives: Original text and online resources on Declaration of Independence, U.S. Constitution, and Bill of Rights
* Constitution of the United States, U.S. Senate: Original text with explanations of each section&#x27;s meaning over time
* The Constitution of the United States as Amended, GovInfo (govinfo.gov): PDF document of full text with explanatory footnotes
* America&#x27;s Founding Documents, Founders Online, National Archives: Searchable database of letters and papers of key founders

===Non-governmental sources===
* Constitution of the United States, Bill of Rights Institute, PDF document of full text without explication
* The Constitution of the United States Audio reading, University of Chicago Law School, mp3 recordings of entire document and individual sections
* The Constitution of the United States of America, mobile-friendly plain text version
* National Constitution Center</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="4" end="37" title="Constitution of the United States" label="Constitution of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644794" start="45" end="56" title="Supremacy Clause" label="supreme law"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="64" end="88" title="United States of America" label="United States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q493620" start="108" end="133" title="Articles of Confederation" label="Articles of Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755" start="159" end="171" title="constitution" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="273" end="291" title="Federal government of the United States" label="federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="365" end="385" title="separation of powers" label="separation of powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="455" end="466" title="United States Congress" label="legislative"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="486" end="495" title="bicameralism" label="bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q48416" start="506" end="515" title="Article One of the United States Constitution" label="Article I"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="522" end="531" title="Federal government of the United States#Executive branch" label="executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="551" end="560" title="President of the United States" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q48423" start="587" end="597" title="Article Two of the United States Constitution" label="Article II"/>
<link wikidata="Q194907" start="608" end="616" title="Federal judiciary of the United States" label="judicial"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="636" end="649" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q48429" start="676" end="687" title="Article Three of the United States Constitution" label="Article III"/>
<link wikidata="Q48412" start="690" end="700" title="Article Four of the United States Constitution" label="Article IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q48434" start="702" end="711" title="Article Five of the United States Constitution" label="Article V"/>
<link wikidata="Q48436" start="717" end="727" title="Article Six of the United States Constitution" label="Article VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q204886" start="747" end="757" title="federalism" label="federalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603694" start="805" end="822" title="State governments of the United States" label="state governments"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="828" end="834" title="U.S. state" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q48437" start="930" end="941" title="Article Seven of the United States Constitution" label="Article VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q193170" start="1006" end="1012" title="Ratification" label="ratify"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806046" start="1161" end="1189" title="Timeline of drafting and ratification of the United States Constitution" label="drafting of the Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q405475" start="1246" end="1271" title="Constitutional Convention (United States)" label="Constitutional Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q390028" start="1292" end="1309" title="Independence Hall" label="Independence Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="1313" end="1325" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="1444" end="1462" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="13 original states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387" start="1464" end="1476" title="Rhode Island" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="1825" end="1833" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044176" start="2037" end="2050" title="Virginia Plan" label="Virginia Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045125" start="2065" end="2080" title="New Jersey Plan" label="New Jersey Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q993847" start="3321" end="3343" title="Connecticut Compromise" label="Connecticut Compromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="3731" end="3742" title="United States Senate" label="U.S. Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="3747" end="3764" title="United States Electoral College" label="Electoral College"/>
<link wikidata="Q230698" start="3830" end="3837" title="List of amendments to the United States Constitution" label="amended"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="3900" end="3914" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q226697" start="4424" end="4433" title="parchment" label="parchment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119268" start="4437" end="4450" title="Jacob Shallus" label="Jacob Shallus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892395" start="4554" end="4580" title="Constitutional law of the United States" label="federal constitutional law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983034" start="4714" end="4741" title="Second Continental Congress" label="Second Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="4755" end="4767" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q390028" start="4792" end="4809" title="Independence Hall" label="Independence Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q59281" start="4829" end="4851" title="provisional government" label="provisional government"/>
<link wikidata="Q252612" start="4891" end="4917" title="First Continental Congress" label="First Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983034" start="4939" end="4966" title="Second Continental Congress" label="Second Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365374" start="5014" end="5027" title="Patriot (American Revolution)" label="revolutionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986806" start="5028" end="5056" title="committees of correspondence" label="committees of correspondence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112521" start="5101" end="5146" title="Colonial government in the Thirteen Colonies" label="colonial governments of the Thirteen Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q493620" start="5153" end="5178" title="Articles of Confederation" label="Articles of Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983034" start="5305" end="5332" title="Second Continental Congress" label="Second Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="6035" end="6052" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="6716" end="6723" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q748300" start="6835" end="6840" title="Louisiana (New Spain)" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="6848" end="6859" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q899359" start="6927" end="6942" title="Barbary pirates" label="Barbary pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q217450" start="7285" end="7300" title="Treaty of Paris (1783)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="7429" end="7437" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="7442" end="7456" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q935481" start="7479" end="7488" title="Loyalist (American Revolution)" label="Loyalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996243" start="7763" end="7785" title="Annapolis Convention (1786)" label="inter–state convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="7899" end="7912" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="8013" end="8024" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q544394" start="8143" end="8152" title="Sedition" label="seditious"/>
<link wikidata="Q390776" start="8218" end="8235" title="Governor General of Canada" label="Viceroy of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q51705" start="8294" end="8299" title="Muscogee" label="Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q715625" start="8349" end="8360" title="martial law" label="martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q392601" start="8383" end="8404" title="Shays&amp;#x27; Rebellion" label="Shays&amp;#x27; Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q817605" start="8530" end="8546" title="Benjamin Lincoln" label="Benjamin Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="9128" end="9145" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="9147" end="9164" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q456794" start="9170" end="9180" title="Rufus King" label="Rufus King"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="9199" end="9207" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="9409" end="9421" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195929" start="10450" end="10458" title="Congress of the Confederation" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044176" start="10600" end="10613" title="Virginia Plan" label="Virginia Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="10781" end="10790" title="Bicameralism" label="Bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="10951" end="10961" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975" start="10998" end="11009" title="Montesquieu" label="Montesquieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q332435" start="11038" end="11049" title="Edward Coke" label="Edward Coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124669" start="11063" end="11078" title="Civil liberties in the United States" label="civil liberties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045125" start="11086" end="11101" title="New Jersey Plan" label="New Jersey Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="11148" end="11158" title="Unicameralism" label="unicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="11268" end="11273" title="Whigs (British political party)" label="Whigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q165792" start="11282" end="11294" title="Edmund Burke" label="Edmund Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q332449" start="11329" end="11347" title="William Blackstone" label="William Blackstone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11603" end="11625" title="Committee of the whole#United States" label="Committee of the Whole"/>
<link wikidata="Q993847" start="12305" end="12327" title="Connecticut Compromise" label="Connecticut Compromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256823" start="12912" end="12935" title="Three-Fifths Compromise" label="Three-Fifths Compromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="12955" end="12967" title="President of the United States" label="Presidential"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153005" start="13065" end="13084" title="Committee of Detail" label="Committee of Detail"/>
<link wikidata="Q370781" start="13096" end="13109" title="John Rutledge" label="John Rutledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q318703" start="13128" end="13143" title="Edmund Randolph" label="Edmund Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378295" start="13156" end="13172" title="Nathaniel Gorham" label="Nathaniel Gorham"/>
<link wikidata="Q515858" start="13190" end="13206" title="Oliver Ellsworth" label="Oliver Ellsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q365181" start="13226" end="13238" title="James Wilson (Founding Father)" label="James Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="13959" end="13977" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="13983" end="13991" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q182543" start="13993" end="14015" title="William Samuel Johnson" label="William Samuel Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="14021" end="14032" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q456794" start="14034" end="14044" title="Rufus King" label="Rufus King"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="14050" end="14063" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="14065" end="14078" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q714960" start="14098" end="14115" title="Gouverneur Morris" label="Gouverneur Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407534" start="14308" end="14316" title="Preamble to the United States Constitution" label="preamble"/>
<link wikidata="Q302719" start="14323" end="14342" title="eschatocol" label="closing endorsement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754217" start="14510" end="14519" title="Western calligraphy" label="engrossed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119268" start="14523" end="14536" title="Jacob Shallus" label="Jacob Shallus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="14823" end="14840" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195929" start="15685" end="15714" title="Congress of the Confederation" label="Congress of the Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q193170" start="16072" end="16084" title="ratification" label="ratification"/>
<link wikidata="Q48437" start="16116" end="16127" title="Article Seven of the United States Constitution" label="Article VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q493620" start="16317" end="16342" title="Articles of Confederation" label="Articles of Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16559" end="16570" title="Federalist#United States" label="Federalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q257855" start="16613" end="16629" title="Anti-Federalism" label="Anti-Federalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="16747" end="16755" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="16885" end="16893" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="16895" end="16902" title="James Madison" label="Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q310847" start="16908" end="16911" title="John Jay" label="Jay"/>
<link wikidata="Q858036" start="16967" end="16988" title="The Federalist Papers" label="The Federalist Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="18510" end="18524" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q28405720" start="18561" end="18593" title="Ratification of the United States Constitution by Rhode Island" label="Rhode Island&amp;#x27;s ratification"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312127" start="18807" end="18825" title="Due Process Clause" label="Due Process Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="18866" end="18876" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q12519" start="18884" end="18895" title="Magna Carta" label="Magna Carta"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="19102" end="19115" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975" start="19138" end="19149" title="Montesquieu" label="Montesquieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="19154" end="19164" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q332435" start="19204" end="19215" title="Edward Coke" label="Edward Coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q332449" start="19220" end="19238" title="William Blackstone" label="William Blackstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q332449" start="19351" end="19361" title="William Blackstone" label="Blackstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q37160" start="19363" end="19367" title="David Hume" label="Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="19369" end="19374" title="John Locke" label="Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975" start="19379" end="19390" title="Montesquieu" label="Montesquieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q26678548" start="19468" end="19488" title="Herbert Schneider" label="Herbert W. Schneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q6114494" start="19667" end="19681" title="Jack P. Greene" label="Jack P. Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q12519" start="19736" end="19747" title="Magna Carta" label="Magna Carta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19824" end="19834" title="English law#Common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5219020" start="19846" end="19864" title="Daniel Walker Howe" label="Daniel Walker Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="19876" end="19893" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q37160" start="19910" end="19920" title="David Hume" label="David Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q15222479" start="20230" end="20264" title="Institutes of the Lawes of England" label="Institutes of the Lawes of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061207" start="20397" end="20421" title="London Company" label="Virginia Charter of 1606"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986212" start="20592" end="20627" title="Commentaries on the Laws of England" label="Commentaries on the Laws of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="20884" end="20903" title="Glorious Revolution" label="Glorious Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q37621" start="21036" end="21049" title="Thomas Hobbes" label="Thomas Hobbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162861" start="21101" end="21124" title="consent of the governed" label="consent of the governed"/>
<link wikidata="Q231949" start="21138" end="21165" title="Two Treatises of Government" label="Two Treatises of Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326430" start="21204" end="21219" title="social contract" label="social contract"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21323" end="21350" title="Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness#Lockean roots hypothesis" label="life, liberty, and property"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440620" start="21432" end="21449" title="Federalist No. 47" label="Federalist No. 47"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440656" start="21482" end="21499" title="Federalist No. 78" label="Federalist No. 78"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780882" start="21567" end="21589" title="List of justices of the Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court Justices"/>
<link wikidata="Q131169" start="21851" end="21859" title="Polybius" label="Polybius"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="21898" end="21917" title="separation of powers" label="checks and balances"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="21925" end="21939" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q514727" start="21955" end="21972" title="The Spirit of Law" label="The Spirit of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q219447" start="22292" end="22313" title="Bill of Rights 1689" label="Bill of Rights (1689)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13368786" start="22379" end="22389" title="jury trial" label="jury trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051051" start="22402" end="22429" title="right to keep and bear arms" label="right to keep and bear arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q162351" start="22450" end="22454" title="bail" label="bail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374304" start="22472" end="22500" title="cruel and unusual punishment" label="cruel and unusual punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q944717" start="22565" end="22595" title="Virginia Declaration of Rights" label="Virginia Declaration of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277720" start="22866" end="22900" title="republicanism in the United States" label="republicanism in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="22941" end="22951" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603671" start="23038" end="23057" title="State constitution (United States)" label="state constitutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975" start="23231" end="23242" title="Montesquieu" label="Montesquieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="23244" end="23254" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q173424" start="23744" end="23754" title="Autocracy" label="autocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269" start="23755" end="23765" title="Monarchy" label="monarchies"/>
<link wikidata="Q188958" start="23794" end="23805" title="Egalitarianism" label="egalitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q370781" start="23860" end="23873" title="John Rutledge" label="John Rutledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q16729451" start="24083" end="24096" title="Donald A. Grinde Jr." label="Donald Grinde"/>
<link wikidata="Q16145329" start="24101" end="24115" title="Bruce E. Johansen" label="Bruce Johansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="24170" end="24190" title="Iroquois League" label="Iroquois Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24220" end="24252" title="Great Law of Peace#Influence on the United States Constitution" label="influenced the U.S. Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q15129896" start="24575" end="24586" title="Philip Levy (historian)" label="Philip Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q59532596" start="24698" end="24714" title="Elisabeth Tooker" label="Elisabeth Tooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895660" start="24869" end="24897" title="John Napoleon Brinton Hewitt" label="John Napoleon Brinton Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856707" start="24919" end="24947" title="Tuscarora Indian Reservation" label="Tuscarora Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q43455" start="24960" end="24971" title="ethnologist" label="ethnologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="24979" end="25002" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3791290" start="25010" end="25029" title="Bureau of Ethnology" label="Bureau of Ethnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709364" start="25169" end="25189" title="Albany Plan of Union" label="Albany Plan of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="25260" end="25277" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="Thirteen Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25618" end="25623" title="#Article V" label="below"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407534" start="25775" end="25788" title="We the People" label="We the People"/>
<link wikidata="Q714960" start="25930" end="25947" title="Gouverneur Morris" label="Gouverneur Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="26842" end="26850" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="26856" end="26874" title="legislature" label="legislative branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="27040" end="27046" title="United States Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="27051" end="27075" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q279283" start="27121" end="27129" title="Elections in the United States" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27422" end="27442" title="Article One of the United States Constitution#Section 8: Powers of Congress" label="Article I, Section 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857899" start="27758" end="27766" title="Militia (United States)" label="militias"/>
<link wikidata="Q6985427" start="28179" end="28206" title="Necessary and Proper Clause" label="Necessary and Proper Clause"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28380" end="28400" title="Article One of the United States Constitution#Section 9: Limits on Congress" label="Article I, Section 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q17349491" start="28510" end="28525" title="Commerce Clause" label="Commerce Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q6985427" start="28534" end="28561" title="Necessary and Proper Clause" label="Necessary and Proper Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773061" start="28657" end="28674" title="Enumerated powers (United States)" label="enumerated powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q908270" start="28737" end="28758" title="McCulloch v. Maryland" label="McCulloch v. Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q310829" start="29084" end="29106" title="John Marshall" label="Chief Justice Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="29491" end="29521" title="President of the United States" label="President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="29530" end="29544" title="Vice President of the United States" label="Vice President"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="29575" end="29591" title="Executive (government)" label="executive branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="29599" end="29617" title="Federal government of the United States" label="federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="29648" end="29661" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="29666" end="29684" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q172099" start="29718" end="29732" title="Twelfth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="12th Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q217797" start="29788" end="29802" title="Twenty-fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="25th Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="30017" end="30035" title="Commander-in-chief" label="Commander in Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="30043" end="30069" title="United States Armed Forces" label="United States Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="" start="30154" end="30181" title="Article Two of the United States Constitution#Clause 2: Advice and Consent Clause" label="with the advice and consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901949" start="30417" end="30435" title="recess appointment" label="recess appointment"/>
<link wikidata="Q115705182" start="30633" end="30644" title="Federal impeachment in the United States" label="impeachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q554211" start="30687" end="30705" title="State of the Union" label="State of the Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q48423" start="30718" end="30739" title="Recommendation Clause" label="Recommendation Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q194907" start="31149" end="31161" title="Federal judiciary of the United States" label="court system"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="31167" end="31182" title="judiciary" label="judicial branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="31199" end="31212" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q864400" start="31274" end="31295" title="original jurisdiction" label="original jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q13368786" start="31442" end="31455" title="jury trial" label="trial by jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q146491" start="31463" end="31477" title="criminal law" label="criminal cases"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="31504" end="31511" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q11728865" start="31823" end="31844" title="Judiciary Act of 1789" label="Judiciary Act of 1789"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614849" start="32073" end="32088" title="United States district court" label="district courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q864400" start="32157" end="32178" title="original jurisdiction" label="original jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419699" start="32232" end="32254" title="exclusive jurisdiction" label="exclusive jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282070" start="32345" end="32371" title="discretionary jurisdiction" label="discretionary jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q708562" start="32521" end="32538" title="Contempt of court" label="criminal contempt"/>
<link wikidata="Q708562" start="32543" end="32557" title="Contempt of court" label="civil contempt"/>
<link wikidata="Q220596" start="32621" end="32634" title="habeas corpus" label="habeas corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166035" start="32670" end="32679" title="contumacy" label="contumacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q312424" start="32733" end="32741" title="mandamus" label="mandamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048355" start="32963" end="32982" title="Case or Controversy Clause" label="Clause1 of Section2"/>
<link wikidata="Q683979" start="33158" end="33166" title="Standing (law)" label="standing"/>
<link wikidata="Q883942" start="33168" end="33176" title="mootness" label="mootness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335586" start="33181" end="33189" title="ripeness" label="ripeness"/>
<link wikidata="Q864400" start="33386" end="33407" title="original jurisdiction" label="original jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34121" end="34136" title="Article Three of the United States Constitution#Judicial review" label="judicial review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114769" start="34644" end="34650" title="comity" label="comity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062245" start="34715" end="34727" title="Res judicata" label="Res judicata"/>
<link wikidata="Q30688219" start="35100" end="35114" title="Treason laws in the United States" label="law on treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113994" start="35183" end="35192" title="overt act" label="overt act"/>
<link wikidata="Q18074156" start="35631" end="35641" title="List of political conspiracies" label="conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18350273" start="35824" end="35844" title="admission to the Union" label="admitting new states"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508034" start="35931" end="35952" title="Full Faith and Credit Clause" label="full faith and credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q428148" start="36056" end="36064" title="regulation" label="regulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246325" start="36125" end="36169" title="Privileges and Immunities Clause" label="&amp;quot;privileges and immunities&amp;quot; clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185637" start="36299" end="36318" title="Criminal sentencing in the United States" label="criminal sentencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q210603" start="36436" end="36447" title="extradition" label="extradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344824" start="36509" end="36528" title="freedom of movement" label="freedom of movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q493620" start="36635" end="36660" title="Articles of Confederation" label="Articles of Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36717" end="36735" title="Article Four of the United States Constitution#Federal property and the Territorial Clause" label="Territorial Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="36967" end="36996" title="Republic" label="republican form of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440616" start="37736" end="37753" title="Federalist No. 43" label="Federalist No. 43"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="38072" end="38080" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362323" start="38085" end="38104" title="Supermajority" label="two-thirds majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166316" start="38165" end="38184" title="Convention to propose amendments to the United States Constitution" label="national convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270264" start="38453" end="38471" title="State legislature (United States)" label="state legislatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603862" start="38491" end="38518" title="state ratifying conventions" label="state ratifying conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q213443" start="38643" end="38665" title="Twenty-first Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twenty-first Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q635713" start="38683" end="38713" title="Archivist of the United States" label="Archivist of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810051" start="38812" end="38822" title="Title 1 of the United States Code" label="1U.S. Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q889821" start="38952" end="38960" title="Governor (United States)" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402343" start="39215" end="39245" title="Office of the Federal Register" label="Office of the Federal Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q12981973" start="39502" end="39523" title="History of slavery" label="importation of slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q926871" start="39655" end="39665" title="direct tax" label="direct tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q343039" start="39895" end="39932" title="Act Prohibiting Importation of Slaves" label="prohibiting the importation of slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q194938" start="39997" end="40016" title="Sixteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Sixteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="40059" end="40069" title="income tax" label="income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="40100" end="40110" title="U.S. state" label="the states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345528" start="40131" end="40151" title="United States Census" label="United States Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644794" start="40648" end="40657" title="Supremacy Clause" label="supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024789" start="40828" end="40841" title="government debt" label="national debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7044887" start="41295" end="41312" title="No Religious Test Clause" label="no religious Test"/>
<link wikidata="Q193170" start="41679" end="41691" title="ratification" label="ratification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900755" start="41733" end="41754" title="Constitutional convention (political meeting)" label="ratifying conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434166" start="42220" end="42261" title="signing of the United States Constitution" label="signing of the United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q302719" start="42446" end="42456" title="eschatocol" label="eschatocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076947" start="42835" end="42850" title="William Jackson (secretary)" label="William Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q714960" start="43035" end="43052" title="Gouverneur Morris" label="Gouverneur Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="43088" end="43105" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="44013" end="44033" title="Western culture" label="Western civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589178" start="44073" end="44079" title="regime" label="regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="44109" end="44136" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q280537" start="44217" end="44236" title="Northwest Ordinance" label="Northwest Ordinance"/>
<link wikidata="Q212108" start="44273" end="44287" title="authentication" label="authentication"/>
<link wikidata="Q176763" start="44454" end="44467" title="Evidence (law)" label="documentation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44712" end="44717" title="#Article V" label="above"/>
<link wikidata="Q635713" start="44751" end="44781" title="archivist of the United States" label="archivist of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501657" start="44829" end="44862" title="General Services Administration" label="administrator of General Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="44887" end="44905" title="United States Secretary of State" label="secretary of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166316" start="45028" end="45047" title="Convention to propose amendments to the United States Constitution" label="national convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q13467821" start="45414" end="45422" title="slip law" label="slip law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440362" start="46259" end="46275" title="Federal Register" label="Federal Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q909723" start="46292" end="46323" title="United States Statutes at Large" label="United States Statutes at Large"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46618" end="46626" title="Constitutional amendment#Form of changes to the text" label="practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q162932" start="46649" end="46657" title="1st United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="46786" end="46800" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302780" start="46840" end="46865" title="Reconstruction Amendments" label="Reconstruction Amendments"/>
<link wikidata="Q219736" start="46881" end="46905" title="Twenty-seventh Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twenty-seventh Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q214679" start="47018" end="47041" title="Twenty-second Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twenty-second Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q219274" start="47060" end="47082" title="Twenty-sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twenty-sixth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q19033" start="47128" end="47135" title="Arithmetic mean" label="average"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="47311" end="47325" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47406" end="47436" title="Federalism in the United States#Early federalism" label="supporters of the Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q257855" start="47450" end="47457" title="Anti-Federalist" label="critics"/>
<link wikidata="Q12616" start="47546" end="47561" title="First Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="First Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142732" start="47650" end="47669" title="Freedom of religion in the United States" label="freedom of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="47671" end="47688" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="47690" end="47710" title="freedom of the press" label="freedom of the press"/>
<link wikidata="Q162254" start="47712" end="47731" title="freedom of assembly" label="freedom of assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q14625153" start="47737" end="47754" title="right to petition" label="right to petition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499816" start="47760" end="47780" title="Free Exercise Clause" label="Free Exercise Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308297" start="47904" end="47924" title="Establishment Clause" label="Establishment Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q210645" start="48512" end="48528" title="Second Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Second Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932144" start="48573" end="48591" title="Right to keep and bear arms in the United States" label="keep and bear arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q12796" start="48809" end="48816" title="firearm" label="firearm"/>
<link wikidata="Q728" start="48827" end="48833" title="weapon" label="weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q223560" start="49256" end="49271" title="Third Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Third Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049343" start="49557" end="49572" title="Quartering Acts" label="Quartering Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739604" start="49587" end="49605" title="Parliament of Great Britain" label="British Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q231304" start="49784" end="49800" title="Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q647884" start="49845" end="49866" title="search and seizure" label="searches and seizures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400881" start="49885" end="49893" title="property" label="property"/>
<link wikidata="Q240340" start="50412" end="50427" title="Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fifth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016240" start="50470" end="50475" title="trial" label="trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q83267" start="50488" end="50493" title="crime" label="crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q17310301" start="50521" end="50531" title="indictment" label="indictment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323789" start="50558" end="50568" title="grand jury" label="grand jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253920" start="50596" end="50611" title="double jeopardy" label="double jeopardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068288" start="50732" end="50743" title="due process" label="due process"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920224" start="50963" end="50993" title="self-incrimination" label="incriminate or be used against"/>
<link wikidata="Q6316610" start="51142" end="51159" title="just compensation" label="just compensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q166332" start="51180" end="51194" title="eminent domain" label="eminent domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q246624" start="51222" end="51237" title="Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Sixth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q837675" start="51400" end="51404" title="jury" label="jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q40348" start="51645" end="51658" title="Lawyer" label="legal counsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q196939" start="51722" end="51729" title="witness" label="witness"/>
<link wikidata="Q312199" start="51983" end="52010" title="Miranda warning" label="&amp;quot;Miranda&amp;quot; warning"/>
<link wikidata="Q261204" start="52017" end="52034" title="Seventh Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Seventh Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q13368786" start="52065" end="52075" title="jury trial" label="jury trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q222249" start="52087" end="52092" title="Civil law (common law)" label="civil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271542" start="52151" end="52167" title="Question of law" label="findings of fact"/>
<link wikidata="Q270938" start="52701" end="52717" title="Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Eighth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q162351" start="52753" end="52757" title="bail" label="bail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243001" start="52761" end="52766" title="fine (penalty)" label="fines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374304" start="52912" end="52940" title="cruel and unusual punishment" label="cruel and unusual punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q275898" start="53471" end="53486" title="Ninth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Ninth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380896" start="53815" end="53838" title="enumerative definition" label="explicit and exhaustive"/>
<link wikidata="Q164665" start="54493" end="54508" title="Tenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Tenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q169990" start="55406" end="55424" title="Eleventh Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Eleventh Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571618" start="55599" end="55617" title="Sovereign immunity in the United States" label="sovereign immunity"/>
<link wikidata="" start="55668" end="55702" title="Article Three of the United States Constitution#Clause 1: Cases and controversies" label="Article Three, Section 2, Clause 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q661675" start="55805" end="55824" title="Chisholm v. Georgia" label="Chisholm v. Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q194938" start="55844" end="55863" title="Sixteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Sixteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56044" end="56074" title="Article One of the United States Constitution#Apportionment of direct taxes" label="Article 1, Section 9, Clause 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225714" start="56175" end="56220" title="Pollock v. Farmers&amp;#x27; Loan &amp;amp; Trust Co." label="Pollock v. Farmers&amp;#x27; Loan &amp;amp; Trust Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q156784" start="56507" end="56527" title="Eighteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Eighteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934208" start="56732" end="56751" title="Temperance movement in the United States" label="temperance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q399999" start="56835" end="56846" title="Prohibition in the United States" label="prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977245" start="57256" end="57268" title="Rum-running" label="black market"/>
<link wikidata="Q46952" start="57346" end="57361" title="organized crime" label="organized crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q213443" start="57438" end="57460" title="Twenty-first Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twenty-first Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q175613" start="57986" end="58006" title="Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Thirteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="58024" end="58031" title="Slavery in the United States" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6061413" start="58036" end="58057" title="involuntary servitude" label="involuntary servitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q17089987" start="58066" end="58091" title="Penal labor in the United States" label="as punishment for a crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853205" start="58128" end="58137" title="Abolitionism in the United States" label="abolition"/>
<link wikidata="Q391358" start="58200" end="58225" title="Emancipation Proclamation" label="Emancipation Proclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="58238" end="58247" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="58578" end="58598" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054376" start="58614" end="58639" title="United States nationality law" label="United States citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002253" start="59129" end="59142" title="Incorporation of the Bill of Rights" label="Incorporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q690462" start="59407" end="59429" title="Dred Scott v. Sandford" label="Dred Scott v. Sandford"/>
<link wikidata="Q191614" start="59449" end="59468" title="Fifteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fifteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254959" start="59497" end="59501" title="Race (human categorization)" label="race"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149038" start="59503" end="59508" title="Colored" label="color"/>
<link wikidata="Q205304" start="59770" end="59790" title="Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Nineteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q205204" start="59846" end="59859" title="Women&amp;#x27;s suffrage" label="right to vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q215810" start="59993" end="60015" title="Twenty-third Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twenty-third Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="60103" end="60123" title="Washington, D.C." label="District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q216963" start="60471" end="60494" title="Twenty-fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twenty-fourth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7503357" start="60514" end="60522" title="Poll taxes in the United States" label="poll tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q219274" start="60982" end="61004" title="Twenty-sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twenty-sixth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61169" end="61179" title="Voting age#United States" label="voting age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191303" start="61220" end="61236" title="student activism" label="student activism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="61261" end="61272" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4523726" start="61346" end="61364" title="Oregon v. Mitchell" label="Oregon v. Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q172099" start="61469" end="61486" title="Twelfth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twelfth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="" start="61793" end="61824" title="Article Two of the United States Constitution#Clause 3: Electoral College" label="Article II, Section 1, Clause 3"/>
<link wikidata="" start="61881" end="61905" title="Article Two of the United States Constitution#Clause 5: Qualifications for office" label="eligibility requirements"/>
<link wikidata="Q197656" start="61954" end="61975" title="Seventeenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Seventeenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196727" start="62071" end="62090" title="direct election" label="direct popular vote"/>
<link wikidata="" start="62117" end="62137" title="Article One of the United States Constitution#Section 3: Senate" label="Article 1, Section 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270264" start="62220" end="62237" title="State legislature (United States)" label="state legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057954" start="62338" end="62354" title="By-election" label="special election"/>
<link wikidata="Q211104" start="62373" end="62392" title="Twentieth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twentieth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62517" end="62529" title="Election Day (United States)#History" label="Election Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q948290" start="62876" end="62885" title="Lame duck (politics)" label="lame duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q214679" start="63200" end="63223" title="Twenty-second Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twenty-second Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="63747" end="63768" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q217797" start="63850" end="63872" title="Twenty-fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twenty-fifth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140419" start="64130" end="64139" title="Ambiguity" label="ambiguous"/>
<link wikidata="" start="64171" end="64202" title="Article Two of the United States Constitution#Clause 6: Vacancy and disability" label="Article II, Section 1, Clause 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q219736" start="64406" end="64430" title="Twenty-seventh Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twenty-seventh Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="" start="64785" end="64817" title="Article One of the United States Constitution#Clause 1: Compensation and legal protection" label="Article One, section 6, Clause 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="65006" end="65011" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="65016" end="65022" title="United States Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="65082" end="65090" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q476190" start="65127" end="65151" title="United States congressional committee" label="Congressional committees"/>
<link wikidata="Q5143039" start="65620" end="65637" title="Coleman v. Miller" label="Coleman v. Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800908" start="65832" end="65869" title="Congressional Apportionment Amendment" label="Congressional Apportionment Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892376" start="66015" end="66028" title="United States congressional apportionment" label="apportionment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345528" start="66116" end="66122" title="United States Census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="66281" end="66288" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="66293" end="66301" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781676" start="66622" end="66647" title="Apportionment Act of 1792" label="Apportionment Act of 1792"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842723" start="66819" end="66847" title="Titles of Nobility Amendment" label="Titles of Nobility Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="67172" end="67181" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="67281" end="67294" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904872" start="67552" end="67568" title="Corwin Amendment" label="Corwin Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q17990855" start="67605" end="67611" title="Entrenched clause" label="shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q178706" start="67618" end="67638" title="institution" label="domestic institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="67684" end="67691" title="Slavery in the United States" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q669269" start="67951" end="67970" title="Border states (American Civil War)" label="border slave states"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097736" start="68278" end="68299" title="Child Labor Amendment" label="Child Labor Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645676" start="68523" end="68542" title="Hammer v. Dagenhart" label="Hammer v. Dagenhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4848400" start="68566" end="68596" title="Bailey v. Drexel Furniture Co." label="Bailey v. Drexel Furniture Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q3064514" start="69057" end="69072" title="Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938" label="federal statute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893261" start="69229" end="69262" title="United States v. Darby Lumber Co." label="United States v. Darby Lumber Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q429923" start="69470" end="69492" title="Equal Rights Amendment" label="Equal Rights Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q169207" start="69566" end="69580" title="discrimination" label="discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283436" start="70439" end="70483" title="District of Columbia Voting Rights Amendment" label="District of Columbia Voting Rights Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q665141" start="71198" end="71207" title="precedent" label="precedent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515622" start="71357" end="71374" title="constitutionality" label="constitutionality"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="71636" end="71641" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="71646" end="71656" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="73055" end="73061" title="U.S. state" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176491" start="73676" end="73695" title="Council of Revision" label="Council of Revision"/>
<link wikidata="Q310829" start="74264" end="74277" title="John Marshall" label="John Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q365181" start="74291" end="74303" title="James Wilson (Founding Father)" label="James Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q515858" start="74324" end="74340" title="Oliver Ellsworth" label="Oliver Ellsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440656" start="74434" end="74451" title="Federalist No. 78" label="Federalist No. 78"/>
<link wikidata="Q310847" start="75008" end="75016" title="John Jay" label="John Jay"/>
<link wikidata="Q370781" start="75154" end="75167" title="John Rutledge" label="John Rutledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q515858" start="75364" end="75380" title="Oliver Ellsworth" label="Oliver Ellsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q310829" start="75473" end="75486" title="John Marshall" label="John Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q365181" start="75830" end="75842" title="James Wilson (Founding Father)" label="James Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q778866" start="75877" end="75891" title="John Blair Jr." label="John Blair Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q11728865" start="76083" end="76096" title="Judiciary Act of 1789" label="Judiciary Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773534" start="76391" end="76405" title="Marshall Court" label="Marshall Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q808974" start="76428" end="76447" title="Barron v. Baltimore" label="Barron v. Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q538242" start="76566" end="76584" title="Marbury v. Madison" label="Marbury v. Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q11728865" start="76906" end="76927" title="Judiciary Act of 1789" label="Judiciary Act of 1789"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644794" start="77359" end="77388" title="Supremacy Clause" label="&amp;quot;Supreme law of the land"/>
<link wikidata="Q690462" start="77791" end="77801" title="Dred Scott v. Sandford" label="Dred Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q727854" start="77842" end="77861" title="Missouri Compromise" label="Missouri Compromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="78189" end="78210" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302931" start="78250" end="78268" title="Judicial Procedures Reform Bill of 1937" label="court packing plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151311" start="78702" end="78720" title="judicial restraint" label="judicial restraint"/>
<link wikidata="Q977488" start="78750" end="78760" title="Finley Peter Dunne" label="Mr. Dooley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056352" start="79010" end="79020" title="certiorari" label="certiorari"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686864" start="79249" end="79265" title="advisory opinion" label="advisory opinion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5147595" start="79315" end="79328" title="friendly suit" label="friendly suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q683979" start="79609" end="79624" title="Standing (law)" label="standing to sue"/>
<link wikidata="Q520840" start="80787" end="80803" title="Louis Brandeis" label="Justice Brandeis"/>
<link wikidata="Q313252" start="81915" end="81935" title="Charles Evans Hughes" label="Charles Evans Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419945" start="82275" end="82294" title="executive privilege" label="executive privilege"/>
<link wikidata="Q34836" start="82376" end="82381" title="Ulysses S. Grant" label="Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="82420" end="82434" title="Reconstruction era" label="Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q505450" start="82489" end="82503" title="Robert H. Jackson" label="Robert Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q23020646" start="83432" end="83443" title="Chase Court" label="Chase Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q23020227" start="83449" end="83459" title="Taft Court" label="Taft Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970144" start="83465" end="83477" title="Warren Court" label="Warren Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q23019825" start="83487" end="83502" title="Rehnquist Court" label="Rehnquist Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q433051" start="83504" end="83519" title="Salmon P. Chase" label="Salmon P. Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q11833539" start="83892" end="83911" title="Radical Republicans" label="Radical Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q359470" start="83967" end="83981" title="Roger B. Taney" label="Roger B. Taney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255335" start="84034" end="84043" title="John Rock (abolitionist)" label="John Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407695" start="84146" end="84160" title="Texas v. White" label="Texas v. White"/>
<link wikidata="Q7917706" start="84233" end="84253" title="Veazie Bank v. Fenno" label="Veazie Bank v. Fenno"/>
<link wikidata="Q5731836" start="84311" end="84330" title="Hepburn v. Griswold" label="Hepburn v. Griswold"/>
<link wikidata="Q35648" start="84453" end="84472" title="William Howard Taft" label="William Howard Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3694439" start="84537" end="84559" title="Progressive Republican" label="Progressive Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109608" start="84636" end="84657" title="Judiciary Act of 1925" label="Judiciary Act of 1925"/>
<link wikidata="Q5565132" start="85012" end="85030" title="Gitlow v. New York" label="Gitlow v. New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002253" start="85082" end="85095" title="Incorporation of the Bill of Rights" label="incorporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931384" start="85186" end="85228" title="Board of Trade of City of Chicago v. Olsen" label="Board of Trade of City of Chicago v. Olsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7088429" start="85293" end="85318" title="Olmstead v. United States" label="Olmstead v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027377" start="85475" end="85496" title="Wisconsin v. Illinois" label="Wisconsin v. Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q311197" start="85641" end="85652" title="Earl Warren" label="Earl Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q23020471" start="86063" end="86075" title="Fuller Court" label="Fuller Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974008" start="86201" end="86219" title="separate but equal" label="separate but equal"/>
<link wikidata="Q875738" start="86367" end="86394" title="Brown v. Board of Education" label="Brown v. Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q4849238" start="86445" end="86458" title="Baker v. Carr" label="Baker v. Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q11349350" start="86475" end="86491" title="Reynolds v. Sims" label="Reynolds v. Sims"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559684" start="86649" end="86669" title="Gideon v. Wainwright" label="Gideon v. Wainwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642249" start="86686" end="86704" title="Miranda v. Arizona" label="Miranda v. Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053373" start="86759" end="86782" title="Griswold v. Connecticut" label="Griswold v. Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377485" start="86819" end="86834" title="Engel v. Vitale" label="Engel v. Vitale"/>
<link wikidata="Q311562" start="86866" end="86883" title="William Rehnquist" label="William Rehnquist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123597" start="87292" end="87316" title="City of Boerne v. Flores" label="City of Boerne v. Flores"/>
<link wikidata="Q7607490" start="87503" end="87522" title="Stenberg v. Carhart" label="Stenberg v. Carhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157002" start="87558" end="87575" title="Lawrence v. Texas" label="Lawrence v. Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q949984" start="87631" end="87647" title="Texas v. Johnson" label="Texas v. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612369" start="87685" end="87705" title="Grutter v. Bollinger" label="Grutter v. Bollinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="87878" end="87892" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q206935" start="87930" end="87944" title="civil religion" label="civil religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="88079" end="88091" title="nation state" label="nation-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="88426" end="88437" title="rule of law" label="rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="88439" end="88459" title="separation of powers" label="separation of powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q29556" start="88480" end="88497" title="civil liberties" label="individual rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q898871" start="88563" end="88578" title="judicial review" label="judicial review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194747" start="88593" end="88611" title="Constitutionalism" label="constitutionalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="88710" end="88725" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="88737" end="88755" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q182276" start="88783" end="88796" title="Benito Juárez" label="Benito Juárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500" start="88879" end="88889" title="José Rizal" label="José Rizal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8573" start="88913" end="88924" title="Sun Yat-sen" label="Sun Yat-sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144614" start="88954" end="88977" title="Australian constitution" label="Australian constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417640" start="89222" end="89238" title="Sanford Levinson" label="Sanford Levinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q405566" start="89474" end="89490" title="Voting rights in the United States" label="eligible to vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="89602" end="89607" title="White Americans" label="white"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302780" start="89748" end="89773" title="Reconstruction Amendments" label="Reconstruction Amendments"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="89851" end="89869" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q205304" start="90105" end="90115" title="Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Nineteenth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014803" start="90331" end="90361" title="New York University Law Review" label="New York University Law Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051051" start="90638" end="90665" title="right to keep and bear arms" label="right to keep and bear arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q774" start="90708" end="90717" title="Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="90722" end="90728" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q112228220" start="91150" end="91193" title="democratic backsliding in the United States" label="democratic backsliding in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="91276" end="91301" title="Franklin Delano Roosevelt" label="Franklin Delano Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="" start="91490" end="91503" title=":File:Washington Constitutional Convention 1787.jpg" label="1856 painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6313706" start="91507" end="91528" title="Junius Brutus Stearns" label="Junius Brutus Stearns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434166" start="91553" end="91587" title="Signing of the United States Constitution" label="delegates signing the Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152386" start="91899" end="91952" title="Commentaries on the Constitution of the United States" label="Commentaries on the Constitution of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368374" start="91962" end="91974" title="Joseph Story" label="Joseph Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160979" start="91999" end="92033" title="Congressional power of enforcement" label="Congressional power of enforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164094" start="92036" end="92072" title="Constitution Day and Citizenship Day" label="Constitution Day and Citizenship Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164151" start="92075" end="92092" title="Constitution Week" label="Constitution Week"/>
<link wikidata="" start="92101" end="92178" title="The Constitution of the United States of America: Analysis and Interpretation" label="The Constitution of the United States of America: Analysis and Interpretation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129096" start="92187" end="92213" title="Constitution of 3 May 1791" label="Constitution of 3 May 1791"/>
<link wikidata="Q42417576" start="92216" end="92254" title="Constitutionalism in the United States" label="Constitutionalism in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q106178755" start="92257" end="92278" title="Gödel&amp;#x27;s Loophole" label="Gödel&amp;#x27;s Loophole"/>
<link wikidata="Q186539" start="92281" end="92318" title="Founding Fathers of the United States" label="Founding Fathers of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q110933547" start="92321" end="92336" title="Founders Online" label="Founders Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q587404" start="92339" end="92359" title="History of democracy" label="History of democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870590" start="92362" end="92403" title="History of the United States Constitution" label="History of the United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666615" start="92406" end="92436" title="List of national constitutions" label="List of national constitutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6635450" start="92457" end="92518" title="List of proposed amendments to the United States Constitution" label="List of proposed amendments to the United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6640182" start="92521" end="92564" title="List of sources of law in the United States" label="List of sources of law in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7206391" start="92567" end="92586" title="Pocket Constitution" label="Pocket Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443223" start="92589" end="92642" title="Second Constitutional Convention of the United States" label="Second Constitutional Convention of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806046" start="92645" end="92716" title="Timeline of drafting and ratification of the United States Constitution" label="Timeline of drafting and ratification of the United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q48767862" start="92719" end="92740" title="UK constitutional law" label="UK constitutional law"/>
<link wikidata="Q196171" start="92768" end="92797" title="Constitution of Massachusetts" label="Constitution of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2245550" start="92807" end="92840" title="Fundamental Orders of Connecticut" label="Fundamental Orders of Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784205" start="92850" end="92881" title="Massachusetts Body of Liberties" label="Massachusetts Body of Liberties"/>
<link wikidata="Q868502" start="92891" end="92908" title="Mayflower Compact" label="Mayflower Compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q4086736" start="92918" end="92956" title="Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom" label="Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3262682" start="93662" end="93675" title="Louis Menand" label="Menand, Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="93746" end="93760" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614979" start="93991" end="94006" title="Steven Levitsky" label="Steven Levitsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q60775852" start="94011" end="94025" title="Daniel Ziblatt" label="Daniel Ziblatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329873" start="94144" end="94160" title="The New Republic" label="The New Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176891" start="94245" end="94265" title="counter-majoritarian" label="counter-majoritarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="94371" end="94377" title="US Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="94396" end="94413" title="United States Electoral College" label="Electoral College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135595" start="94415" end="94422" title="cloture" label="cloture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448434" start="94447" end="94464" title="Senate filibuster" label="Senate filibuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q185387" start="94479" end="94492" title="voting rights" label="voting rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q53463" start="94530" end="94554" title="constitutional amendment" label="constitutional amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q581993" start="94595" end="94606" title="term limits" label="term limits"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="94649" end="94662" title="US Supreme Court" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="95045" end="95058" title="U.S. Congress" label="U.S. Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="95166" end="95185" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q518155" start="95279" end="95296" title="National Archives and Records Administration" label="National Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="95440" end="95451" title="U.S. Senate" label="U.S. Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q51772877" start="95578" end="95585" title="GovInfo" label="GovInfo"/>
<link wikidata="Q110933547" start="95691" end="95706" title="Founders Online" label="Founders Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q518155" start="95708" end="95725" title="National Archives and Records Administration" label="National Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911506" start="95854" end="95878" title="Bill of Rights Institute" label="Bill of Rights Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036763" start="95981" end="96013" title="University of Chicago Law School" label="University of Chicago Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q42591" start="96015" end="96018" title="mp3" label="mp3"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31646" wikidata="Q48416" url="?curid=31646" title="Article One of the United States Constitution">
<text>Article One of the Constitution of the United States establishes the legislative branch of the federal government, the United States Congress. Under Article One, Congress is a bicameral legislature consisting of the House of Representatives and the Senate. Article One grants Congress various enumerated powers and the ability to pass laws &quot;necessary and proper&quot; to carry out those powers. Article One also establishes the procedures for passing a bill and places various limits on the powers of Congress and the states from abusing their powers.

Article One&#x27;s Vesting Clause grants all federal legislative power to Congress and establishes that Congress consists of the House of Representatives and the Senate. In combination with the vesting clauses of Article Two and Article Three, the Vesting Clause of Article One establishes the separation of powers among the three branches of the federal government. Section 2 of Article One addresses the House of Representatives, establishing that members of the House are elected every two years, with congressional seats apportioned to the states on the basis of population. Section 2 includes various rules for the House of Representatives, including a provision stating that individuals qualified to vote in elections for the largest chamber of their state&#x27;s legislature have the right to vote in elections for the House of Representatives. Section 3 addresses the Senate, establishing that the Senate consists of two senators from each state, with each senator serving a six-year term. Section 3 originally required that the state legislatures elect the members of the Senate, but the Seventeenth Amendment, ratified in 1913, provides for the direct election of senators. Section 3 lays out various other rules for the Senate, including a provision that establishes the vice president of the United States as the president of the Senate.

Section 4 of Article One grants the states the power to regulate the congressional election process but establishes that Congress can alter those regulations or make its own regulations. Section 4 also requires Congress to assemble at least once per year. Section 5 lays out various rules for both houses of Congress and grants the House of Representatives and the Senate the power to judge their own elections, determine the qualifications of their own members, and punish or expel their own members. Section 6 establishes the compensation, privileges, and restrictions of those holding congressional office. Section 7 lays out the procedures for passing a bill, requiring both houses of Congress to pass a bill for it to become law, subject to the veto power of the president of the United States. Under Section 7, the president can veto a bill, but Congress can override the president&#x27;s veto with a two-thirds vote of both chambers.

Section 8 lays out the powers of Congress. It includes several enumerated powers, including the power to lay and collect &quot;taxes, duties, imposts, and excises&quot; (provided duties, imposts, and excises are uniform throughout the United States), &quot;to provide for the common defense and general welfare of the United States&quot;, the power to regulate interstate and international commerce, the power to set naturalization laws, the power to coin and regulate money, the power to borrow money on the credit of the United States, the power to establish post offices and post roads, the power to establish federal courts inferior to the Supreme Court, the power to raise and support an army and a navy, the power to call forth the militia &quot;to execute the laws of the Union, suppress insurrections, and repel invasions&quot; and to provide for the militia&#x27;s &quot;organizing, arming, disciplining...and governing&quot; and granting Congress the power to declare war. Section 8 also provides Congress the power to establish a federal district to serve as the national capital and gives Congress the exclusive power to administer that district. In addition to various enumerated powers, Section 8 grants Congress the power to make laws necessary and proper to carry out its enumerated powers and other powers vested in it. Section 9 places various limits on the power of Congress, banning bills of attainder and other practices. Section 10 places limits on the states, prohibiting them from entering into alliances with foreign powers, impairing contracts, taxing imports or exports above the minimum level necessary for inspection, keeping armies, or engaging in war without the consent of Congress.

==Section 1: Legislative power vested in Congress==


Section 1 is a vesting clause that bestows federal legislative power exclusively to Congress. Similar clauses are found in Article II, which confers executive power upon the president alone, and Article III, which grants judicial power solely to the federal judiciary. These three articles create a separation of powers among the three branches of the federal government. This separation of powers, by which each branch may exercise only its own constitutional powers and no others, is fundamental to the idea of a limited government accountable to the people.

The separation of powers principle is particularly significant for Congress. The Constitution declares that the Congress may exercise only those legislative powers &quot;herein granted&quot; within Article I (as later limited by the Tenth Amendment). It also, by implied extension, prohibits Congress from delegating its legislative authority to either of the other branches of government, a rule known as the nondelegation doctrine. However, the Supreme Court has ruled that Congress does have the latitude to delegate regulatory powers to executive agencies as long as it provides an &quot;intelligible principle&quot; which governs the agency&#x27;s exercise of the delegated regulatory authority. That the power assigned to each branch must remain with that branch, and may be expressed only by that branch, is central to the theory. The nondelegation doctrine is primarily used as a way of interpreting a congressional delegation of authority narrowly, in that the courts presume Congress intended only to delegate that which it certainly could have, unless it clearly demonstrates it intended to &quot;test the waters&quot; of what the courts would allow it to do.

Although not mentioned in the Constitution, Congress has also long asserted the power to investigate and the power to compel cooperation with an investigation. The Supreme Court has affirmed these powers as an implication of Congress&#x27;s power to legislate. Since the power to investigate is an aspect of Congress&#x27;s power to legislate, it is as broad as Congress&#x27;s powers to legislate. However, it is also &quot;limited&quot; to inquiries that are &quot;in aid of the legislative function&quot;; Congress may not &quot;expose for the sake of exposure&quot;. It is uncontroversial that a proper subject of Congress&#x27;s investigation power is the operations of the federal government, but Congress&#x27;s ability to compel the submission of documents or testimony from the president or his subordinates is often-discussed and sometimes controversial (see executive privilege), although not often litigated. As a practical matter, the limitation of Congress&#x27;s ability to investigate only for a proper purpose (&quot;in aid of&quot; its legislative powers) functions as a limit on Congress&#x27;s ability to investigate the private affairs of individual citizens; matters that simply demand action by another branch of government, without implicating an issue of public policy necessitating legislation by Congress, must be left to those branches due to the doctrine of separation of powers. The courts are highly deferential to Congress&#x27;s exercise of its investigation powers, however. Congress has the power to investigate that which it could regulate, and the courts have interpreted Congress&#x27;s regulatory powers broadly since the Great Depression.

==Section 2: House of Representatives==

===Clause 1: Composition and election of Members===


Election districts in each state have recently been required to be structured so that each elected representative represents substantially equal populations, based on court interpretations of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, finding that, &quot;construed in its historical context, the command of Art. I, § 2, that Representatives be chosen &#x27;by the People of the several States&#x27; means that as nearly as is practicable one man&#x27;s vote in a congressional election is to be worth as much as another&#x27;s.&quot; Court involvement in this issue developed slowly from an initial practice of electing representatives at-large, until in the late 1940s and the early 1950s the Court used the &quot;political question&quot; doctrine in &quot;Baker v. Carr&quot; to decline to adjudicate districting and apportionment suits. The Supreme Court has held in &quot;Rucho v. Common Cause&quot; that there was no &quot;constitutional directive&quot; nor any &quot;legal standards to guide&quot; the Court in claims of unconstitutional partisan gerrymandering, and such claims today are considered nonjusticiable.

At the time of its creation, the Constitution did not explicitly give citizens an inherent right to vote. However, by stipulating that those qualified to vote in elections for the largest chamber of a state&#x27;s legislature could vote in Congressional (House of Representatives) elections the Framers expressed a rather explicit intent that the House was to be directly elected. Since the Civil War, several constitutional amendments have been enacted that have curbed the states&#x27; broad powers to set voter qualification standards. Though never enforced, clause 2 of the Fourteenth Amendment provides that &quot;when the right to vote at any election for the choice of electors for president and vice president of the United States, Representatives in Congress, the Executive and Judicial officers of a State, or the members of the Legislature thereof, is denied to any of the male inhabitants of such State, being twenty-one years of age, and citizens of the United States, or in any way abridged, except for participation in rebellion, or other crime, the basis of representation therein shall be reduced in the proportion which the number of such male citizens shall bear to the whole number of male citizens twenty-one years of age in such State.&quot; The Fifteenth Amendment prohibits the denial of the right to vote based on race, color, or previous condition of servitude. The Nineteenth Amendment prohibits the denial of the right to vote based on sex. The Twenty-fourth Amendment prohibits the revocation of voting rights due to the non-payment of a poll tax. The Twenty-sixth Amendment prohibits the denial of the right of US citizens, eighteen years of age or older, to vote on account of age.

Moreover, since the Supreme Court has recognized voting as a fundamental right, the Equal Protection Clause places very tight limitations (albeit with uncertain limits) on the states&#x27; ability to define voter qualifications; it is fair to say that qualifications beyond citizenship, residency, and age are usually questionable.

In the 1960s, the Supreme Court started to view voting as a fundamental right covered by the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. In a dissenting opinion of a 1964 Supreme Court case involving reapportionment in the Alabama state legislature, Associate Justice John Marshall Harlan II included &quot;Minor v. Happersett&quot; (an 1875 case which allowed states to deny women the right to vote) in a list of past decisions about voting and apportionment which were no longer being followed.

In &quot;Oregon v. Mitchell&quot; (1970), the Supreme Court held that the Qualifications clause did not prevent Congress from overriding state-imposed minimum age restrictions for voters in Congressional elections.

Since clause 3 provides that Members of the House of Representatives are apportioned state-by-state and that each state is guaranteed at least one Representative, exact population equality between all districts is not guaranteed and, in fact, is currently impossible, because while the size of the House of Representatives is fixed at 435, several states had less than 1/435 of the national population at the time of the last reapportionment in 2020. However, the Supreme Court has interpreted the provision of Clause One that Representatives shall be elected &quot;by the People&quot; to mean that, in those states with more than one member of the House of Representatives, each congressional election district within the state must have nearly identical populations.

===Clause 2: Qualifications of Members===


The Constitution provides three requirements for Representatives: A Representative must be at least 25 years old, must be an inhabitant of the state in which he or she is elected, and must have been a citizen of the United States for the previous seven years. There is no requirement that a Representative reside within the district in which he or she represents; although this is usually the case, there have been occasional exceptions.

The Supreme Court has interpreted the Qualifications Clause as an &quot;exclusive&quot; list of qualifications that cannot be supplemented by a house of Congress exercising its Section 5 authority to &quot;judge...the...qualifications of its own members&quot; or by a state in its exercise of its Section 4 authority to prescribe the &quot;times, places and manner of holding elections for Senators and Representatives.&quot; The Supreme Court, as well as other federal courts, have repeatedly barred states from additional restrictions, such as imposing term limits on members of Congress, allowing members of Congress to be subject to recall elections, or requiring that Representatives live in the congressional district in which they represent. A 2002 Congressional Research Service report also found that no state could implement a qualification that a Representative not be a convicted felon or incarcerated.

However, the United States Supreme Court has ruled that certain ballot access requirements, such as filing fees and submitting a certain number of valid petition signatures do not constitute additional qualifications and thus few Constitutional restrictions exist as to how harsh ballot access laws can be.

Finally, although the U.S. Constitution places no restrictions on state or local office-holders simultaneously holding federal office, most state constitutions today effectively ban state and local office holders from also holding federal office at the same time by prohibiting federal office holders from also holding state and local office. Unlike other state-mandated restrictions, these sorts of prohibitions are constitutional as long they are enforced purely at the state level (i.e. against active federal office holders seeking to obtain or hold a state or local office).

===Clause 3: Apportionment of Representatives and taxes===


After much debate, the framers of the Constitution decided to make population the basis of apportioning the seats in the House of Representatives and the tax liability among the states. To facilitate this, the Constitution mandates that a census be conducted every ten years to determine the population of each state and of the nation as a whole and establishes a rule for who shall be counted or excluded from the count. As the new form of government would become operational prior to the completion of a national census, the Constitution also provides for a temporary apportionment of seats.

Originally, the population of each state and of the nation as a whole was ascertained by adding to the whole number of free Persons, three-fifths the number of all other Persons (i.e. slaves), but excluding non-taxed Native Americans. This Constitutional rule, known as the three-fifths compromise, was a compromise between Southern and Northern states in which three-fifths of the population of slaves would be counted for enumeration purposes and for the apportionment of seats in the House of Representatives and of taxes among the states. It was, according to Supreme Court Justice Joseph Story (writing in 1833), a &quot;matter of compromise and concession, confessedly unequal in its operation, but a necessary sacrifice to that spirit of conciliation, which was indispensable to the union of states having a great diversity of interests, and physical condition, and political institutions&quot;. Section 2 of the Fourteenth Amendment (1868) later superseded Article 1, Section 2, Clause 3 and explicitly repealed the compromise.

Following the completion of each census, Congress is empowered to use the aggregate population in all the states (according to the prevailing Constitutional rule for determining population) to determine the relative population of each state to the population of the whole, and, based on its calculations, to establish the appropriate size of the House and to allocate a particular number of representatives to each state according to its share of the national population.

Since enactment of the Reapportionment Act of 1929, a constant 435 House seats have been apportioned among the states according to each census, and determining the size of the House is not presently part of the apportionment process. With one exception, the apportionment of 1842, the House of Representatives had been enlarged by various degrees from sixty-five members in 1788 to 435 members by 1913. The determination of size was made based on the aggregate national population, so long as the size of the House did not exceed 1 member for every 30,000 of the country&#x27;s total population nor the size of any state&#x27;s delegation exceed 1 for every 30,000 of that state&#x27;s population. With the size of the House still fixed at 435, the current ratio, as of the 2020 United States census, is around 1 Representative per 760,000 Persons.

However, after the 1920 census, Congress failed to apportion the House, with the House using the allocations of the Apportionment Act of 1911 until after the 1932 elections, which was the date determined by Congress after it passed and the president signed the Reapportionment Act of 1929. This resulted in the representation within the House to remain frozen for twenty years. Reapportionment of the House required Congress to pass a bill and the president to sign into law an act to reapportion the House from since the ratification of the constitution up until 1941, which is when a self-executing statute was enacted, thus making reapportionment an automatic process.

Although the first sentence in this clause originally concerned apportionment of both House seats and taxes among the several states, the Fourteenth Amendment sentence that replaced it in 1868 mentioned only the apportionment of House seats. Even so, the constraint placed upon Congress&#x27;s taxation power remained, as the restriction was reiterated in Article 1 Section 9 Clause 4. The amount of direct taxes that could be collected by the federal government from the people in any State would still be tied directly to that state&#x27;s share of the national population.

Due to this restriction, application of the income tax to income derived from real estate and specifically income in the form of dividends from personal property ownership such as stock shares was found to be unconstitutional because it was not apportioned among the states; that is to say, there was no guarantee that a State with 10% of the country&#x27;s population paid 10% of those income taxes collected, because Congress had not fixed an amount of money to be raised and apportioned it between the States according to their respective shares of the national population. To permit the levying of such an income tax, Congress proposed and the states ratified the Sixteenth Amendment, which removed the restriction by specifically providing that Congress could levy a tax on income &quot;from whatever source derived&quot; without it being apportioned among the States or otherwise based on a State&#x27;s share of the national population.

===Clause 4: Vacancies===

Generally states and territories fill vacancies within the House of Representatives according to their own laws, however when vacancies within the House exceed 100 members, the Speaker of the House will announce &quot;extraordinary circumstances&quot; have occurred, which obligates the executive authority of all states with vacancies to hold a special election within 49 days of the announcement. This election is initiated via a writ of election from the Governor ().

===Clause 5: Speaker and other officers; Impeachment===

Section Two further provides that the House of Representatives &quot;shall&quot; choose its Speaker and its other officers. Though the Constitution does not mandate it, every Speaker has been a member of the House of Representatives. The Speaker rarely presides over routine House sessions, choosing instead to deputize a junior member to accomplish the task.

Finally, Section Two grants to the House of Representatives the sole power of impeachment. Although the Supreme Court has not had an occasion to interpret this specific provision, the Court has suggested that the grant to the House of the &quot;sole&quot; power of impeachment makes the House the exclusive interpreter of what constitutes an impeachable offense.

This power, which is analogous to the bringing of criminal charges by a grand jury, has been used only rarely. The House has begun impeachment proceedings 62 times since 1789, and twenty-one federal officials have been formally impeached as a result, including: three presidents (Andrew Johnson, Bill Clinton, and Donald Trump, twice), two Cabinet secretaries (William W. Belknap and Alejandro Mayorkas), one senator (William Blount), one Supreme Court associate justice (Samuel Chase), and fourteen federal judges. Also, notably, impeachment proceedings compelled the resignation of President Richard Nixon.

The Constitution does not specify how impeachment proceedings are to be initiated. Until the early 20th century, a House member could rise and propose an impeachment, which would then be assigned to a committee for investigation upon a formal resolution vote of the judicial committee. Presently, it is the House Judiciary Committee that initiates the process and then, after investigating the allegations, prepares recommendations for the whole House&#x27;s consideration. If the House votes to adopt an impeachment resolution, &quot;managers&quot; are appointed by the House to serve as the prosecution team in the impeachment trial in the Senate (see Section 3, Clause 6 below).

==Section 3: Senate==

===Clause 1: Composition and election of senators===


The first Clause of Section Three provides that each state is entitled to have two senators, who would be &quot;elected by its state legislature&quot; (now by the people of each state), serve for staggered six-year terms, and have one vote each. Through these provisions, adopted following the Connecticut Compromise, the Framers sought to protect the sovereignty and interests of states. This clause has been superseded by the Seventeenth Amendment, ratified in 1913, which, in part, provides &quot;as amended&quot;, that

Article Five specifies the means by which the Constitution of the United States can be amended. It ends by shielding three Article I clauses from being amended. The clause guaranteeing equal representation is among them. (The others are first and fourth clauses in Section 9, which were amendable after 1808.) Article Five provides that &quot;no State, without its Consent, shall be deprived of its equal Suffrage in the Senate.&quot; Thus, no individual state may have its individual representation in the Senate adjusted without its consent. That is to say, an amendment that directly changed this clause to provide that all states would get only one senator (or three senators, or any other number) could become valid as part of the Constitution if ratified by three-fourths of the states; however, one that provided for some basis of representation other than strict numerical equality (for example, population, wealth, or land area), would require the unanimous consent of all the states.

Denying the states their intended role as joint partners in the federal government by abolishing their equality in the Senate would, according to Chief Justice Salmon P. Chase (in &quot;Texas v. White&quot;), destroy the grounding of the Union. This Article V provision has been employed by those opposed to contemplated constitutional amendments that would grant the District of Columbia full representation in the Congress without also granting it statehood. Their argument is that an amendment that would allow a non-state district to have two senators would deprive the states of their equal suffrage in the Senate and would therefore require unanimous ratification by all the states. Those in favor of the amendment have argued that the States are merely entitled to equal suffrage amongst one another, and that granting the federal district Senate representation does not violate that right. Whether unanimous consent of the 50 states would be required for such an amendment to become operative remains an unanswered political question.

===Clause 2: Classification of senators; Vacancies===


After the first group of senators was elected to the First Congress (1789–1791), the senators were divided into three &quot;classes&quot; as nearly equal in size as possible, as required by this section. This was done in May 1789 by lot. It was also decided that each state&#x27;s senators would be assigned to two different classes. Those senators grouped in the first class had their term expire after only two years; those senators in the second class had their term expire after only four years, instead of six. After this, all senators from those states have been elected to six-year terms, and as new states have joined the Union, their Senate seats have been assigned to two of the three classes, maintaining each grouping as nearly equal in size as possible. In this way, election is staggered; approximately one-third of the Senate is up for re-election every two years, but the entire body is never up for re-election in the same year (as contrasted with the House, where its entire membership is up for re-election every 2 years).

As originally established, senators were elected by the Legislature of the State they represented in the Senate. If a senator died, resigned, or was expelled, the legislature of the state would appoint a replacement to serve out the remainder of the senator&#x27;s term. If the state legislature was not in session, its governor could appoint a temporary replacement to serve until the legislature could elect a permanent replacement. This was superseded by the Seventeenth Amendment, which provided for the popular election of senators, instead of their appointment by the state legislature. In a nod to the less populist nature of the Senate, the amendment tracks the vacancy procedures for the House of Representatives in requiring that the governor call a special election to fill the vacancy, but (unlike in the House) it vests in the state legislature the authority to allow the governor to appoint a temporary replacement until the special election is held. Note, however, that under the original Constitution, the governors of the states were expressly allowed by the Constitution to make temporary appointments. The current system, under the Seventeenth Amendment, allows governors to appoint a replacement only if their state legislature has previously decided to allow the governor to do so; otherwise, the seat must remain vacant until the special election is held to fill the seat, as in the case of a vacancy in the House.

===Clause 3: Qualifications of senators===
A senator must be at least 30 years of age, must have been a citizen of the United States for at least nine years before being elected, and must reside in the State they will represent at the time of the election. The Supreme Court has interpreted the Qualifications Clause as an exclusive list of qualifications that cannot be supplemented by a House of Congress exercising its Section 5 authority to &quot;Judge... the... Qualifications of its own Members,&quot; or by a state in its exercise of its Section 4 authority to prescribe the &quot;Times, Places and Manner of holding Elections for Senators and Representatives...&quot;

===Clause 4: Vice president as president of Senate===


Section Three provides that the vice president is the president of the Senate. Excepting the duty to receive the tally of electoral votes for president, this is the only regular responsibility assigned to the office of the vice president by the Constitution. When serving in this capacity, the vice president may cast tie-breaking votes. Early in the nation&#x27;s history, vice presidents frequently presided over the Senate. In modern times, the vice president usually does so only during ceremonial occasions or when a tie in the voting is anticipated. , there have been 294 tie-breaking votes cast by vice presidents.

===Clause 5: President pro tempore and other officers===


Clause five provides for a president pro tempore of the Senate, who is elected to the post by the Senate, to preside over the body when the vice president is either absent or exercising the powers and duties of the president.

Although the Constitutional text seems to suggest to the contrary, the Senate&#x27;s current practice is to elect a full-time president pro tempore at the beginning of each Congress, as opposed to making it a temporary office only existing during the vice president&#x27;s absence. Historically, a member of the majority party has filled this position. The Constitution does not require that the president pro tempore be a senator, but by convention, a senator is always chosen. The same goes for the speaker of the House, who is not required to be a U.S. representative, but always has been.

===Clause 6: Trial of impeachment===

Clause Six grants to the Senate the sole power to try impeachments and spells out the basic procedures for impeachment trials. The Supreme Court has interpreted this clause to mean that the Senate has exclusive and unreviewable authority to determine what constitutes an adequate impeachment trial. Of the twenty federal officials formally impeached (Donald Trump was impeached twice) by the House of Representatives, four resigned (so that proceedings were dismissed), eight were acquitted (Trump was acquitted twice), and eight (all judges) were convicted by the Senate. On another occasion, the Senate declined to proceed with the impeachment of Senator William Blount in 1797, asserting that the House had no jurisdiction over members of the Senate; in any case, Blount had already been expelled from the Senate.
On May 29, 1787, Virginia Constitutional Convention Delegate Edmund Randolph introduced fifteen resolutions to the Convention (following a plan formulated by fellow Virginia Delegate James Madison) that included a proposal to have a national judiciary conduct impeachments of national officials and to replace the Congress of the Confederation with a bicameral legislature where members of the lower house directly elected by the public would select members of the upper house. On June 7, the Convention passed a resolution moving that senators would be chosen by their respective state legislatures rather than by popular vote. On September 4, a Committee of Eleven formed on August 31 submitted a resolution to the Convention that proposed that the Senate should have the power to try all impeachments.

On September 8, the Convention approved the Senate impeachment trial jury resolution, and also approved a resolution introduced by Virginia Delegate George Mason to expand the scope of impeachments to include &quot;other high crimes and misdemeanors&quot; instead of only treason and bribery. After the approval of the resolution, James Madison spoke in opposition to having the Senate serve as the impeachment trial jury rather than the Supreme Court and introduced a failed resolution to remove the power from the Senate, while Pennsylvania Delegate Gouverneur Morris argued against having the Court conduct impeachments because the Court would be too small in number.

After six states had ratified the Constitution, New York Delegate Alexander Hamilton argued in &quot;Federalist No. 65&quot; on March 7, 1788 that because of the inherently political nature of impeachment—as the process relates primarily to injuries to the body politic caused by the misconduct of public officials in violation of their public trust—prosecuting such charges would typically divide the public into factions in defense of or in opposition to the accused, that such factions would often overlap with and reinforce existing partisan factions, and that this risked the decisions in impeachment trials not being based upon actual demonstrations of innocence or guilt but instead by the comparative strength of the factions. Thus, Hamilton concluded that &quot;A well-established court for the trial of impeachments is an object not more to be desired than difficult to be obtained in a government wholly elective.&quot;

Noting that the model approved by the Convention was modeled after the impeachment process in Great Britain and that the British model had been adopted by multiple state constitutions, Hamilton argued that the Senate, composed of members chosen by state legislatures rather than popularly elected by the public, was sufficiently independent to serve as an impartial trial jury of impeachments for accusations brought by the House of Representatives, composed of members directly elected by the public. By contrast, Hamilton doubted that impeachment trials conducted by the Supreme Court, composed of unelected lifetime appointees, would have the requisite legitimacy to adjudicate the indefinite and inexhaustible range of impeachable charges brought by the House of Representatives. Instead, Hamilton argued that because a court of impeachment renders verdicts on charges &quot;[that] can never be tied down by… strict rules... in the delineation of the offense by the prosecutors&quot; and that are leveled against the &quot;most distinguished characters of the community&quot;, the inherently political nature of impeachment trials necessitated a numerous court and &quot;[forbade] the commitment of the trust to a small number of persons.&quot;

Additionally, Hamilton argued that because conviction in an impeachment trial did not preclude further criminal prosecution—since impeachment would not require the accused to have committed an indictable offense and its punishment would be limited to removal and disqualification from holding public office—having the Supreme Court conduct impeachment trials could subject impeached officials to double jeopardy, arguing &quot;Would it be proper that the persons who had disposed [impeached officials of their] fame… in one trial, should, in another trial, for the same offense, be also the disposers of [their] life and … fortune? Would there not be the greatest reason to apprehend, that error, in the first sentence, would be the parent of error in the second sentence? … [By] making the same persons judges in both cases, [impeached officials] would… be deprived of the double security intended them by a double trial.&quot;

There are three Constitutionally mandated requirements for impeachment trials. The provision that senators must sit on oath or affirmation was designed to impress upon them the extreme seriousness of the occasion. The stipulation that the Chief Justice is to preside over presidential impeachment trials underscores the solemnity of the occasion, and aims to avoid the conflict of interest of a vice president&#x27;s presiding over the proceeding for the removal of the one official standing between them and the presidency. The latter consideration was regarded to be quite important in the eighteenth century – political parties had not yet formed when the Constitution was adopted, and with the original method of electing the president and vice president it was presumed that the two people elected to those offices would frequently be political rivals. The specification that a two-thirds super-majority vote of those senators present in order to convict was also thought necessary to facilitate serious deliberation and to make removal possible only through a consensus that cuts across factional divisions.

===Clause 7: Judgment in cases of impeachment; Punishment on conviction===


If any officer or the President or the Vice President is convicted on impeachment, that person is immediately removed from office and may be barred from holding any appointed federal executive office in the future. This is purely a political remedy which &quot;touches neither his person, nor his property; but simply divests him of his political capacity,&quot; however the convicted person remains liable to trial and punishment in the courts for civil and criminal charges. The President cannot reinstate an impeached officer with his Article II appointment power if such officers have been disqualified to hold any future federal office as part of their conviction.

==Section 4: Congressional elections and sessions==

===Clause 1: Time, place, and manner of holding elections===


The purpose of this clause is twofold. First, it makes clear the division of responsibility with respect to the conduct of the election of federal senators and representatives. That responsibility lies primarily with the states and secondarily with Congress. Second, the clause lodges the power to regulate elections in the respective legislative branches of the states and the federal government. As authorized by this clause, Congress has set a uniform date for federal elections: the Tuesday following the first Monday in November.

Presently, as there are no on-point federal regulations, the states retain the authority to regulate the dates on which other aspects of the election process are held (registration, primary elections, etc.) and where elections will be held. As for regulating the &quot;manner&quot; of elections, the Supreme Court has interpreted this to mean &quot;matters like notices, registration, supervision of voting, protection of voters, prevention of fraud and corrupt practices, counting of votes, duties of inspectors and canvassers, and making and publication of election returns.&quot; The Supreme Court has held that States may &quot;not&quot; exercise their power to determine the &quot;manner&quot; of holding elections to impose term limits on their congressional delegation.

One of the most significant ways that each state regulates the &quot;manner&quot; of elections is through their power to draw electoral districts. Although in theory Congress could draw the district map for each State, it has not exercised this level of oversight. Congress has, however, required the States to conform to certain practices when drawing districts. States are currently required to use a single-member district scheme, whereby the State is divided into as many election districts for Representatives in the House of Representatives as the size of its representation in that body (that is to say, Representatives cannot be elected at-large from the whole State unless the State has only one Representative in the House, nor can districts elect more than 1 Representative). The Supreme Court has interpreted &quot;by the Legislature thereof&quot; to include the state governor&#x27;s veto, and the initiative process, in those states whose constitutions provide it. This conclusion has been challenged, however, by the independent state legislature theory, which was rejected by the Supreme Court in their 2023 decision in &quot;Moore v. Harper&quot;.

Congress first exercised its power to regulate elections nationwide in 1842, when the 27th Congress passed a law requiring the election of Representatives by districts. In subsequent years, Congress expanded on the requirements, successively adding contiguity, compactness, and substantial equality of population to the districting requirements. These standards were all later deleted in the Reapportionment Act of 1929, but the Supreme Court has re-imposed the population requirement on the States under the Equal Protection Clause and is suspicious of districts that do not meet the other &quot;traditional&quot; districting criteria of compactness and contiguity. The single member district requirement was reinforced in the Uniform Congressional District Act passed by Congress in 1967.

In 1865, Congress legislated a remedy for a situation under which deadlocks in state legislatures over the election of senators were creating vacancies in the office. The act required the two houses of each legislature to meet in joint session on a specified day and to meet every day thereafter until a senator was selected. The first comprehensive federal statute dealing with elections was adopted in 1870 as a means of enforcing the Fifteenth Amendment&#x27;s guarantee against racial discrimination in granting suffrage rights. Under the Enforcement Act of 1870, and subsequent laws, false registration, bribery, voting without legal right, making false returns of votes cast, interference in any manner with officers of election, and the neglect by any such officer of any duty required by state or federal law were made federal offenses. Provision was made for the appointment by federal judges of persons to attend at places of registration and at elections with authority to challenge any person proposing to register or vote unlawfully, to witness the counting of votes, and to identify by their signatures the registration of voters and election tally sheets.

Beginning with the Tillman Act of 1907, Congress has imposed a growing number of restrictions on elections and campaign financing. The most significant piece of legislation has been the 1971 Federal Election Campaign Act. It was this legislation that was at issue in the Supreme Court&#x27;s seminal decision, &quot;Buckley v. Valeo&quot; (1976), which, in the face of a First Amendment challenge, set the ground rules for campaign finance legislation, generally disallowing restrictions on expenditures by candidates, but permitting restrictions on contributions by individuals and corporations.

In addition to statutory constraints, Congress and the States have altered the electoral process through amending the Constitution (first in the above mentioned Fifteenth Amendment). The Seventeenth Amendment altered the manner of conducting the elections of senators; establishing that they are to be elected by the people of the states. Also, the Nineteenth Amendment prohibits any U.S. citizen from being denied the right to vote on the basis of sex; the Twenty-fourth Amendment prohibits both Congress and the states from conditioning the right to vote in federal elections on payment of a poll tax or other types of tax; and the Twenty-sixth Amendment prohibits the states and the federal government from using age as a reason for denying the right to vote to U.S. citizens who are at least eighteen years old.

===Clause 2: Sessions of Congress===


Clause 2 fixes an annual date upon which Congress must meet. By doing so, the Constitution empowers Congress to meet, whether or not the president called it into session. Article II, Section 3 does grant the president limited authority to convene and adjourn both Houses (or either of them) and mandates that it will meet at least once in a year to enact legislation on behalf of the people. Some delegates to the 1787 constitutional convention believed yearly meetings were not necessary, for there would not be enough legislative business for Congress to deal with annually. Nathaniel Gorham of Massachusetts argued that the time should be fixed to prevent disputes from arising within the legislature, and to allow the states to adjust their elections to correspond with the fixed date. A fixed date also corresponded to the tradition in the states of having annual meetings. Finally, Gorham concluded that the legislative branch should be required to meet at least once a year to act as a check upon the executive department.

Although this clause provides that the annual meeting was to be on the first Monday in December, the government established by the 1787 Constitution did not begin operations until March 4, 1789. As the 1st Congress held its initial meeting on March 4, that became the date on which new representatives and senators took office in subsequent years. Therefore, every other year, although a new Congress was elected in November, it did not come into office until the following March, with a &quot;lame duck&quot; session convening in the interim. This practice was altered in 1933 following ratification of the Twentieth Amendment, which states (in Section 2) that, &quot;The Congress shall assemble at least once in every year, and such meeting shall begin at noon on the third day of January, unless they shall by law appoint a different day&quot;. This change virtually eliminated the necessity of there being a lame duck session of Congress.

==Section 5: Procedure==
===Clause 1: Electoral judgement; Quorum===
Section Five states that a majority of each House constitutes a quorum to do business; a smaller number may adjourn the House or compel the attendance of absent members. In practice, the quorum requirement is not followed, as a quorum is assumed to be present unless a quorum call, requested by a member, proves otherwise. Rarely do members ask for quorum calls to demonstrate the absence of a quorum; more often, they use the quorum call as a delaying tactic. This clause also states that each House is the judge of the elections, returns and the qualifications of its own members. This power means that the Senate or House can conduct an investigation of an election when the losing candidate present a petition, and have the power to exclude the member if the Senate or House has judged that the election had irregularities. An example of this power being used was in 1974 when the Senate voted to declare the New Hampshire Senate seat vacant due to alleged irregularities during the 1974 United States Senate election in New Hampshire. However, the power to disqualify duly elected members is not absolute. The Supreme Court ruled in the case &quot;Powell v. McCormack&quot; (1969) that the House of Representatives can only exclude duly elected members for only reasons in the Qualification of Members Clause. 

Sometimes, unqualified individuals have been admitted to Congress. For instance, the Senate once admitted John Henry Eaton, a twenty-eight-year-old, in 1818 (the admission was inadvertent, as Eaton&#x27;s birth date was unclear at the time). In 1934, a twenty-nine-year-old, Rush Holt, was elected to the Senate; he agreed to wait six months, until his thirtieth birthday, to take the oath. The Senate ruled in that case that the age requirement applied as of the date of the taking of the oath, not the date of election.

===Clause 2: Rules===

Each House can determine its own Rules (assuming a quorum is present), and may punish any of its members. A two-thirds vote is necessary to expel a member. Section 5, Clause 2 does not provide specific guidance to each House regarding when and how each House may change its rules, leaving details to the respective chambers.

===Clause 3: Record of proceedings===
Each House must keep and publish a Journal, though it may choose to keep any part of the Journal secret. The proceedings of the House are recorded in the Journal; if one-fifth of those present (assuming a quorum is present) request it, the votes of the members on a particular question must also be entered.

===Clause 4: Adjournment===

Neither House may adjourn, without the consent of the other, for more than three days. Often, a House will hold &quot;pro forma&quot; sessions every three days; such sessions are merely held to fulfill the constitutional requirement, and not to conduct business. Furthermore, neither House may meet in any place other than that designated for both Houses (the Capitol), without the consent of the other House.

==Section 6: Compensation, privileges, and restrictions on holding civil office==

===Clause 1: Compensation and legal protection===

Senators and representatives set their own compensation. Under the Twenty-seventh Amendment, any change in their compensation will not take effect until after the next congressional election. Paying senators and representatives out of the federal treasury was a departure from the practice under the Articles of Confederation, where they were paid by the state in which they were elected.

Members of both houses have certain privileges, based on those enjoyed by the members of the British Parliament. Members attending, going to or returning from either house are privileged from arrest, except for treason, felony or breach of the peace. One may not sue a senator or representative for slander occurring during Congressional debate, nor may speech by a member of Congress during a Congressional session be the basis for criminal prosecution. The latter was affirmed when Mike Gravel published over 4,000 pages of the &quot;Pentagon Papers&quot; in the &quot;Congressional Record&quot;, which might have otherwise been a criminal offense. This clause has also been interpreted in &quot;Gravel v. United States&quot;, 408 U.S. 606 (1972) to provide protection to aides and staff of sitting members of Congress, so long as their activities relate to legislative matters.

===Clause 2: Independence from the executive===

Senators and representatives may not simultaneously serve in Congress and hold a position in the executive branch. This restriction is meant to protect legislative independence by preventing the president from using patronage to buy votes in Congress. It is a major difference from the Westminster political system in the British Parliament as well as those of some other nations using the parliamentary system, where cabinet ministers are required to be members of parliament.

Furthermore, senators and representatives cannot resign to take newly created or higher-paying political positions; rather, they must wait until the conclusion of the term for which they were elected. If Congress increases the salary of a particular officer, it may later reduce that salary to permit an individual to resign from Congress and take that position (known as the Saxbe fix). The effects of the clause were discussed in 1937, when Senator Hugo Black was appointed an associate justice of the Supreme Court with some time left in his Senate term. Just prior to the appointment, Congress had increased the pension available to Justices retiring at the age of seventy. It was therefore suggested by some that the office&#x27;s emolument had been increased during Black&#x27;s senatorial term, and that therefore Black could not take office as a justice. The response, however, was that Black was fifty-one years old, and would not receive the increased pension until at least 19 years later, long after his Senate term had expired.

==Section 7: Bills==

===Clause 1: Bills of revenue===
This establishes the method for making Acts of Congress that involve taxation. Accordingly, any bill may originate in either House of Congress, except for a revenue bill, which may originate only in the House of Representatives. In practice, the Senate sometimes circumvents this requirement by substituting the text of a revenue bill previously passed by the House with a substitute text. Either House may amend any bill, including revenue and appropriation bills.

This clause of the U.S. Constitution stemmed from an English parliamentary practice that all money bills must have their first reading in the House of Commons. This practice was intended to ensure that the power of the purse is possessed by the legislative body most responsive to the people, although the English practice was modified in America by allowing the Senate to amend these bills. The clause was part of the Great Compromise between small and large states; the large states were unhappy with the lopsided power of small states in the Senate, and so the clause theoretically offsets the unrepresentative nature of the Senate, and compensates the large states for allowing equal voting rights to senators from small states.

===Clause 2: From bill to law===
This clause is known as the Presentment Clause. Before a bill becomes law, it must be presented to the president, who has ten days (excluding Sundays) to act upon it. If the president signs the bill, it becomes law. However, to propose a constitutional amendment, two-thirds of both Houses may submit it to the states for the ratification, without any consideration by the president, as prescribed in Article V. If he disapproves of the bill, he must return it to the House in which it originated together with his objections. This procedure has become known as the veto, although that particular word does not appear in the text of Article One. The bill does not then become law unless both Houses, by two-thirds votes, override the veto. In overriding a veto, the votes of both houses must be done by yeas and nays, and the names of the persons voting for and against the bill must be recorded. If the president neither signs nor returns the bill within the ten-day limit, the bill becomes law, unless the Congress has adjourned in the meantime, thereby preventing the president from returning the bill to the House in which it originated. In the latter case, the president, by taking no action on the bill towards the end of a session, exercises a &quot;pocket veto&quot;, which Congress may not override. In the former case, where the president allows a bill to become law unsigned, there is no common name for the practice, but recent scholarship has termed it a &quot;default enactment.&quot;

What exactly constitutes an adjournment for the purposes of the pocket veto has been unclear. In the &quot;Pocket Veto Case&quot; (1929), the Supreme Court held that &quot;the determinative question in reference to an &#x27;adjournment&#x27; is not whether it is a final adjournment of Congress or an interim adjournment, such as an adjournment of the first session, but whether it is one that &#x27;prevents&#x27; the president from returning the bill to the House in which it originated within the time allowed.&quot; Since neither House of Congress was in session, the president could not return the bill to one of them, thereby permitting the use of the pocket veto. In &quot;Wright v. United States&quot; (1938), however, the Court ruled that adjournments of one House only did not constitute an adjournment of Congress required for a pocket veto. In such cases, the Secretary or Clerk of the House in question was ruled competent to receive the bill.

Some presidents have made very extensive use of the veto, while others have not used it at all. Grover Cleveland, for instance, vetoed over four hundred bills during his first term in office; Congress overrode only two of those vetoes. Meanwhile, seven presidents have never used the veto power. There have been 2,560 vetoes, including pocket vetoes.

In 1996, Congress passed the Line Item Veto Act, which permitted the president, at the time of the signing of the bill, to rescind certain expenditures. The Congress could disapprove the cancellation and reinstate the funds. The president could veto the disapproval, but the Congress, by a two-thirds vote in each House, could override the veto. In the case &quot;Clinton v. City of New York&quot;, the Supreme Court found the Line Item Veto Act unconstitutional because it violated the Presentment clause. First, the procedure delegated legislative powers to the president, thereby violating the nondelegation doctrine. Second, the procedure violated the terms of Section Seven, which state, &quot;if he approve [the bill] he shall sign it, but if not he shall return it.&quot; Thus, the president may sign the bill, veto it, or do nothing, but he may not amend the bill and then sign it.

===Clause 3: Resolutions===

Every order, resolution, or vote that must be passed by both Houses, except on a question of adjournment, must also be presented to the president before taking effect, just as with bills that become law.

==Section 8: Powers of Congress==
===Enumerated powers===
Congress&#x27;s legislative powers are enumerated in Section Eight. Its 18 clauses are, in order:
*To lay and collect Taxes, Duties, Imposts and Excises, to pay the Debts and provide for the common defence and general Welfare of the United States; but all Duties, Imposts and Excises shall be uniform throughout the United States;
*To borrow Money on the credit of the United States;
*To regulate Commerce with foreign Nations, and among the several States, and with the Indian Tribes;
*To establish a uniform Rule of Naturalization, and uniform Laws on the subject of Bankruptcies throughout the United States;

*To coin Money, regulate the Value thereof, and of foreign Coin, and fix the Standard of Weights and Measures;
*To provide for the Punishment of counterfeiting the Securities and current coin of the United States;
*To establish Post Offices and post Roads;
*To promote the Progress of Science and useful Arts, by securing for limited Times to Authors and Inventors the exclusive Right to their respective Writings and Discoveries;
*To constitute Tribunals inferior to the Supreme Court;
*To define and punish Piracies and Felonies committed on the high Seas, and Offences against the Law of Nations;
*To declare War, grant Letters of Marque and Reprisal, and make Rules concerning Captures on Land and Water;
*To raise and support Armies, but no Appropriation of Money to that Use shall be for a longer Term than two Years;
*To provide and maintain a Navy;
*To make Rules for the Government and Regulation of the land and naval Forces;
*To provide for calling forth the Militia to execute the Laws of the Union, suppress Insurrections and repel Invasions;
*To provide for organizing, arming, and disciplining, the Militia, and for governing such Part of them as may be employed in the Service of the United States, reserving to the States respectively, the Appointment of the Officers, and the Authority of training the Militia according to the discipline prescribed by Congress;
*To exercise exclusive Legislation in all Cases whatsoever, over such District (not exceeding ten Miles square) as may, by Cession of particular States, and the Acceptance of Congress, become the Seat of the Government of the United States, and to exercise like Authority over all Places purchased by the Consent of the Legislature of the State in which the Same shall be, for the Erection of Forts, Magazines, Arsenals, dock-Yards, and other needful Buildings;—And
*To make all Laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into Execution the foregoing Powers, and all other Powers vested by this Constitution in the Government of the United States, or in any Department or Officer thereof.
Many powers of Congress have been granted under a broad interpretation of Article 1, section 8. Most notably, Clauses 1 (the General Welfare or Taxing and Spending clause), 3 (the Commerce clause), and 18 (The Necessary and Proper clause) have been deemed to grant expansive powers to Congress. These three clauses have been interpreted so broadly that the federal government of the United States exercises many powers that are not expressly delegated to it by the states under the Constitution. Some point to the various social programs of the American welfare state as a prime example, and not all agree with this broad interpretation. James Madison, who wrote much of the Constitution, asserted that Congress could not exercise powers unless they were expressly granted in the Constitution. While he was president of the United States, Madison vetoed the Federal Public Works Bill of 1817, calling it unconstitutional, since in his view the federal government did not have the authority to build infrastructure.

===Clause 1: the General Welfare Clause===
This clause is also referred to as the Spending Clause and the Taxing and Spending Clause. It states that Congress may lay and collect taxes for the &quot;common defense&quot; or &quot;general welfare&quot; of the United States. The U.S. Supreme Court has not often defined &quot;general welfare,&quot; leaving the political question to Congress. In &quot;United States v. Butler&quot; (1936), the Court for the first time construed the clause. The dispute centered on a tax collected from processors of agricultural products such as meat; the funds raised by the tax were not paid into the general funds of the treasury, but were rather specially earmarked for farmers. The Court struck down the tax, ruling that the general welfare language in the Taxing and Spending Clause related only to &quot;matters of national, as distinguished from local, welfare&quot;. Congress continues to make expansive use of the Taxing and Spending Clause; for instance, the social security program is authorized under the Taxing and Spending Clause.

===Clause 2: Borrowing Power===
Congress has the power to borrow money on the credit of the United States. In 1871, when deciding &quot;Knox v. Lee,&quot; the Court ruled that this clause permitted Congress to emit bills and make them legal tender in satisfaction of debts. Whenever Congress borrows money, it is obligated to repay the sum as stipulated in the original agreement. However, such agreements are only &quot;binding on the conscience of the sovereign&quot;, as the doctrine of sovereign immunity prevents a creditor from suing in court if the government reneges on its commitment.

===Clause 3: Commerce Clause===

The Supreme Court has seldom restrained the use of the &quot;commerce clause&quot; for widely varying purposes. The first important decision related to the commerce clause was &quot;Gibbons v. Ogden&quot;, decided by a unanimous Court in 1824. The case involved conflicting federal and state laws: Thomas Gibbons had a federal permit to navigate steamboats in the Hudson River, while the other, Aaron Ogden, had a monopoly to do the same granted by the state of New York. Ogden contended that &quot;commerce&quot; included only buying and selling of goods and not their transportation. Chief Justice John Marshall rejected this notion. Marshall suggested that &quot;commerce&quot; included navigation of goods, and that it &quot;must have been contemplated&quot; by the Framers. Marshall added that Congress&#x27;s power over commerce &quot;is complete in itself, may be exercised to its utmost extent, and acknowledges no limitations other than are prescribed in the Constitution&quot;.

The expansive interpretation of the Commerce Clause was restrained during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, when a &quot;laissez-faire&quot; attitude dominated the Court. In &quot;United States v. E. C. Knight Company&quot; (1895), the Supreme Court limited the newly enacted Sherman Antitrust Act, which had sought to break up the monopolies dominating the nation&#x27;s economy. The Court ruled that Congress could not regulate the manufacture of goods, even if they were later shipped to other states. Chief Justice Melville Fuller wrote, &quot;commerce succeeds to manufacture, and is not a part of it.&quot;

The U.S. Supreme Court sometimes ruled New Deal programs unconstitutional because they stretched the meaning of the commerce clause. In &quot;Schechter Poultry Corp. v. United States,&quot; (1935) the Court unanimously struck down industrial codes regulating the slaughter of poultry, declaring that Congress could not regulate commerce relating to the poultry, which had &quot;come to a permanent rest within the State.&quot; As Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes put it, &quot;so far as the poultry here in question is concerned, the flow of interstate commerce has ceased.&quot; Judicial rulings against attempted use of Congress&#x27;s Commerce Clause powers continued during the 1930s.

In 1937, the Supreme Court began moving away from its laissez-faire attitude concerning Congressional legislation and the Commerce Clause, when it ruled in &quot;National Labor Relations Board v. Jones &amp; Laughlin Steel Company&quot;, that the National Labor Relations Act of 1935 (commonly known as the Wagner Act) was constitutional. The legislation under scrutiny prevented employers from engaging in &quot;unfair labor practices&quot; such as firing workers for joining unions. In sustaining this act, the Court signaled its return to the philosophy espoused by John Marshall, that Congress could pass laws regulating actions that even indirectly influenced interstate commerce.

This new attitude became firmly set into place in 1942. In &quot;Wickard v. Filburn&quot;, the Court ruled that production quotas under the Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1938 were constitutionally applied to agricultural production (in this instance, home-grown wheat for private consumption) that was consumed purely intrastate, because its effect upon interstate commerce placed it within the power of Congress to regulate under the Commerce Clause. This decision marked the beginning of the Court&#x27;s total deference to Congress&#x27;s claims of Commerce Clause powers, which lasted into the 1990s.

&quot;United States v. Lopez&quot; (1995) was the first decision in six decades to invalidate a federal statute on the grounds that it exceeded the power of the Congress under the Commerce Clause. The Court held that while Congress had broad lawmaking authority under the Commerce Clause, the power was limited, and did not extend so far from &quot;commerce&quot; as to authorize the regulation of the carrying of handguns, especially when there was no evidence that carrying them affected the economy on a massive scale. In a later case, &quot;United States v. Morrison&quot; (2000), the justices ruled that Congress could not make such laws even when there was evidence of aggregate effect.

In contrast to these rulings, the Supreme Court also continues to follow the precedent set by &quot;Wickard v. Filburn&quot;. In &quot;Gonzales v. Raich&quot; it ruled that the Commerce Clause granted Congress the authority to criminalize the production and use of home-grown cannabis even where states approve its use for medicinal purposes. The court held that, as with the agricultural production in the earlier case, home-grown cannabis is a legitimate subject of federal regulation because it competes with marijuana that moves in interstate commerce.

===Other powers of Congress===
Congress may establish uniform laws relating to naturalization and bankruptcy. It may also coin money, regulate the value of American or foreign currency and punish counterfeiters. Congress may fix the standards of weights and measures. Furthermore, Congress may establish post offices and post roads (the roads, however, need not be exclusively for the conveyance of mail). Congress may promote the progress of science and useful arts by granting copyrights and patents of limited duration. Section eight, clause eight of Article One, known as the Copyright Clause, is the only instance of the word &quot;right&quot; used in the original constitution (though the word does appear in several Amendments). Though perpetual copyrights and patents are prohibited, the Supreme Court has ruled in &quot;Eldred v. Ashcroft&quot; (2003) that repeated extensions to the term of copyright do not constitute perpetual copyright; this is the only power granted where the means to accomplish its stated purpose is specifically provided for. Courts inferior to the Supreme Court may be established by Congress.

Congress has several powers related to war and the armed forces. Under the War Powers Clause, only Congress may declare war, but in several cases it has, without declaring war, granted the president the authority to engage in military conflicts. Five wars have been declared in United States&#x27; history: the War of 1812, the Mexican–American War, the Spanish–American War, World War I and World War II. Some historians argue that the legal doctrines and legislation passed during the operations against Pancho Villa constitute a sixth declaration of war. Congress may grant letters of marque and reprisal. Congress may establish and support the armed forces, but no appropriation made for the support of the army may be used for more than two years. This provision was inserted because the Framers feared the establishment of a standing army, beyond civilian control, during peacetime. Congress may regulate or call forth the state militias, but the states retain the authority to appoint officers and train personnel. Congress also has exclusive power to make rules and regulations governing the land and naval forces. Although the executive branch and the Pentagon have asserted an ever-increasing measure of involvement in this process, the U.S. Supreme Court has often reaffirmed Congress&#x27;s exclusive hold on this power (e.g. Burns v. Wilson, 346 U.S. 137 (1953)). Congress used this power twice soon after World War II with the enactment of two statutes: the Uniform Code of Military Justice to improve the quality and fairness of courts martial and military justice, and the Federal Tort Claims Act which among other rights had allowed military service persons to sue for damages until the U.S. Supreme Court repealed that section of the statute in a divisive series of cases, known collectively as the Feres Doctrine.

Congress has the exclusive right to legislate &quot;in all cases whatsoever&quot; for the nation&#x27;s capital, the District of Columbia. Congress chooses to devolve some of such authority to the elected mayor and council of District of Columbia. Nevertheless, Congress remains free to enact any legislation for the District so long as constitutionally permissible, to overturn any legislation by the city government, and technically to revoke the city government at any time. Congress may also exercise such jurisdiction over land purchased from the states for the erection of forts and other buildings.

==== Clause 10: Offenses Against the Law of Nations Clause ====
The Congress shall have Power ... To define and punish Piracies and Felonies committed on the high Seas, and Offences against the Law of Nations...The &quot;Offenses Clause&quot; was developed to address the national government&#x27;s inability to conduct foreign affairs effectively under the Articles of Confederation, which left it up to states to &quot;provide expeditious, exemplary and adequate punishment...for the infractions of the immunities of ambassadors and other public ministers...&quot; Edmund Randolph, a delegate to the Constitutional Convention, cited this arrangement as one of the major &quot;defects&quot; of the Articles, since it left no consistent or uniform recourse for foreign dignitaries and merchants.

At the time clause was drafted, piracy was the only universal crime that was well-defined by the law of nations, and Congress soon addressed it through a federal statute in 1790. Felonies committed in international waters had to be specifically defined by Congress pursuant to the U.S. Supreme Court decision in &quot;United States v. Furlong&quot; (1820). However, determining the grounds on which Congress can define offenses against the law of nations has been more difficult, due largely to uncertainty about the meaning of the term &quot;law of nations&quot; and its scope.

==== Clause 18: Implied Powers of Congress (Necessary and Proper) ====
Regarding the Implied Powers of Congress, the Constitution specifically states all implied or additional powers permitted to the Congress are limited exclusively to the &quot;Powers vested&quot;, to the Congress, &quot;by this Constitution&quot; (the Implied Powers Clause does not say, &quot;the Powers vested in it&quot;); meaning, whatever is not expressly written or obviously implied within the Constitution cannot be inferred as being part of, nor permitted by the Constitution. Id est, the Congress cannot create additional powers for itself with which to wield. Any powers deemed, &quot;necessary and proper&quot;, are limited and restricted to carrying out the functions of government as prescribed within the Constitution and ensuring those functions continued operations. E.g., the Constitution states Congress shall manage the government purse through the creation of a Treasury, thus there must be a Department of the Treasury with a sub-division which accounts for every penny coming and going, pays government debts, &amp;c.; whereas, nowhere in the Constitution can it be inferred that the People&#x27;s Second Amendment Right to Bear Arms necessitates a Department of Alcohol, Tobacco, Fire Arms, and Explosives (ATFE). The Department of the Treasury, along with many of its sub-divisions, is entirely Constitutional; but the Secret Service was not created until July 5th, 1865 (four months after President Abraham Lincoln&#x27;s assassination) to specifically combat counterfeiting which is a task delegated to the Department of the Treasury by the Congress. Congress constitutionally expanded the Secret Service&#x27;s duties to include Presidential protection only after President William McKinley was assassinated in 1901. It is important to note, the Internal Revenue Service falls under the jurisdiction of the Federal Reserve and the Department of the Treasury is not part of the Federal Reserve, nor is the Federal Reserve part of the Department of the Treasury.
Finally, Congress has the power to do whatever is &quot;necessary and proper&quot; to carry out its enumerated powers and, crucially, all others vested in it. This has been interpreted to authorize criminal prosecution of those whose actions have a &quot;substantial effect&quot; on interstate commerce in &quot;Wickard v. Filburn&quot;; however, Thomas Jefferson, in the Kentucky Resolutions, supported by James Madison, maintained that a penal power could not be inferred from a power to regulate, and that the only penal powers were for treason, counterfeiting, piracy and felony on the high seas, and offenses against the law of nations.

The necessary and proper clause has been interpreted extremely broadly, thereby giving Congress wide latitude in legislation. The first landmark case involving the clause was &quot;McCulloch v. Maryland&quot; (1819), which involved the establishment of a national bank. Alexander Hamilton, in advocating the creation of the bank, argued that there was &quot;a more or less direct&quot; relationship between the bank and &quot;the powers of collecting taxes, borrowing money, regulating trade between the states, and raising and maintaining fleets and navies&quot;. Thomas Jefferson countered that Congress&#x27;s powers &quot;can all be carried into execution without a national bank. A bank therefore is not necessary, and consequently not authorized by this phrase&quot;. Chief Justice John Marshall agreed with the former interpretation. Marshall wrote that a Constitution listing &quot;all&quot; of Congress&#x27;s powers &quot;would partake of a prolixity of a legal code and could scarcely be embraced by the human mind&quot;. Since the Constitution could not possibly enumerate the &quot;minor ingredients&quot; of the powers of Congress, Marshall &quot;deduced&quot; that Congress had the authority to establish a bank from the &quot;great outlines&quot; of the general welfare, commerce and other clauses. Under this doctrine of the necessary and proper clause, Congress has sweepingly broad powers (known as implied powers) not explicitly enumerated in the Constitution. However, the Congress cannot enact laws solely on the implied powers, any action must be necessary and proper in the execution of the enumerated powers.

==Section 9: Limits on Federal power==

The ninth section of Article One places limits on federal powers, including those of Congress:

===Clause 1: Slave trade===

The first clause in this section prevents Congress from passing any law that would restrict the importation of slaves into the United States prior to 1808. Congress could, however, levy a &quot;per capita&quot; duty of up to ten Spanish milled dollars for each slave imported into the country. This clause was further entrenched into the Constitution by Article V, where it is explicitly shielded from constitutional amendment prior to 1808. On March 2, 1807, Congress approved legislation prohibiting the importation of slaves into the United States, which went into effect January 1, 1808, the first day of the prohibition permitted by the Constitution. This clause did see brief life outside of the slavery context in the late 1790s when the Virginia General Assembly cited it in arguing the Alien Enemies Acts was unconstitutional, the federal act being used by the Adams administration to deport French immigrants the Commonwealth had itself saw proper to admit.

===Clauses 2 and 3: Civil and legal protections===
A writ of &quot;habeas corpus&quot; is a legal action against unlawful detainment that commands a law enforcement agency or other body that has a person in custody to have a court inquire into the legality of the detention. The court may order the person released if the reason for detention is deemed insufficient or unjustifiable. The Constitution further provides that the privilege of the writ of &quot;habeas corpus&quot; may not be suspended &quot;unless when in cases of rebellion or invasion the public safety may require it&quot;. In &quot;Ex parte Milligan&quot; (1866), the Supreme Court ruled that the suspension of &quot;habeas corpus&quot; in a time of war was lawful, but military tribunals did not apply to citizens in states that had upheld the authority of the Constitution and where civilian courts were still operating.

For these stipulations, clauses 2 and 3 are also known as the Suspension Clause.

A bill of attainder is a legislative bill or act that legally declares a person guilty of a crime, regardless of whether a trial has been held. An &quot;ex post facto&quot; law is a law which applies retroactively, punishing someone for an act that was only made criminal after it was done. The &quot;ex post facto&quot; clause does not apply to civil matters.

===Clause 4: Apportionment of direct taxes===
Section Nine reiterates the provision from Section Two, Clause 3 that direct taxes must be apportioned by state populations. This clause was also explicitly shielded from constitutional amendment prior to 1808 by Article V. In 1913, the 16th Amendment exempted all income taxes from this clause. This overcame the ruling in &quot;Pollock v. Farmers&#x27; Loan &amp; Trust Co.&quot; that the income tax could only be applied to regular income and could not be applied to dividends and capital gains.

===Clauses 5 and 6: Restrictions on trade-related legislation===
Furthermore, no tax may be imposed on exports from any state. Congress may not, by revenue or commerce legislation, give preference to ports of one state over those of another; neither may it require ships from one state to pay duties in another.

===Clause 7: Appropriations and public statements of expenditures===
All funds belonging to the Treasury may not be withdrawn except according to law. Modern practice is that Congress annually passes a number of appropriations bills authorizing the expenditure of public money. The Constitution requires that a regular statement of such expenditures be published.

===Clause 8: Titles of nobility===

The Title of Nobility Clause prohibits Congress from granting any title of nobility. In addition, it specifies that no civil officer may accept, without the consent of Congress, any gift, payment, office or title from a foreign ruler or state. Emoluments were a profound concern of the Founders. However, a U.S. citizen may receive foreign office before or after their period of public service.

==Section 10: Limits on the States==

===Clause 1: Contract Clause===

States may not exercise certain powers reserved for the federal government: they may not enter into treaties, alliances or confederations, grant letters of marque or reprisal, coin money or issue bills of credit (such as currency). Furthermore, no state may make anything but gold and silver coin a tender in payment of debts, which expressly forbids any state government (but not the federal government) from &quot;making a tender&quot; (i.e., authorizing something that may be offered in payment) of any type or form of money to meet any financial obligation, unless that form of money is coins made of gold or silver (or a medium of exchange backed by and redeemable in gold or silver coins, as noted in &quot;Farmers &amp; Merchants Bank v. Federal Reserve Bank&quot;). Much of this clause is devoted to preventing the States from using or creating any currency other than that created by Congress. In &quot;Federalist no. 44&quot;, Madison explains that &quot;it may be observed that the same reasons which shew the necessity of denying to the States the power of regulating coin, prove with equal force that they ought not to be at liberty to substitute a paper medium in the place of coin. Had every State a right to regulate the value of its coin, there might be as many different currencies as States; and thus the intercourse among them would be impeded&quot;. Moreover, the states may not pass bills of attainder, enact &quot;ex post facto&quot; laws, impair the obligation of contracts, or grant titles of nobility.

The Contract Clause was the subject of much contentious litigation in the 19th century. It was first interpreted by the Supreme Court in 1810, when &quot;Fletcher v. Peck&quot; was decided. The case involved the Yazoo land scandal, in which the Georgia legislature authorized the sale of land to speculators at low prices. The bribery involved in the passage of the authorizing legislation was so blatant that a Georgia mob attempted to lynch the corrupt members of the legislature. Following elections, the legislature passed a law that rescinded the contracts granted by corrupt legislators. The validity of the annulment of the sale was questioned in the Supreme Court. In writing for a unanimous court, Chief Justice John Marshall asked, &quot;What is a contract?&quot; His answer was: &quot;a compact between two or more parties&quot;. Marshall argued that the sale of land by the Georgia legislature, though fraught with corruption, was a valid &quot;contract&quot;. He added that the state had no right to annul the purchase of the land since doing so would impair the obligations of the contract.

The definition of a contract propounded by Chief Justice Marshall was not as simple as it may seem. In 1819, the Court considered whether a corporate charter could be construed as a contract. The case of &quot;Trustees of Dartmouth College v. Woodward&quot; involved Dartmouth College, which had been established under a Royal Charter granted by King George III. The Charter created a board of twelve trustees for the governance of the College. In 1815, however, New Hampshire passed a law increasing the board&#x27;s membership to twenty-one with the aim that public control could be exercised over the College. The Court, including Marshall, ruled that New Hampshire could not amend the charter, which was ruled to be a contract since it conferred &quot;vested rights&quot; on the trustees.

The Marshall Court determined another dispute in &quot;Sturges v. Crowninshield&quot;. The case involved a debt that was contracted in early 1811. Later in that year, the state of New York passed a bankruptcy law, under which the debt was later discharged. The Supreme Court ruled that a retroactively applied state bankruptcy law impaired the obligation to pay the debt, and therefore violated the Constitution. In &quot;Ogden v. Saunders&quot; (1827), however, the court decided that state bankruptcy laws &quot;could&quot; apply to debts contracted after the passage of the law. State legislation on the issue of bankruptcy and debtor relief has not been much of an issue since the adoption of a comprehensive federal bankruptcy law in 1898.

===Clause 2: Import-Export Clause===
Still more powers are prohibited of the states. States may not, without the consent of Congress, tax imports or exports except for the fulfillment of state inspection laws (which may be revised by Congress). The net revenue of the tax is paid not to the state, but to the federal Treasury.

===Clause 3: Compact Clause===

Under the Compact Clause, states may not, without the consent of Congress, keep troops or armies during times of peace, or enter into agreements with other states or with foreign governments. Furthermore, states may not engage in war unless invaded. States may, however, organize and arm a militia according to the discipline prescribed by Congress. The National Guard, whose members are also members of the militia as defined by , fulfill this function, as do persons serving in a state defense force with federal oversight under .

The idea of allowing Congress to have say over agreements between states traces back to the numerous controversies that arose between various colonies. Eventually compromises would be created between the two colonies and these compromises would be submitted to the Crown for approval. After the American Revolutionary War, the Articles of Confederation allowed states to appeal to Congress to settle disputes between the states over boundaries or &quot;any cause whatever&quot;. The Articles of Confederation also required Congressional approval for &quot;any treaty or alliance&quot; in which a state was one of the parties.

A number of Supreme Court cases have concerned what constitutes valid Congressional consent to an interstate compact. In &quot;Virginia v. Tennessee&quot;, , the Court found that some agreements among states stand even when lacking the explicit consent of Congress. One example the court gave was a state moving some goods from a distant state to itself, for which it would not require Congressional approval to contract with another state to use its canals for transport. According to the Court, the Compact Clause requires Congressional consent only if the agreement among the states is &quot;directed to the formation of any combination tending to the increase of political power in the States, which may encroach upon or interfere with the just supremacy of the United States&quot;.

The Congressional consent issue is at the center of the debate over the constitutionality of the proposed National Popular Vote Interstate Compact (NPVIC). , seventeen states plus the District of Columbia have joined the NPVIC.

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* Irons, Peter H. (1999). &quot;A People&#x27;s History of the Supreme Court&quot;. New York: Penguin.

==External links==

* Davis, Z. (2001). &quot;Presidential Vetoes, 1989–2000.&quot;
* Kilman, J. &amp; Costello, G. (Eds). (2000). &quot;The Constitution of the United States of America: Analysis and Interpretation.&quot; s
* CRS Annotated Constitution: Article 1
* &quot;Resources Regarding the Origination Clause&quot; (from TIFIS)
* National Cable Satellite Corporation. (2003). &quot;Capitol Questions.&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q48416" start="0" end="52" title="Article One of the United States Constitution" label="Article One of the Constitution of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="69" end="87" title="legislative branch" label="legislative branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="95" end="113" title="Federal government of the United States" label="federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="119" end="141" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="176" end="185" title="bicameral" label="bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="216" end="240" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="249" end="255" title="United States Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773061" start="293" end="310" title="Enumerated powers (United States)" label="enumerated powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6985427" start="346" end="366" title="Necessary and Proper Clause" label="necessary and proper"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="523" end="529" title="U.S. state" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q125688914" start="577" end="591" title="Legislative Vesting Clause" label="Vesting Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="852" end="872" title="separation of powers" label="separation of powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q197656" start="1655" end="1676" title="Seventeenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Seventeenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="1840" end="1875" title="vice president of the United States" label="vice president of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602907" start="2659" end="2669" title="List of United States presidential vetoes" label="veto power"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="2677" end="2707" title="president of the United States" label="president of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689659" start="2956" end="3019" title="Taxing and Spending Clause" label="lay and collect &amp;quot;taxes, duties, imposts, and excises&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q17349491" start="3203" end="3249" title="Commerce Clause" label="regulate interstate and international commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054376" start="3268" end="3287" title="United States nationality law" label="naturalization laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q194907" start="3464" end="3478" title="Federal judiciary of the United States" label="federal courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="3495" end="3508" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249472" start="3821" end="3832" title="Declaration of war by the United States" label="declare war"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="3892" end="3908" title="Washington, D.C." label="federal district"/>
<link wikidata="Q862685" start="4254" end="4272" title="bills of attainder" label="bills of attainder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165650" start="4401" end="4420" title="Contract Clause" label="impairing contracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q30588963" start="4422" end="4447" title="Import-Export Clause" label="taxing imports or exports"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923476" start="4636" end="4650" title="vesting clause" label="vesting clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q49371" start="4672" end="4683" title="Legislation" label="legislative"/>
<link wikidata="Q48423" start="4744" end="4754" title="Article Two of the United States Constitution" label="Article II"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="4770" end="4779" title="Executive (government)" label="executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q48429" start="4816" end="4827" title="Article Three of the United States Constitution" label="Article III"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="4842" end="4850" title="judicial" label="judicial"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="4920" end="4940" title="separation of powers" label="separation of powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="4973" end="4991" title="Federal government of the United States" label="federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q164665" start="5416" end="5431" title="Tenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Tenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049254" start="5593" end="5615" title="nondelegation doctrine" label="nondelegation doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419945" start="7224" end="7243" title="executive privilege" label="executive privilege"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="8016" end="8032" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137223" start="8322" end="8349" title="Equal Protection Clause" label="the Equal Protection Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="8357" end="8377" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823570" start="8859" end="8877" title="political question" label="political question"/>
<link wikidata="Q4849238" start="8902" end="8915" title="Baker v. Carr" label="Baker v. Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q65119498" start="9020" end="9041" title="Rucho v. Common Cause" label="Rucho v. Common Cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q476310" start="9197" end="9211" title="gerrymandering" label="gerrymandering"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="9658" end="9667" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9845" end="9865" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution#Apportionment of representation in House of Representatives" label="Fourteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q191614" start="10535" end="10554" title="Fifteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fifteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q205304" start="10659" end="10679" title="Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Nineteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q216963" start="10740" end="10763" title="Twenty-fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twenty-fourth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7503357" start="10834" end="10842" title="Poll tax (United States)" label="poll tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q219274" start="10848" end="10870" title="Twenty-sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twenty-sixth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137223" start="11065" end="11088" title="Equal Protection Clause" label="Equal Protection Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q2286103" start="11523" end="11538" title="reapportionment" label="reapportionment"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="11546" end="11553" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q957749" start="11591" end="11614" title="John Marshall Harlan II" label="John Marshall Harlan II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869209" start="11630" end="11649" title="Minor v. Happersett" label="Minor v. Happersett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4523726" start="11830" end="11848" title="Oregon v. Mitchell" label="Oregon v. Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12043" end="12051" title="#Section 2, Clause 3: Apportionment" label="clause 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q15133865" start="13052" end="13080" title="citizen of the United States" label="citizen of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13467" end="13476" title="#Section 5: Procedure" label="Section 5"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13587" end="13596" title="#Clause 1: Time, place, and manner of holding" label="Section 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q194907" start="13752" end="13766" title="United States federal courts" label="federal courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q581993" start="13845" end="13855" title="term limit" label="term limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196663" start="13927" end="13942" title="recall election" label="recall election"/>
<link wikidata="Q972414" start="14046" end="14076" title="Congressional Research Service" label="Congressional Research Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851891" start="14270" end="14283" title="ballot access" label="ballot access"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007530" start="14580" end="14647" title="Dual office-holding" label="state or local office-holders simultaneously holding federal office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345528" start="15395" end="15401" title="United States Census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="15935" end="15940" title="slave" label="slave"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="15968" end="15984" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256823" start="16025" end="16048" title="three-fifths compromise" label="three-fifths compromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704791" start="16175" end="16186" title="enumeration" label="enumeration"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="16315" end="16328" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q11144" start="16329" end="16336" title="Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States" label="Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368374" start="16337" end="16349" title="Joseph Story" label="Joseph Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152386" start="16362" end="16366" title="Commentaries on the Constitution of the United States" label="1833"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="16671" end="16691" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301430" start="17284" end="17311" title="Reapportionment Act of 1929" label="Reapportionment Act of 1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="18035" end="18060" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042056" start="18130" end="18141" title="1920 United States census" label="1920 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781679" start="18227" end="18252" title="Apportionment Act of 1911" label="Apportionment Act of 1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301430" start="18372" end="18399" title="Reapportionment Act of 1929" label="Reapportionment Act of 1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q926871" start="19184" end="19196" title="direct taxes" label="direct taxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="19405" end="19415" title="income tax" label="income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q194938" start="20029" end="20048" title="Sixteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Sixteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038380" start="20765" end="20781" title="writ of election" label="writ of election"/>
<link wikidata="Q115705182" start="21301" end="21312" title="Federal impeachment in the United States" label="impeachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323789" start="21659" end="21669" title="grand jury" label="grand jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149795" start="21867" end="21881" title="Impeachment of Andrew Johnson" label="Andrew Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200400" start="21883" end="21895" title="Impeachment of Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q79063280" start="21901" end="21913" title="First impeachment of Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q639738" start="21927" end="21934" title="United States Cabinet" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q706248" start="21948" end="21966" title="William W. Belknap" label="William W. Belknap"/>
<link wikidata="Q4714600" start="21971" end="21989" title="Alejandro Mayorkas" label="Alejandro Mayorkas"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="21996" end="22003" title="United States Senate" label="senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q767446" start="22005" end="22019" title="William Blount" label="William Blount"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="22026" end="22039" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q11144" start="22040" end="22057" title="Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States" label="associate justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q285521" start="22059" end="22071" title="Samuel Chase" label="Samuel Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006696" start="22087" end="22101" title="United States federal judge" label="federal judges"/>
<link wikidata="Q20711778" start="22118" end="22141" title="Impeachment process against Richard Nixon" label="impeachment proceedings"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="22181" end="22194" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131462" start="22504" end="22529" title="House Judiciary Committee" label="House Judiciary Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q115925924" start="22732" end="22740" title="House managers" label="managers"/>
<link wikidata="Q115702285" start="22814" end="22845" title="Federal impeachment trial in the United States" label="impeachment trial in the Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270264" start="23085" end="23102" title="State legislature (United States)" label="state legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q993847" start="23252" end="23274" title="Connecticut Compromise" label="Connecticut Compromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q197656" start="23386" end="23407" title="Seventeenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Seventeenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q48434" start="23482" end="23494" title="Article Five of the United States Constitution" label="Article Five"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23589" end="23598" title="Entrenched clause#United States" label="shielding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384148" start="24580" end="24588" title="Equal footing" label="equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q11147" start="24623" end="24636" title="Chief Justice of the United States" label="Chief Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q433051" start="24637" end="24652" title="Salmon P. Chase" label="Salmon P. Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407695" start="24663" end="24677" title="Texas v. White" label="Texas v. White"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="24845" end="24865" title="Washington, D.C." label="District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q490812" start="25461" end="25477" title="Coming into force" label="become operative"/>
<link wikidata="Q162932" start="25630" end="25644" title="1st United States Congress" label="First Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744546" start="25689" end="25714" title="Classes of United States Senators" label="three &amp;quot;classes&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q70196" start="25807" end="25813" title="Sortition" label="by lot"/>
<link wikidata="Q197656" start="27082" end="27103" title="Seventeenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Seventeenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28480" end="28489" title="#Section 5: Procedure" label="Section 5"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28603" end="28612" title="#Clause 1: Time, place, and manner of holding" label="Section 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="28823" end="28837" title="Vice President of the United States" label="vice president"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="28845" end="28868" title="President of the United States Senate" label="president of the Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275080" start="29109" end="29127" title="Casting vote" label="tie-breaking votes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829310" start="29192" end="29200" title="Presiding Officer of the United States Senate" label="presided"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140848" start="29500" end="29535" title="President pro tempore of the United States Senate" label="president pro tempore of the Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123628" start="29663" end="29697" title="Acting president of the United States" label="powers and duties of the president"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="30683" end="30695" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q767446" start="30989" end="31003" title="William Blount" label="William Blount"/>
<link wikidata="Q405475" start="31175" end="31200" title="Constitutional Convention (United States)" label="Constitutional Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q318703" start="31210" end="31225" title="Edmund Randolph" label="Edmund Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044176" start="31288" end="31292" title="Virginia Plan" label="plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="31332" end="31345" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195929" start="31463" end="31492" title="Congress of the Confederation" label="Congress of the Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="31500" end="31509" title="bicameralism" label="bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q375928" start="31543" end="31554" title="lower house" label="lower house"/>
<link wikidata="Q637846" start="31614" end="31625" title="upper house" label="upper house"/>
<link wikidata="Q532329" start="32104" end="32116" title="George Mason" label="George Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757523" start="32176" end="32204" title="high crimes and misdemeanors" label="high crimes and misdemeanors"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="32393" end="32406" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q714960" start="32507" end="32524" title="Gouverneur Morris" label="Gouverneur Morris"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32633" end="32673" title="History of the United States Constitution#Ratification of the Constitution" label="six states had ratified the Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="32693" end="32711" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440642" start="32728" end="32745" title="Federalist No. 65" label="Federalist No. 65"/>
<link wikidata="Q4936955" start="32884" end="32896" title="body politic" label="body politic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410431" start="32964" end="32976" title="public trust" label="public trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149408" start="33630" end="33666" title="Impeachment in the United Kingdom" label="impeachment process in Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253920" start="35205" end="35220" title="double jeopardy" label="double jeopardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11147" start="35978" end="35991" title="Chief Justice of the United States" label="Chief Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="36953" end="36962" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="36970" end="36984" title="Vice President of the United States" label="Vice President"/>
<link wikidata="Q24965407" start="37124" end="37130" title="Officer under the United States" label="office"/>
<link wikidata="Q11704" start="38165" end="38177" title="Election Day (United States)" label="uniform date"/>
<link wikidata="Q171174" start="39943" end="39961" title="Direct democracy" label="initiative process"/>
<link wikidata="Q112228267" start="40064" end="40100" title="independent state legislature theory" label="independent state legislature theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q112999877" start="40174" end="40189" title="Moore v. Harper" label="Moore v. Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632667" start="40284" end="40297" title="27th United States Congress" label="27th Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301430" start="40590" end="40617" title="Reapportionment Act of 1929" label="Reapportionment Act of 1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q111951698" start="40926" end="40960" title="Uniform Congressional District Act" label="Uniform Congressional District Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q191614" start="41427" end="41453" title="Fifteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fifteenth Amendment&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377349" start="41533" end="41556" title="Enforcement Act of 1870" label="Enforcement Act of 1870"/>
<link wikidata="Q7802870" start="42181" end="42200" title="Tillman Act of 1907" label="Tillman Act of 1907"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027776" start="42259" end="42291" title="Campaign finance reform in the United States" label="elections and campaign financing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258618" start="42353" end="42382" title="Federal Election Campaign Act" label="Federal Election Campaign Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927471" start="42478" end="42494" title="Buckley v. Valeo" label="Buckley v. Valeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q205304" start="43109" end="43129" title="Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Nineteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q185387" start="43179" end="43192" title="suffrage" label="right to vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q216963" start="43218" end="43241" title="Twenty-fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twenty-fourth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7503357" start="43354" end="43362" title="Poll tax (United States)" label="poll tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q219274" start="43394" end="43416" title="Twenty-sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twenty-sixth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="" start="43787" end="43808" title="Article Two of the United States Constitution#Clause 3: Extraordinary sessions and prorogation of Congress" label="Article II, Section 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378295" start="44193" end="44209" title="Nathaniel Gorham" label="Nathaniel Gorham"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="44213" end="44226" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q162932" start="44849" end="44861" title="1st United States Congress" label="1st Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q948290" start="45141" end="45150" title="Lame duck (politics)" label="lame duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q211104" start="45255" end="45274" title="Twentieth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twentieth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q526999" start="45724" end="45730" title="quorum" label="quorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11486474" start="45768" end="45775" title="adjournment" label="adjourn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272867" start="45929" end="45940" title="quorum call" label="quorum call"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891734" start="46647" end="46698" title="1974–75 United States Senate elections in New Hampshire" label="1974 United States Senate election in New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236117" start="46807" end="46838" title="Powell v. McCormack" label="&amp;quot;Powell v. McCormack&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q878759" start="47083" end="47099" title="John Eaton (politician)" label="John Henry Eaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q571649" start="47252" end="47261" title="Rush D. Holt Sr." label="Rush Holt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421751" start="47663" end="47677" title="Expulsion from the United States Congress" label="expel a member"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48337" end="48367" title="Pro forma#United States" label="&amp;quot;pro forma&amp;quot; sessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q54109" start="48581" end="48592" title="United States Capitol" label="the Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q219736" start="48837" end="48861" title="Twenty-seventh Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twenty-seventh Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q493620" start="49070" end="49095" title="Articles of Confederation" label="Articles of Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404273" start="49208" end="49271" title="parliamentary privilege" label="based on those enjoyed by the members of the British Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="49371" end="49378" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q178844" start="49380" end="49386" title="felony" label="felony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722536" start="49390" end="49409" title="breach of the peace" label="breach of the peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q352422" start="49644" end="49655" title="Mike Gravel" label="Mike Gravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9724" start="49696" end="49711" title="Pentagon Papers" label="Pentagon Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160952" start="49731" end="49751" title="Congressional Record" label="Congressional Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597839" start="49858" end="49881" title="Gravel v. United States" label="Gravel v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q265939" start="50307" end="50316" title="patronage" label="patronage"/>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="50377" end="50388" title="Westminster system" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="50481" end="50501" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q389217" start="50946" end="50955" title="Saxbe fix" label="Saxbe fix"/>
<link wikidata="Q459752" start="51021" end="51031" title="Hugo Black" label="Hugo Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q11144" start="51049" end="51087" title="associate justice of the Supreme Court" label="associate justice of the Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q476068" start="51706" end="51722" title="Act of Congress" label="Acts of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607599" start="52255" end="52268" title="first reading" label="first reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q5914852" start="52276" end="52292" title="House of Commons of Great Britain" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236582" start="52340" end="52358" title="power of the purse" label="power of the purse"/>
<link wikidata="Q993847" start="52553" end="52569" title="Connecticut Compromise" label="Great Compromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241017" start="52929" end="52947" title="Presentment Clause" label="Presentment Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q48434" start="53302" end="53311" title="Article Five of the United States Constitution" label="Article V"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="53467" end="53471" title="veto" label="veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q615305" start="54158" end="54169" title="pocket veto" label="pocket veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7206429" start="54508" end="54524" title="Pocket Veto Case" label="Pocket Veto Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038284" start="55081" end="55104" title="Wright v. United States" label="Wright v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q35171" start="55455" end="55471" title="Grover Cleveland" label="Grover Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q615305" start="55695" end="55706" title="pocket veto" label="pocket veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553185" start="55740" end="55758" title="Line Item Veto Act of 1996" label="Line Item Veto Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134289" start="56075" end="56102" title="Clinton v. City of New York" label="Clinton v. City of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689659" start="56996" end="57099" title="Taxing and Spending Clause" label="lay and collect Taxes, Duties, Imposts and Excises, to pay the Debts and provide for the common defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689659" start="57100" end="57119" title="Taxing and Spending Clause" label="and general Welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138777" start="57229" end="57276" title="United States public debt" label="borrow Money on the credit of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q17349491" start="57282" end="57378" title="Commerce Clause" label="regulate Commerce with foreign Nations, and among the several States, and with the Indian Tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054376" start="57396" end="57426" title="United States nationality law" label="uniform Rule of Naturalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856460" start="57463" end="57475" title="Bankruptcy in the United States" label="Bankruptcies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141049" start="57511" end="57521" title="United States Mint" label="coin Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q176691" start="57584" end="57616" title="National Institute of Standards and Technology" label="Standard of Weights and Measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q502918" start="57652" end="57666" title="counterfeiting" label="counterfeiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233980" start="57725" end="57734" title="Postal Clause" label="establish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109672" start="57735" end="57747" title="United States Post Office Department" label="Post Offices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431696" start="57752" end="57762" title="post roads" label="post Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169225" start="57768" end="57936" title="Copyright Clause" label="promote the Progress of Science and useful Arts, by securing for limited Times to Authors and Inventors the exclusive Right to their respective Writings and Discoveries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440562" start="57953" end="57971" title="Federal tribunals in the United States" label="Tribunals inferior"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="57979" end="57992" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="58016" end="58024" title="piracy" label="Piracies"/>
<link wikidata="Q178844" start="58029" end="58037" title="Felony" label="Felonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q25855" start="58055" end="58064" title="International waters" label="high Seas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394526" start="58091" end="58105" title="Public international law" label="Law of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249472" start="58111" end="58122" title="Declaration of war by the United States" label="declare War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414906" start="58130" end="58160" title="Letter of marque" label="Letters of Marque and Reprisal"/>
<link wikidata="Q542612" start="58171" end="58214" title="Prize court" label="Rules concerning Captures on Land and Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="58238" end="58244" title="United States Army" label="Armies"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821677" start="58253" end="58266" title="Appropriations bill (United States)" label="Appropriation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="58358" end="58362" title="United States Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424958" start="58402" end="58441" title="Uniform Code of Military Justice" label="Regulation of the land and naval Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q6042444" start="58488" end="58561" title="Insurrection Act" label="execute the Laws of the Union, suppress Insurrections and repel Invasions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283439" start="58900" end="58945" title="District of Columbia home rule" label="exclusive Legislation in all Cases whatsoever"/>
<link wikidata="Q475050" start="58957" end="58965" title="Federal district" label="District"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="59280" end="59284" title="Fort" label="Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q110051611" start="59287" end="59296" title="Magazine (artillery)" label="Magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q81669" start="59298" end="59305" title="Arsenal" label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q190928" start="59308" end="59318" title="Shipyard" label="dock-Yards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6985427" start="59386" end="59406" title="Necessary and Proper Clause" label="necessary and proper"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60141" end="60154" title="welfare state#United States" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="60225" end="60238" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="60434" end="60438" title="veto" label="veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6047872" start="60580" end="60600" title="Internal improvements" label="build infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689659" start="60709" end="60735" title="Taxing and Spending Clause" label="Taxing and Spending Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823570" start="60961" end="60979" title="political question" label="political question"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893237" start="61002" end="61025" title="United States v. Butler" label="United States v. Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689659" start="61558" end="61584" title="Taxing and Spending Clause" label="Taxing and Spending Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="61604" end="61619" title="social security" label="social security"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423632" start="61817" end="61828" title="Knox v. Lee" label="Knox v. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457196" start="62171" end="62189" title="sovereign immunity" label="sovereign immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q17349491" start="62370" end="62385" title="commerce clause" label="commerce clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308289" start="62491" end="62507" title="Gibbons v. Ogden" label="Gibbons v. Ogden"/>
<link wikidata="Q50365663" start="62607" end="62621" title="Thomas Gibbons (politician)" label="Thomas Gibbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="62673" end="62685" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q302436" start="62704" end="62715" title="Aaron Ogden" label="Aaron Ogden"/>
<link wikidata="Q310829" start="62909" end="62922" title="John Marshall" label="John Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q171990" start="63436" end="63449" title="laissez-faire" label="laissez-faire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893274" start="63495" end="63532" title="United States v. E. C. Knight Company" label="United States v. E. C. Knight Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425088" start="63591" end="63612" title="Sherman Antitrust Act" label="Sherman Antitrust Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="63968" end="63976" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7431025" start="64071" end="64111" title="Schechter Poultry Corp. v. United States" label="Schechter Poultry Corp. v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q313252" start="64373" end="64393" title="Charles Evans Hughes" label="Charles Evans Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973935" start="64783" end="64851" title="National Labor Relations Board v. Jones &amp;amp; Laughlin Steel Company" label="National Labor Relations Board v. Jones &amp;amp; Laughlin Steel Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154442" start="64868" end="64896" title="National Labor Relations Act" label="National Labor Relations Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884306" start="65034" end="65055" title="unfair labor practice" label="unfair labor practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="65098" end="65104" title="labor union" label="unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998256" start="65373" end="65391" title="Wickard v. Filburn" label="Wickard v. Filburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693866" start="65448" end="65483" title="Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1938" label="Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q870728" start="65921" end="65943" title="United States v. Lopez" label="United States v. Lopez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574963" start="66329" end="66336" title="handgun" label="handgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893409" start="66460" end="66485" title="United States v. Morrison" label="United States v. Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582161" start="66744" end="66761" title="Gonzales v. Raich" label="Gonzales v. Raich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="66885" end="66893" title="cannabis (drug)" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033379" start="66932" end="66950" title="medical cannabis" label="medicinal purposes"/>
<link wikidata="Q841440" start="67246" end="67260" title="naturalization" label="naturalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q152074" start="67265" end="67275" title="bankruptcy" label="bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233980" start="67471" end="67498" title="Postal Clause" label="post offices and post roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q842270" start="67646" end="67656" title="United States copyright law" label="copyrights"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039740" start="67661" end="67668" title="United States patent law" label="patents"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169225" start="67747" end="67763" title="Copyright Clause" label="Copyright Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q713593" start="67996" end="68014" title="Eldred v. Ashcroft" label="Eldred v. Ashcroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968520" start="68372" end="68389" title="War Powers Clause" label="War Powers Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="68608" end="68619" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="68625" end="68645" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="68651" end="68671" title="Spanish–American War" label="Spanish–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="68673" end="68684" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="68689" end="68701" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q192278" start="68803" end="68815" title="Pancho Villa" label="Pancho Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414906" start="68874" end="68891" title="letter of marque" label="letters of marque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365756" start="68896" end="68904" title="reprisal" label="reprisal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424958" start="69769" end="69801" title="Uniform Code of Military Justice" label="Uniform Code of Military Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440462" start="69886" end="69909" title="Federal Tort Claims Act" label="Federal Tort Claims Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5444070" start="70114" end="70128" title="Feres v. United States" label="Feres Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="70248" end="70268" title="Washington, D.C." label="District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190572" start="70336" end="70341" title="Mayor of Washington, D.C." label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527389" start="70346" end="70353" title="Council of the District of Columbia" label="council"/>
<link wikidata="Q318703" start="71305" end="71320" title="Edmund Randolph" label="Edmund Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="71567" end="71573" title="piracy" label="piracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3786872" start="71587" end="71602" title="Hostis humani generis" label="universal crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q25855" start="71736" end="71756" title="international waters" label="international waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q19030827" start="71853" end="71877" title="United States v. Furlong" label="United States v. Furlong"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="74521" end="74537" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6140753" start="74546" end="74566" title="Kentucky Resolutions" label="Kentucky Resolutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="74581" end="74594" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="74714" end="74721" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q502918" start="74723" end="74737" title="counterfeiting" label="counterfeiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="74739" end="74745" title="piracy" label="piracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q178844" start="74750" end="74756" title="felony" label="felony"/>
<link wikidata="Q25855" start="74764" end="74773" title="high seas" label="high seas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394526" start="74800" end="74814" title="law of nations" label="law of nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q908270" start="74998" end="75019" title="McCulloch v. Maryland" label="McCulloch v. Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263849" start="75072" end="75085" title="Second Bank of the United States" label="national bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="75087" end="75105" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="75382" end="75398" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660339" start="76235" end="76249" title="implied powers" label="implied powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q233288" start="76713" end="76734" title="Slave trade in the United States" label="importation of slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q558635" start="76811" end="76821" title="per capita" label="per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q15039722" start="76846" end="76868" title="Spanish dollar" label="Spanish milled dollars"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="76935" end="76945" title="entrenched clause#United States" label="entrenched"/>
<link wikidata="Q48434" start="76971" end="76980" title="Article Five of the United States Constitution" label="Article V"/>
<link wikidata="Q343039" start="77107" end="77144" title="Act Prohibiting Importation of Slaves" label="prohibiting the importation of slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q530970" start="77362" end="77387" title="Virginia General Assembly" label="Virginia General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118757" start="77412" end="77430" title="Alien and Sedition Acts" label="Alien Enemies Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q220596" start="77653" end="77666" title="habeas corpus" label="habeas corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383314" start="78186" end="78203" title="Ex parte Milligan" label="Ex parte Milligan"/>
<link wikidata="Q862685" start="78562" end="78579" title="bill of attainder" label="bill of attainder"/>
<link wikidata="Q328293" start="78713" end="78726" title="ex post facto" label="ex post facto"/>
<link wikidata="" start="79011" end="79032" title="#Clause 3: Apportionment of Representatives and taxes" label="Section Two, Clause 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q926871" start="79038" end="79050" title="direct taxes" label="direct taxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q48434" start="79181" end="79190" title="Article Five of the United States Constitution" label="Article V"/>
<link wikidata="Q194938" start="79205" end="79219" title="Sixteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="16th Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="79233" end="79245" title="income taxes" label="income taxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225714" start="79298" end="79343" title="Pollock v. Farmers&amp;#x27; Loan &amp;amp; Trust Co." label="Pollock v. Farmers&amp;#x27; Loan &amp;amp; Trust Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q16821677" start="79993" end="80012" title="Appropriations bill (United States)" label="appropriations bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810128" start="80186" end="80210" title="Title of Nobility Clause" label="Title of Nobility Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="80248" end="80265" title="nobility" label="title of nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q186539" start="80464" end="80476" title="Founding Fathers of the United States" label="the Founders"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911507" start="80845" end="80860" title="bills of credit" label="bills of credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368" start="81171" end="81176" title="money" label="money"/>
<link wikidata="Q858036" start="81561" end="81578" title="The Federalist Papers" label="Federalist no. 44"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165650" start="82182" end="82197" title="Contract Clause" label="Contract Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q937061" start="82332" end="82348" title="Fletcher v. Peck" label="Fletcher v. Peck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474968" start="82390" end="82408" title="Yazoo land scandal" label="Yazoo land scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="82423" end="82430" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196738" start="83494" end="83535" title="Trustees of Dartmouth College v. Woodward" label="Trustees of Dartmouth College v. Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q49116" start="83551" end="83568" title="Dartmouth College" label="Dartmouth College"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="83635" end="83645" title="George III of the United Kingdom" label="George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="83747" end="83760" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7629043" start="84133" end="84157" title="Sturges v. Crowninshield" label="Sturges v. Crowninshield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079956" start="84500" end="84517" title="Ogden v. Saunders" label="Ogden v. Saunders"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856460" start="84791" end="84813" title="Bankruptcy in the United States" label="federal bankruptcy law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857899" start="85474" end="85481" title="Militia (United States)" label="militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q928670" start="85538" end="85552" title="National Guard of the United States" label="National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107156" start="85666" end="85685" title="state defense force" label="state defense force"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="85979" end="85988" title="the Crown" label="the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="86013" end="86039" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q493620" start="86045" end="86070" title="Articles of Confederation" label="Articles of Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="86357" end="86370" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q16848268" start="86443" end="86461" title="interstate compact" label="interstate compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934718" start="86472" end="86493" title="Virginia v. Tennessee" label="Virginia v. Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015482" start="87239" end="87279" title="National Popular Vote Interstate Compact" label="National Popular Vote Interstate Compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="87317" end="87337" title="Washington, D.C." label="District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174449" start="87409" end="87424" title="Peter H. Irons" label="Irons, Peter H."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31647" wikidata="Q48423" url="?curid=31647" title="Article Two of the United States Constitution">
<text>Article Two of the United States Constitution establishes the executive branch of the federal government, which carries out and enforces federal laws. Article Two vests the power of the executive branch in the office of the President of the United States, lays out the procedures for electing and removing the President, and establishes the President&#x27;s powers and responsibilities.

Section 1 of Article Two establishes the positions of the President and the Vice President, and sets the term of both offices at four years. Section 1&#x27;s Vesting Clause declares that the executive power of the federal government is vested in the President and, along with the Vesting Clauses of Article One and Article Three, establishes the separation of powers among the three branches of government. Section 1 also establishes the Electoral College, the body charged with electing the President and the Vice President. Section 1 provides that each state chooses members of the Electoral College in a manner directed by each state&#x27;s respective legislature, with the states granted electors equal to their combined representation in both houses of Congress. Section 1 lays out the procedures of the Electoral College and requires the House of Representatives to hold a contingent election to select the President if no individual wins a majority of the electoral vote. Section 1 also sets forth the eligibility requirements for the office of the President, provides procedures in case of a Presidential vacancy, and requires the President to take an oath of office.

Section 2 of Article Two lays out the powers of the Presidency, establishing that the President serves as the Commander-in-Chief of the military. This section gives the President the power to grant pardons. Section 2 also requires the &quot;principal officer&quot; of any executive department to tender advice.

Though not required by Article Two, President George Washington organized the principal officers of the executive departments into the Cabinet, a practice that subsequent Presidents have followed. The Treaty Clause grants the President the power to enter into treaties with the approval of two-thirds of the Senate. The Appointments Clause grants the President the power to appoint judges and public officials subject to the advice and consent of the Senate, which in practice has meant that Presidential appointees must be confirmed by a majority vote in the Senate. The Appointments Clause also establishes that Congress can, by law, allow the President, the courts, or the heads of departments to appoint &quot;inferior officers&quot; without requiring the advice and consent of the Senate. The final clause of Section 2 grants the President the power to make recess appointments to fill vacancies that occur when the Senate is in recess.

Section 3 of Article Two lays out the responsibilities of the President, granting the President the power to convene both Houses of Congress, receive foreign representatives, and commission all federal officers. Section 3 requires the President to inform Congress of the &quot;state of the union&quot;; since 1913 this has taken the form of a speech referred to as the State of the Union. The Recommendation Clause requires the President to recommend measures deemed &quot;necessary and expedient.&quot; The Take Care Clause requires the President to obey and enforce all laws, though the President retains some discretion in interpreting the laws and determining how to enforce them.

Section 4 of Article Two gives directives on impeachment. The directive states, &quot;The President, Vice President and all civil Officers of the United States shall be removed from office on Impeachment for, and conviction of, Treason, Bribery, or other high Crimes and Misdemeanors.&quot;

==Section 1: President and vice president==

===Clause 1: Executive power and term of office===


Section 1 begins with a vesting clause that confers federal executive power upon the President. Similar clauses are found in Article I and Article III; the former bestows federal legislative power exclusively to Congress, and the latter grants judicial power solely to the Supreme Court, and other federal courts established by law. These three articles together secure a separation of powers among the three branches of the federal government, and individually, each one entrenches checks and balances on the operation and power of the other two branches.

Article I grants certain powers to Congress, and the Vesting Clause does not reassign those powers to the President. In fact, because those actions require legislation passed by Congress which must be signed by the President to take effect, those powers are not strictly executive powers granted to or retained by Congress per se. Nor were they retained by the U.S. Congress as leftovers from the Articles of Confederation. The Articles of Confederation, Continental Congress and its powers were abolished at the time the new U.S. Congress was seated and the new federal government formally and officially replaced its interim predecessor.

The President may order military action in defense of the United States pursuant to &quot;a national emergency created by attack upon the United States, its territories or possessions, or its armed forces&quot;. The President must notify Congress within 48 hours after the beginning of military operations, giving the source of his authority for the action. Once legal notification is given to Congress, military action can continue for up to 60 days without further authorization from Congress, or up to 90 days if the President &quot;determines and certifies to the Congress in writing that unavoidable military necessity respecting the safety of United States Armed Forces requires the continued use of such armed forces in the course of bringing about a prompt removal of such forces.&quot;

Treaties are official agreements with foreign governments. Treaties must be approved by Senate. While the President does not make treaties, the President shapes and determines U.S. foreign policy initiatives, can enter into discussions and give conditional approval to agreements reached with foreign governments subject to Senate approval.

In their capacity as Head of State and individual representative of the United States, the President has the authority to withdraw the United States from treaties when it is in the best interests and well being of the U.S.

Presidential appointments are approved by advice and consent of the Senate. Senate consent occurs when a majority of senators votes to approve a nominee.

The head of the Executive Branch is the President. The Constitution states that the President and Vice President are to be elected at the same time, for the same term, and by the same constituency. It is believed the framers wanted to preserve the independence of the executive branch should the Vice President assume the Presidency.

===Clause 2: Method of choosing electors===


Under the U.S. Constitution the President and Vice President are chosen by electors, under a Constitutional grant of authority delegated to the legislatures of the several states. The Constitution reserves the choice of the precise manner for selecting electors to the will of the state legislatures. It does not define or delimit what process a state legislature may use to create its &quot;state&quot; college of electors. In practice, the state legislatures have generally chosen to select electors through an indirect popular vote, since the 1820s. Most states use a &quot;winner-take-all&quot; system in which all the state&#x27;s electors are awarded to the candidate gaining the most popular votes. Maine and Nebraska allow individual congressional districts to each elect one elector.

In an indirect popular vote, it is the names of the candidates who are on the ballot to be elected. Most states do not put the names of the electors on the ballot. It is generally understood by the voters and the electors themselves that they are the representative &quot;stand-ins&quot; for the candidates and are expected to cast their electoral college ballots for the president and vice president who appeared on the ballot. The actual electors being voted for are usually selected by the candidate&#x27;s party. There have been a few cases where some electors have refused to vote for the designated candidate, termed a faithless elector. Many states have mandated in law that electors &quot;shall&quot; cast their electoral college ballot for the designated presidential candidate. The constitutionality of such mandates was established by the Supreme Court of the United States in &quot;Chiafalo v. Washington&quot; (2020).

Each state chooses as many electors as it has representatives and senators representing it in Congress. Under the 23rd Amendment, the District of Columbia may choose no more electors than the state with the lowest number of electoral votes (in effect, three electors), although since that amendment&#x27;s ratification the District&#x27;s population has never reached the threshold that would otherwise entitle it to choose four or more electors. U.S. Senators, Representatives and federal government officials are barred from becoming electors; in practice, the two major federal parties frequently select senior state party and government officials (up to and including governors) to serve as electors.

All states other than Maine (including the District of Columbia) use a first past the post system in their presidential elections. In 2020, Maine switched from first past the post to ranked choice.

In &quot;McPherson v. Blacker&quot; (1892), the Supreme Court affirmed the ability of a state to appoint its electors based on electoral districts rather than a statewide popular vote, describing the power of state legislatures to determine the method of appointment of electors as &quot;plenary&quot;, and suggesting that it was not limited even by state constitutions. In &quot;Bush v. Palm Beach County Canvassing Board&quot; (2000), the Supreme Court remanded to the Supreme Court of Florida the question of &quot;the extent to which the Florida Supreme Court saw the Florida Constitution as circumscribing the legislature&#x27;s authority under Art. II, § 1, cl. 2&quot;. In &quot;Williams v. Rhodes&quot; (1968), the Court struck down as a violation of the Equal Protection Clause an Ohio law which placed heavy burdens on minor parties seeking to be placed on the ballot for presidential electors.

The Supreme Court upheld the power of Congress to regulate political contributions intended to influence the appointment of electors in &quot;Burroughs v. United States&quot; (1934).

===Clause 3: Electoral College===
&quot;(Note: This procedure was changed by the 12th Amendment in 1804.)&quot;

In modern practice, parties nominate their electors through various methods . Then, each state chooses its electors in popular elections. In most states, the party with the plurality of the popular vote gets all of its electors chosen. Once chosen, the electors meet in their respective states to cast ballots for the president and vice president. Originally, each elector cast two votes for president; at least one of the individuals voted for had to be from a state different from the elector&#x27;s. The individual with the majority of votes became president, and the runner-up became vice president. In case of a tie between candidates who received votes from a majority of electors, the House of Representatives would choose one of the tied candidates; if no person received a majority, then the House could again choose one of the five with the greatest number of votes. When the House voted, each state delegation cast one vote, and the vote of a majority of states was necessary to choose a president. If second-place candidates were tied, then the Senate broke the tie. A quorum in the House consisted of at least one member from two-thirds of the state delegations; there was no special quorum for the Senate. This procedure was followed in 1801 after the electoral vote produced a tie, and nearly resulted in a deadlock in the House.

The 12th Amendment introduced a number of important changes to the procedure. Now, electors do not cast two votes for president; rather, they cast one vote for president and another for vice president. In case no presidential candidate receives a majority, the House chooses from the top three (not five, as before the 12th Amendment). The Amendment also requires the Senate to choose the vice president from those with the two highest figures if no vice presidential candidate receives a majority of electoral votes (rather than only if there&#x27;s a tie for second for president). It also stipulates that to be the vice president, a person must be qualified to be the president.

===Clause 4: Election day===

Congress sets a national Election Day. Currently, electors are chosen on the Tuesday following the first Monday in November (the first Tuesday after November 1), in the year before the president&#x27;s term is to expire. The electors cast their votes on the Monday following the second Wednesday in December (the first Monday after December 12) of that year. Thereafter, the votes are opened by the President of the Senate, and then counted by Congress in a joint session.

===Clause 5: Qualifications for office===

Section 1 of Article Two of the United States Constitution sets forth the eligibility requirements for serving as president of the United States:

At the time of taking office, the President must be:
* a natural-born citizen, or a person recognized as a citizen before September 17, 1787
* at least 35 years of age
* an inhabitant of the United States for at least fourteen years.

A person who meets the above qualifications, however, may still be constitutionally barred from holding the office of president under any of the following conditions:
* Article I, Section 3, Clause 7, gives the U.S. Senate the option of forever disqualifying anyone convicted in an impeachment case from holding any federal office.
* Section 3 of the 14th Amendment prohibits anyone who swore an oath to support the Constitution, and later rebelled against the United States, from becoming president. However, this disqualification can be lifted by a two-thirds vote of each house of Congress.
* The 22nd Amendment prohibits anyone from being elected to the presidency more than twice (or once if the person serves as president or acting president for more than two years of a presidential term to which someone else was originally elected).

===Clause 6: Vacancy and disability===


&quot;(Note: This clause was partially by the 25th Amendment in 1967.)&quot;

The wording of this clause caused much controversy at the time it was first used. When William Henry Harrison died in office, a debate arose over whether the vice president would become president, or if he would just inherit the powers, thus becoming an acting president. Harrison&#x27;s vice president, John Tyler, believed that he had the right to become president. However, many senators argued that he only had the right to assume the powers of the presidency long enough to call for a new election. Because the wording of the clause is so vague, it was impossible for either side to prove its point. Tyler took the Oath of Office as president, setting a precedent that made it possible for later vice presidents to ascend to the presidency unchallenged following the president&#x27;s death. The &quot;Tyler Precedent&quot; established that if the president dies, resigns or is removed from office, the vice president becomes president.

The Congress may provide for a line of succession beyond the vice president. The current Presidential Succession Act establishes the order as the speaker of the House of Representatives, the president &quot;pro tempore&quot; of the Senate and then the fifteen Cabinet secretaries in order of each department&#x27;s establishment. There are concerns regarding the constitutionality of having members of Congress in the line of succession, however, as this clause specifies that only an &quot;officer of the United States&quot; may be designated as a presidential successor. Constitutional scholars from James Madison to the present day have argued that the term &quot;officer&quot; excludes members of Congress.

The 25th Amendment explicitly states that if the president dies, resigns or is removed from office, the vice president becomes president, and also establishes a procedure for filling a vacancy in the office of the vice president. The Amendment further provides that the president, or the vice president and Cabinet, can declare the president unable to discharge his or her duties, in which case the vice president becomes Acting president. If the declaration is done by the vice president and Cabinet, the Amendment permits the president to take control back, unless the vice president and Cabinet challenge the president and two-thirds of both Houses vote to sustain the findings of the vice president and Cabinet. If the declaration is done by the president, the president may take control back without risk of being overridden by the Congress.

===Clause 7: Salary===

The president&#x27;s salary, currently $400,000 a year, must remain constant throughout the president&#x27;s term. The president may not receive other compensation from either the federal or any state government.

===Clause 8: Oath or affirmation===

According to the Joint Congressional Committee on Presidential Inaugurations, George Washington added the words &quot;So help me God&quot; during his first inaugural, though this has been disputed. There are no contemporaneous sources for this fact, and no eyewitness sources to Washington&#x27;s first inaugural mention the phrase at all—including those that transcribed what he said for his oath.

Also, the president-elect&#x27;s name is typically added after the &quot;I&quot;, for example, &quot;I, George Washington, do...&quot; Normally, the chief justice of the United States administers the oath. It is sometimes asserted that the oath bestows upon the president the power to do whatever is necessary to &quot;preserve, protect and defend the Constitution&quot;. Andrew Jackson, while vetoing an Act for the renewal of the charter of the national bank, implied that the president could refuse to execute statutes that he felt were unconstitutional. In suspending the privilege of the writ of &quot;habeas corpus&quot;, President Abraham Lincoln claimed that he acted according to the oath. His action was challenged in court and overturned by the U.S. Circuit Court in Maryland (led by Chief Justice Roger B. Taney) in &quot;Ex parte Merryman&quot;, 17 F. Cas. 144 (C.C.D. Md. 1861). Lincoln ignored Taney&#x27;s order. Finally, Andrew Johnson&#x27;s counsel referred to the theory during his impeachment trial. Otherwise, few have seriously asserted that the oath augments the president&#x27;s powers.

The vice president also has an oath of office, but it is taken under the Oath or Affirmation Clause of Article VI that provides that &quot;all ... Officers ... of the United States ... shall be bound by Oath or Affirmation, to support this Constitution&quot;. Pursuant to Article VI, the 1st United States Congress passed the Oath Administration Act (that remains in effect) which provides that &quot;...the oath or affirmation required by the sixth article of the Constitution of the United States ... shall be administered to [the President of the Senate]&quot;. Currently, the vice presidential oath is the same as that for members of Congress and members of the Cabinet, which is as follows:

==Section 2: Presidential powers==
In the landmark decision &quot;Nixon v. General Services Administration&quot; (1977), Justice William Rehnquist, afterwards the chief justice, declared in his dissent &quot;It would require far more of a discourse than could profitably be included in an opinion such as this to fully describe the preeminent position that the president of the United States occupies with respect to our Republic. Suffice it to say that the president is made the sole repository of the executive powers of the United States, and the powers entrusted to him as well as the duties imposed upon him are awesome indeed.&quot;

Unlike the modern constitutions of many other countries, which specify when and how a state of emergency may be declared and which rights may be suspended, the U.S. Constitution itself includes no comprehensive separate regime for emergencies. However, according to &quot;The Atlantic&quot;, some legal scholars believe that the Constitution gives the president inherent emergency powers by making him commander in chief of the armed forces, or by vesting in him a broad, undefined &quot;executive Power&quot;. Congress has delegated at least 136 distinct statutory emergency powers to the President, each available upon the declaration of an emergency. Only 13 of these require a declaration from Congress; the remaining 123 are assumed by an executive declaration with no further Congressional input. Congressionally-authorized emergency presidential powers are sweeping and dramatic and range from seizing control of the Internet to declaring martial law. This led the magazine &quot;The Atlantic&quot; to observe that &quot;the misuse of emergency powers is a standard gambit among leaders attempting to consolidate power&quot;, because, in the words of Justice Robert H. Jackson&#x27;s dissent in &quot;Korematsu v. United States&quot; (1944), the decision that upheld the internment of Japanese Americans, each emergency power &quot;lies about like a loaded weapon, ready for the hand of any authority that can bring forward a plausible claim of an urgent need.&quot;

===Clause 1: Command of military; Opinions of cabinet secretaries; Pardons===


The Constitution vests the president with executive power. The Supreme Court has interpreted that power as reaching its zenith when wielded to protect national security, and ruled that federal courts in the United States must show deference to the executive in assessing threats to the country. The president is the military&#x27;s commander-in-chief; however, Article One&#x27;s War Powers Clause gives Congress, and not the president, the exclusive right to declare war. Nevertheless, the power of the president to initiate hostilities has been subject to question. According to historian Thomas Woods, &quot;Ever since the Korean War, Article II, Section 2 [...] has been interpreted &#x27;The president has the power to initiate hostilities without consulting Congress&#x27; [...] But what the framers actually meant by that clause was that once war has been declared, it was the president&#x27;s responsibility as commander-in-chief to direct the war. Alexander Hamilton spoke in such terms when he said that the president, although lacking the power to declare war, would have &#x27;the direction of war when authorized or begun.&#x27; The president acting alone was authorized only to repel sudden attacks (hence the decision to withhold from him only the power to &#x27;declare&#x27; war, not to &#x27;make&#x27; war, which was thought to be a necessary emergency power in case of foreign attack).&quot; Since World War II, major U.S. military engagements, including the Korean War and the Vietnam War, have commenced as &quot;military operations&quot; or under the framework of United Nations &quot;police action&quot;. These campaigns or efforts have been justified through Congressional authorizations, such as the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution and the Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq, as well as through United Nations resolutions, providing a basis for their legal legitimacy.

The president may require the &quot;principal officer&quot; of any executive department to tender their advice in writing. While the Constitution nowhere requires a formal Cabinet, it does authorize the president to seek advice from the principal officers of the various departments as they perform their official duties. George Washington found it prudent to organize his principal officers into a Cabinet, and it has been part of the executive branch structure ever since. Presidents have used Cabinet meetings of selected principal officers to widely differing extents and for different purposes. Secretary of State William H. Seward advocated the use of a parliamentary-style Cabinet government to President Abraham Lincoln, but was rebuffed. Later, Woodrow Wilson advocated use of a parliamentary-style Cabinet while he was a professor, but as president he would have none of it in his administration. In recent administrations, cabinets have grown to include key White House staff in addition to department and agency heads. President Ronald Reagan formed seven subcabinet councils to review many policy issues, and subsequent presidents have followed that practice.

Pardons and reprieves may be granted by the president, except in cases of impeachment. There is currently no universally accepted interpretation of the impeachment exception. Some argue that the president simply cannot use a pardon to stop an officeholder from being impeached, while others suggest that crimes underlying an impeachment cannot be pardoned by the president.

As ruled by the Supreme Court in &quot;United States v. Wilson&quot; (1833), the pardon could be rejected by the convict. Then, in &quot;Burdick v. United States&quot; (1915), the court specifically said, &quot;Circumstances may be made to bring innocence under the penalties of the law. If so brought, escape by confession of guilt implied in the acceptance of a pardon may be rejected, preferring to be the victim of the law rather than its acknowledged transgressor, preferring death even to such certain infamy.&quot;

Commutations (reduction in prison sentence), unlike pardons (restoration of civil rights after prison sentence had been served) may not be refused. In &quot;Biddle v. Perovich&quot; , the subject of the commutation did not want to accept life in prison but wanted the death penalty restored. The Supreme Court said, &quot;[a] pardon in our days is not a private act of grace from an individual happening to possess power. It is a part of the Constitutional scheme. When granted it is the determination of the ultimate authority that the public welfare will be better served by inflicting less than what the judgment fixed.&quot;

===Clause 2: Advice and Consent Clause===
The president exercises the powers in the Advice and Consent Clause with the advice and consent of the Senate.

====Treaties====
The President shall have the Power to make treaties, with approval of two-thirds of the Senate. In Article II however, the Constitution is not explicit about the termination of treaties. The first abrogation of a treaty occurred in 1798, when Congress passed a law terminating the Treaty of Alliance (1778). In 1854, however, President Franklin Pierce terminated a treaty with Denmark with the consent of the Senate. A Senate committee ruled that it was correct procedure for the president to terminate treaties after being authorized by the Senate. President Pierce&#x27;s successors, however, returned to the former procedure of obtaining authorization from both Houses. Some Presidents have claimed to themselves the exclusive power of terminating treaties. The first unambiguous case of a President terminating a treaty without authorization, granted prior to or after the termination, occurred when Jimmy Carter terminated a treaty with the Republic of China. For the first time, judicial determination was sought, but the effort proved futile: the Supreme Court could not find a majority agreeing on any particular principle, and therefore instructed the trial court to dismiss the case.

====Appointments====
The president may also appoint federal judges, U.S. ambassadors, consuls, ministers, and other officers of the United States with the advice and consent of the Senate. However, Congress may instead legislate for the appointment of particular inferior officials by the president, heads of executive departments, or the courts.

The Senate has a long-standing practice of permitting motions to reconsider previous decisions. In 1931, the Senate granted advice and consent to the president on the appointment of a member of the Federal Power Commission. The officer in question was sworn in, but the Senate, under the guise of a motion to reconsider, rescinded the advice and consent. In the &quot;quo warranto&quot; proceedings that followed, the Supreme Court ruled that the Senate was not permitted to rescind advice and consent after the officer had been installed.

After the Senate grants advice and consent, however, the Supreme Court has ruled that the president is under no compulsion to commission the officer. It has not been settled whether the president has the prerogative to withhold a commission after having signed it. This issue played a large part in the seminal court case &quot;Marbury v. Madison&quot;.

At times, the president has asserted the power to remove individuals from office. Congress has often explicitly limited the president&#x27;s power to remove; during the Reconstruction era, Congress passed the Tenure of Office Act, proscribing, without the advice and consent of the Senate, presidential removal of anyone appointed with the advice and consent of the Senate. President Andrew Johnson ignored the Act, and was later impeached and acquitted. The constitutionality of the Act was not immediately settled. In &quot;Myers v. United States&quot;, the Supreme Court held that Congress could not limit the president&#x27;s power to remove an executive officer (the Postmaster General), but in &quot;Humphrey&#x27;s Executor v. United States&quot;, it upheld Congress&#x27;s authority to restrict the president&#x27;s power to remove officers of the Federal Trade Commission, an &quot;administrative body [that] cannot in any proper sense be characterized as an arm or an eye of the executive.&quot;

Congress may repeal the legislation that authorizes the appointment of an executive officer. But according to the Supreme Court, it &quot;cannot reserve for itself the power of an officer charged with the execution of the laws except by impeachment.&quot;

===Clause 3: Recess appointments===


The president may fill critical federal executive and judicial branch vacancies unilaterally but temporarily when the Senate is in recess, and thus unavailable to provide advice and consent. Such appointments expire at the end of the next Senate session. To continue to serve thereafter, the appointee must be formally nominated by the president and confirmed by the Senate.

==Section 3: Presidential responsibilities==

===Clause 1: State of the Union===

The president must give the Congress information on the &quot;State of the Union&quot; &quot;from time to time&quot;. This is called the State of the Union Clause. Originally, presidents personally delivered annual addresses to Congress. Thomas Jefferson, who felt that the procedure resembled the speech from the throne delivered by British monarchs, chose instead to send written messages to Congress for reading by clerks. Jefferson&#x27;s procedure was followed by future presidents until Woodrow Wilson reverted to the former procedure of personally addressing Congress, which has continued .

Kesavan and Sidak explain the purpose of the State of the Union clause:

===Clause 2: Making recommendations to Congress===
The president has the power and duty to recommend, for the consideration of Congress, such measures which the president deems as &quot;necessary and expedient&quot;. At his inauguration George Washington declared in his : &quot;By the article establishing the executive department it is made the duty of the president &#x27;to recommend to your consideration such measures as he shall judge necessary and expedient. This is the Recommendation Clause.

Kesavan and Sidak explain the purpose of the Recommendation Clause:

Sidak explained that there is a connection between the Recommendation Clause and the Petition Clause of the 1st Amendment: &quot;Through his performance of the duty to recommend measures to Congress, the president functions as the agent of a diffuse electorate who seek the redress of grievances. To muzzle the president, therefore, is to diminish the effectiveness of this right expressly reserved to the people under the first amendment.&quot; Kesavan and Sidak also cited a Professor Bybee who stated in this context: &quot;The Recommendation Clause empowers the president to represent the people before Congress, by recommending measures for the reform of government, for the general welfare, or for the redress of grievances. The Right of Petition Clause prevents Congress from abridging the right of the people to petition for a redress of grievances.&quot;

The Recommendation clause imposes a duty, but its performance rests solely with the president. Congress possesses no power to compel the president to recommend, as he alone is the &quot;judge&quot; of what is &quot;necessary and expedient&quot;. Unlike the Necessary and Proper Clause of Article I, which limits Congress&#x27;s discretion to carrying out only its delegated powers, the phrase &quot;necessary and expedient&quot; implies a wider range of discretion for the president. Because this is a political question, there has been little judicial involvement with the president&#x27;s actions under the clause as long as presidents have not tried to extend their legislative powers. In &quot;Youngstown Sheet &amp; Tube Co. v. Sawyer&quot; (1952), the Supreme Court noted that the Recommendations Clause serves as a reminder that the president cannot make law by himself: &quot;The power to recommend legislation, granted to the president, serves only to emphasize that it is his function to recommend and that it is the function of the Congress to legislate.&quot; The Court made a similar point in striking down the line-item veto in &quot;Clinton v. City of New York&quot; (1998). When President Bill Clinton attempted to shield the records of the President&#x27;s Task Force on Health Care Reform as essential to his functions under the Recommendations Clause, a federal circuit court rejected the argument and noted in &quot;Association of American Physicians &amp; Surgeons v. Clinton&quot; (1993): &quot;[T]he Recommendation Clause is less an obligation than a right. The president has the undisputed authority to recommend legislation, but he need not exercise that authority with respect to any particular subject or, for that matter, any subject.&quot;

===Clause 3: Extraordinary sessions and prorogation of Congress===

To allow the government to act quickly in case of a major domestic or international crisis arising when Congress is not in session, the president is empowered to call a special session of one or both houses of Congress. Since John Adams first did so in 1797, the president has called the full Congress to convene for a special session on 27 occasions. Harry Truman was the most recent to do so in July 1948 (the so called &quot;Turnip Day Session&quot;). Additionally, prior to ratification of the Twentieth Amendment (which brought forward the date on which Congress convenes from March to January) in 1933, newly inaugurated presidents would routinely call the Senate to meet to confirm nominations or ratify treaties. Clause 3 also authorizes the president to prorogue Congress if the House and Senate cannot agree on the time of adjournment; no president has ever had to exercise this administrative power. In 2020, President Donald Trump threatened to use this clause as a justification to prorogue both houses of Congress in order to make recess appointments during the COVID-19 pandemic; however, the President does not have the authority to do so unless either the Senate or the House of Representatives were to alter their scheduled adjournment dates.

===Clause 4: Receiving foreign representatives===
The president receives all foreign ambassadors. This clause of the Constitution, known as the Reception Clause, has been interpreted to imply that the president possesses broad power over matters of foreign policy, and to provide support for the president&#x27;s exclusive authority to grant recognition to a foreign government.

===Clause 5: Caring for the faithful execution of the law===
The president must &quot;take care that the laws be faithfully executed&quot;. This clause in the Constitution imposes a duty on the president to enforce the laws of the United States and is called the Take Care Clause, also known as the Faithful Execution Clause or Faithfully Executed Clause. This clause is meant to ensure that a law is faithfully executed by the president even if he disagrees with the purpose of that law. Addressing the North Carolina ratifying convention, William Maclaine declared that the Faithful Execution Clause was &quot;one of the [Constitution&#x27;s] best provisions&quot;. If the president &quot;takes care to see the laws faithfully executed, it will be more than is done in any government on the continent; for I will venture to say that our government, and those of the other states, are, with respect to the execution of the laws, in many respects mere ciphers.&quot; President George Washington interpreted this clause as imposing on him a unique duty to ensure the execution of federal law. Discussing a tax rebellion, Washington observed, &quot;it is my duty to see the Laws executed: to permit them to be trampled upon with impunity would be repugnant to [that duty].&quot;

According to former United States Assistant Attorney General Walter E. Dellinger III, the Supreme Court and the Attorneys General have long interpreted the Take Care Clause to mean that the president has no inherent constitutional authority to suspend the enforcement of the laws, particularly of statutes. The Take Care Clause demands that the president obey the law, the Supreme Court said in &quot;Humphrey&#x27;s Executor v. United States&quot;, and repudiates any notion that he may dispense with the law&#x27;s execution. In &quot;Printz v. United States&quot;, the Supreme Court explained how the president executes the law: &quot;The Constitution does not leave to speculation who is to administer the laws enacted by Congress; the president, it says, &#x27;shall take Care that the Laws be faithfully executed,&#x27; Art. II, §3, personally and through officers whom he appoints (save for such inferior officers as Congress may authorize to be appointed by the &#x27;Courts of Law&#x27; or by &#x27;the Heads of Departments&#x27; with other presidential appointees), Art. II, §2.&quot;

The president may not prevent a member of the executive branch from performing a ministerial duty lawfully imposed upon him by Congress. (See &quot;Marbury v. Madison&quot; (1803); and &quot;Kendall v. United States ex rel. Stokes&quot; (1838).) Nor may the president take an action not authorized either by the Constitution or by a lawful statute. (See &quot;Youngstown Sheet &amp; Tube Co. v. Sawyer&quot; (1952).) Finally, the president may not refuse to enforce a constitutional law, or &quot;cancel&quot; certain appropriations, for that would amount to an extra-constitutional veto or suspension power.

Some presidents have claimed the authority under this clause to impound money appropriated by Congress. President Jefferson, for example, delayed the expenditure of money appropriated for the purchase of gunboats for over a year. President Franklin D. Roosevelt and his successors sometimes refused outright to expend appropriated money. The Supreme Court, however, has held that impoundments without Congressional authorization are unconstitutional.

It has been asserted that the president&#x27;s responsibility in the &quot;faithful&quot; execution of the laws entitles him to suspend the privilege of the writ of &quot;habeas corpus&quot;. Article One provides that the privilege may not be suspended save during times of rebellion or invasion, but it does not specify who may suspend the privilege. The Supreme Court ruled that Congress may suspend the privilege if it deems it necessary. During the American Civil War, President Abraham Lincoln suspended the privilege, but, owing to the vehement opposition he faced, obtained congressional authorization for the same. Since then, the privilege of the writ has only been suspended upon the express authorization of Congress, except in the case of Mary Surratt, whose writ was suspended by President Andrew Johnson regarding her alleged involvement in the assassination of President Lincoln.

In &quot;Mississippi v. Johnson&quot;, , the Supreme Court ruled that the judiciary may not restrain the president in the execution of the laws. In that case the Supreme Court refused to entertain a request for an injunction preventing President Andrew Johnson from executing the Reconstruction Acts, which were claimed to be unconstitutional. The Court found that &quot;[t]he Congress is the legislative department of the government; the president is the executive department. Neither can be restrained in its action by the judicial department; though the acts of both, when performed, are, in proper cases, subject to its cognizance.&quot; Thus, the courts cannot bar the passage of a law by Congress, though it may later strike down such a law as unconstitutional. A similar construction applies to the executive branch.

===Clause 6: Officers&#x27; commissions===
The president commissions &quot;all the Officers of the United States&quot;. These include officers in both military and foreign service. (Under Article I, Section 8, the States have authority for &quot;the Appointment of the Officers ... of the [State] Militia ...&quot;)

The presidential authority to commission officers had a large impact on the 1803 case &quot;Marbury v. Madison&quot;, where outgoing Federalist President John Adams feverishly signed many commissions to the judiciary on his final day in office, hoping to, as incoming Democratic-Republican President Thomas Jefferson put it, &quot;[retire] into the judiciary as a stronghold&quot;. However, in his haste, Adams&#x27; secretary of State neglected to have all the commissions delivered. Incoming President Jefferson was enraged with Adams, and ordered his secretary of State, James Madison, to refrain from delivering the remaining commissions. William Marbury took the matter to the Supreme Court, where it held that the commissions were valid, and the courts generally had the power to order them delivered and should have done so (a ruling that established the principle of judicial review in the United States), but refused to issue the orders itself on the grounds that the law giving it original jurisdiction over such cases was unconstitutional.

==Section 4: Removal of convicted criminals from office==


The Constitution also allows for involuntary removal from office of the president, vice president, Cabinet secretaries, and other executive officers, as well as judges, who may be impeached by the House of Representatives and tried in the Senate.

Any official convicted by the Senate is immediately removed from office, and to prevent the President&#x27;s Article II appointment power from being used as a de facto pardon the Senate may also vote by a simple majority that the removed official be forever disqualified from holding any future office under the United States. Constitutional law expert Senator Matthew Carpenter reported that without the permanent disqualification clause impeachment would have no effect, because the President could simply reinstate his impeached officers &quot;the next morning&quot;.

While no other punishments may be inflicted pursuant to the impeachment proceeding, the convicted party remains liable to trial and punishment in the courts for civil and criminal charges.

==See also==
* Unitary executive theory

==References==
==External links==

* Kilman, Johnny and George Costello (Eds). (2000). &quot;The Constitution of the United States of America: Analysis and Interpretation.&quot;
* CRS Annotated Constitution: Article 2
* Mount, Steve. (2003). &quot;Presidential Pardons.&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q48423" start="0" end="11" title="Article Two of the United States Constitution" label="Article Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="19" end="45" title="Constitution of the United States" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="62" end="78" title="Executive (government)" label="executive branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="86" end="104" title="Federal government of the United States" label="federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="224" end="254" title="President of the United States" label="President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923476" start="546" end="560" title="Vesting Clauses" label="Vesting Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q48416" start="687" end="698" title="Article One of the United States Constitution" label="Article One"/>
<link wikidata="Q48429" start="703" end="716" title="Article Three of the United States Constitution" label="Article Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="734" end="754" title="separation of powers" label="separation of powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="826" end="843" title="United States Electoral College" label="Electoral College"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="1146" end="1154" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="1232" end="1256" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q28404720" start="1267" end="1286" title="contingent election" label="contingent election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502117" start="1548" end="1562" title="Oath of office of the president of the United States" label="oath of office"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="1675" end="1693" title="Commander-in-chief" label="Commander-in-Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q34736359" start="1763" end="1770" title="Federal pardons in the United States" label="pardons"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="1923" end="1940" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q639738" start="2012" end="2019" title="Cabinet of the United States" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836935" start="2078" end="2091" title="Treaty Clause" label="Treaty Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="2185" end="2191" title="United States Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781647" start="2197" end="2216" title="Appointments Clause" label="Appointments Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686796" start="2302" end="2320" title="advice and consent" label="advice and consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634484" start="2401" end="2410" title="List of positions filled by presidential appointment with Senate confirmation" label="confirmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901949" start="2740" end="2758" title="recess appointment" label="recess appointment"/>
<link wikidata="Q554211" start="3189" end="3207" title="State of the Union" label="State of the Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q115705182" start="3698" end="3709" title="Federal impeachment in the United States" label="Impeachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="3734" end="3741" title="Treason" label="Treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q187436" start="3743" end="3750" title="Bribery" label="Bribery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757523" start="3761" end="3789" title="High crimes and misdemeanors" label="high Crimes and Misdemeanors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923476" start="3920" end="3934" title="Vesting Clauses" label="vesting clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="3956" end="3965" title="Executive (government)" label="executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q48416" start="4021" end="4030" title="Article One of the United States Constitution" label="Article I"/>
<link wikidata="Q48429" start="4035" end="4046" title="Article Three of the United States Constitution" label="Article III"/>
<link wikidata="Q49371" start="4075" end="4086" title="Legislation" label="legislative"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="4140" end="4148" title="Judiciary" label="judicial"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="4268" end="4288" title="separation of powers" label="separation of powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="4321" end="4339" title="Federal government of the United States" label="federal government"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4379" end="4398" title="Separation of powers under the United States Constitution#Checks and balances" label="checks and balances"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4471" end="4485" title="Article One of the United States Constitution#Section 8: Powers of Congress" label="certain powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="7068" end="7076" title="United States Electoral College" label="electors"/>
<link wikidata="Q795980" start="8412" end="8429" title="faithless elector" label="faithless elector"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="8637" end="8671" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q85751865" start="8681" end="8703" title="Chiafalo v. Washington" label="Chiafalo v. Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q215810" start="8833" end="8847" title="Twenty-third Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="23rd Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="8853" end="8873" title="Washington D.C." label="District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q205759" start="9496" end="9515" title="First-past-the-post voting" label="first past the post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491219" start="9608" end="9621" title="instant-runoff voting" label="ranked choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q19035854" start="9633" end="9653" title="McPherson v. Blacker" label="McPherson v. Blacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001458" start="10004" end="10046" title="Bush v. Palm Beach County Canvassing Board" label="Bush v. Palm Beach County Canvassing Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001105" start="10095" end="10119" title="Supreme Court of Florida" label="Supreme Court of Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995130" start="10196" end="10216" title="Florida Constitution" label="Florida Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021129" start="10310" end="10328" title="Williams v. Rhodes" label="Williams v. Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137223" start="10387" end="10410" title="Equal Protection Clause" label="Equal Protection Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000491" start="10672" end="10698" title="Burroughs v. United States" label="Burroughs v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q172099" start="10795" end="10809" title="Twelfth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="12th Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12149" end="12170" title="1800 United States presidential election#1801 contingent election" label="deadlock in the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q11704" start="12911" end="12923" title="Election Day (United States)" label="Election Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="13285" end="13308" title="President of the United States Senate" label="President of the Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269549" start="13344" end="13357" title="Joint session of the United States Congress" label="joint session"/>
<link wikidata="Q263233" start="13565" end="13578" title="United States presidential inauguration" label="taking office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969985" start="13607" end="13627" title="Natural-born-citizen clause (United States)" label="natural-born citizen"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13954" end="13984" title="Article One of the United States Constitution#Clause 7: Judgment in cases of impeachment; Punishment on conviction" label="Article I, Section 3, Clause 7"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14119" end="14150" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution#Participants in rebellion" label="Section 3 of the 14th Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q214679" start="14385" end="14399" title="Twenty-second Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="22nd Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q217797" start="14715" end="14729" title="Twenty-fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="25th Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11869" start="14834" end="14856" title="William Henry Harrison" label="William Henry Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q11881" start="15051" end="15061" title="John Tyler" label="John Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050554" start="15720" end="15738" title="United States presidential line of succession" label="line of succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009909" start="15778" end="15805" title="Presidential Succession Act" label="Presidential Succession Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q24965407" start="16180" end="16208" title="officer of the United States" label="officer of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="16291" end="16304" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q217797" start="16405" end="16419" title="Twenty-fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="25th Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="17602" end="17619" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q11147" start="18073" end="18107" title="Chief Justice of the United States" label="chief justice of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="18296" end="18310" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q220596" start="18517" end="18550" title="habeas corpus" label="writ of &amp;quot;habeas corpus&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="18562" end="18577" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="18702" end="18710" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q359470" start="18733" end="18747" title="Roger B. Taney" label="Roger B. Taney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419197" start="18758" end="18775" title="Ex parte Merryman" label="Ex parte Merryman"/>
<link wikidata="Q8612" start="18862" end="18876" title="Andrew Johnson" label="Andrew Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149795" start="18926" end="18943" title="Impeachment of Andrew Johnson" label="impeachment trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351482" start="19041" end="19082" title="Oath of office of the vice president of the United States" label="vice president also has an oath of office"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19110" end="19150" title="Article Six of the United States Constitution#Oaths" label="Oath or Affirmation Clause of Article VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q24965407" start="19184" end="19217" title="Officer of the United States" label="Officers ... of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q162932" start="19325" end="19351" title="1st United States Congress" label="1st United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4750277" start="19363" end="19386" title="An act to regulate the time and manner of administering certain oaths" label="Oath Administration Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042008" start="19800" end="19840" title="Nixon v. General Services Administration" label="Nixon v. General Services Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q11144" start="19855" end="19862" title="Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States" label="Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q311562" start="19863" end="19880" title="William Rehnquist" label="William Rehnquist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11147" start="19897" end="19910" title="Chief Justice of the United States" label="chief justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q216227" start="20460" end="20478" title="state of emergency" label="state of emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="20646" end="20658" title="The Atlantic" label="The Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q216227" start="20745" end="20761" title="emergency powers" label="emergency powers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21118" end="21127" title="Federal government of the United States#Executive branch" label="executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="21361" end="21373" title="The Atlantic" label="The Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q505450" start="21540" end="21557" title="Robert H. Jackson" label="Robert H. Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q24307" start="21582" end="21608" title="Korematsu v. United States" label="Korematsu v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q936604" start="21652" end="21684" title="internment of Japanese Americans" label="internment of Japanese Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="21971" end="21986" title="executive power" label="executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q258307" start="22080" end="22097" title="national security" label="national security"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="22261" end="22279" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q48416" start="22290" end="22301" title="Article One of the United States Constitution" label="Article One"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968520" start="22309" end="22326" title="War Powers Clause" label="War Powers Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q334516" start="22389" end="22400" title="declare war" label="declare war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608419" start="22520" end="22532" title="Thomas Woods" label="Thomas Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="22555" end="22565" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="22886" end="22904" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q645883" start="23464" end="23483" title="Military operation" label="military operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="23516" end="23530" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309962" start="23537" end="23550" title="police action" label="police action"/>
<link wikidata="Q240352" start="23655" end="23680" title="Gulf of Tonkin Resolution" label="Gulf of Tonkin Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6067763" start="23689" end="23741" title="Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq Resolution of 2002" label="Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190392" start="23762" end="23788" title="United Nations resolution" label="United Nations resolutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q639738" start="24009" end="24016" title="United States Cabinet" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q297308" start="24456" end="24473" title="William H. Seward" label="William H. Seward"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="24549" end="24564" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="24591" end="24605" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="24878" end="24891" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34736359" start="25011" end="25017" title="Federal pardons in the United States" label="Pardon"/>
<link wikidata="Q115705182" start="25085" end="25096" title="Federal impeachment in the United States" label="impeachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893523" start="25425" end="25448" title="United States v. Wilson" label="United States v. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998296" start="25523" end="25547" title="Burdick v. United States" label="Burdick v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16176775" start="25909" end="25921" title="Commutation (law)" label="Commutations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4904063" start="26066" end="26084" title="Biddle v. Perovich" label="Biddle v. Perovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686796" start="26658" end="26676" title="advice and consent" label="advice and consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2788282" start="26991" end="27016" title="Treaty of Alliance (1778)" label="Treaty of Alliance (1778)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12312" start="27046" end="27061" title="Franklin Pierce" label="Franklin Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="27087" end="27094" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="27614" end="27626" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="27656" end="27673" title="Republic of China" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006696" start="27957" end="27971" title="United States federal judge" label="federal judges"/>
<link wikidata="Q15726790" start="27973" end="27989" title="U.S. ambassadors" label="U.S. ambassadors"/>
<link wikidata="Q468512" start="27991" end="27998" title="consul of the United States" label="consuls"/>
<link wikidata="Q24965407" start="28021" end="28050" title="officers of the United States" label="officers of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302769" start="28307" end="28328" title="motions to reconsider" label="motions to reconsider"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067871" start="28451" end="28475" title="Federal Power Commission" label="Federal Power Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3724781" start="28621" end="28633" title="quo warranto" label="quo warranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q60918" start="28920" end="28930" title="commission (document)" label="commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q538242" start="29122" end="29140" title="Marbury v. Madison" label="Marbury v. Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="29318" end="29336" title="Reconstruction era" label="Reconstruction era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589777" start="29358" end="29378" title="Tenure of Office Act (1867)" label="Tenure of Office Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q8612" start="29533" end="29547" title="Andrew Johnson" label="Andrew Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982364" start="29675" end="29697" title="Myers v. United States" label="Myers v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q20820583" start="29821" end="29839" title="Postmaster General" label="Postmaster General"/>
<link wikidata="Q5941246" start="29855" end="29896" title="Humphrey&amp;#x27;s Executor v. United States" label="Humphrey&amp;#x27;s Executor v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q786713" start="30005" end="30029" title="Federal Trade Commission" label="Federal Trade Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302375" start="30582" end="30588" title="Recess (motion)" label="recess"/>
<link wikidata="Q554211" start="30971" end="30989" title="State of the Union Address" label="State of the Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="31147" end="31163" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q787020" start="31207" end="31229" title="speech from the throne" label="speech from the throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="31402" end="31416" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454184" start="31801" end="31817" title="First inauguration of George Washington" label="his inauguration"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="31818" end="31835" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q12616" start="32238" end="32253" title="Petition Clause" label="Petition Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q6985427" start="33275" end="33302" title="Necessary and Proper Clause" label="Necessary and Proper Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058665" start="33716" end="33757" title="Youngstown Sheet &amp;amp; Tube Co. v. Sawyer" label="Youngstown Sheet &amp;amp; Tube Co. v. Sawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553022" start="34142" end="34156" title="line-item veto" label="line-item veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134289" start="34166" end="34193" title="Clinton v. City of New York" label="Clinton v. City of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="34223" end="34235" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574869" start="35025" end="35040" title="special session" label="special session"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="35082" end="35092" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="35208" end="35220" title="Harry Truman" label="Harry Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856057" start="35284" end="35302" title="Turnip Day Session" label="Turnip Day Session"/>
<link wikidata="Q211104" start="35354" end="35373" title="Twentieth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twentieth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q263233" start="35471" end="35482" title="United States presidential inauguration" label="inaugurated"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35619" end="35627" title="Prorogation#United States" label="prorogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="35786" end="35798" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q83873577" start="35932" end="35949" title="COVID-19 pandemic in the United States" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058726" start="36460" end="36471" title="diplomatic recognition" label="recognition"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37002" end="37037" title="United States Constitution#Ratification 2" label="North Carolina ratifying convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q377542" start="37601" end="37616" title="Whiskey Rebellion" label="a tax rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889542" start="37796" end="37836" title="United States Assistant Attorney General" label="United States Assistant Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544051" start="37837" end="37860" title="Walter E. Dellinger III" label="Walter E. Dellinger III"/>
<link wikidata="Q5941246" start="38177" end="38218" title="Humphrey&amp;#x27;s Executor v. United States" label="Humphrey&amp;#x27;s Executor v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245333" start="38313" end="38336" title="Printz v. United States" label="Printz v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q538242" start="39020" end="39038" title="Marbury v. Madison" label="Marbury v. Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058665" start="39232" end="39273" title="Youngstown Sheet &amp;amp; Tube Co. v. Sawyer" label="Youngstown Sheet &amp;amp; Tube Co. v. Sawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="39722" end="39743" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q220596" start="40091" end="40124" title="habeas corpus" label="writ of &amp;quot;habeas corpus&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="40387" end="40405" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="40417" end="40432" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q459991" start="40685" end="40697" title="Mary Surratt" label="Mary Surratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879389" start="40839" end="40861" title="Mississippi v. Johnson" label="Mississippi v. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302779" start="41110" end="41129" title="Reconstruction Acts" label="Reconstruction Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857899" start="41952" end="41959" title="Militia (United States)" label="Militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q538242" start="42064" end="42082" title="Marbury v. Madison" label="Marbury v. Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="42126" end="42136" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="42272" end="42288" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="42526" end="42544" title="United States Secretary of State" label="secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="42546" end="42559" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020095" start="42615" end="42630" title="William Marbury" label="William Marbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303028" start="42847" end="42883" title="judicial review in the United States" label="judicial review in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q21028311" start="43183" end="43202" title="White House Cabinet Secretary" label="Cabinet secretaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q115705182" start="43264" end="43273" title="Federal impeachment in the United States" label="impeached"/>
<link wikidata="Q24965407" start="43627" end="43657" title="Officer of the United States" label="office under the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q961204" start="43693" end="43710" title="Matthew H. Carpenter" label="Matthew Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887245" start="44109" end="44133" title="Unitary executive theory" label="Unitary executive theory"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31648" wikidata="Q48429" url="?curid=31648" title="Article Three of the United States Constitution">
<text>Article Three of the United States Constitution establishes the judicial branch of the U.S. federal government. Under Article Three, the judicial branch consists of the Supreme Court of the United States, as well as lower courts created by Congress. Article Three empowers the courts to handle cases or controversies arising under federal law, as well as other enumerated areas. Article Three also defines treason.

Section 1 of Article Three vests the judicial power of the United States in &quot;one supreme Court&quot;, as well as &quot;inferior courts&quot; established by Congress. Section 1 authorizes the creation of inferior courts, but does not require it; the first inferior federal courts were established shortly after the ratification of the Constitution with the Judiciary Act of 1789. Section 1 also establishes that federal judges do not face term limits, and that an individual judge&#x27;s salary may not be decreased. Article Three does not set the size of the Supreme Court or establish specific positions on the court, but Article One establishes the position of chief justice. Along with the Vesting Clauses of Article One and Article Two, Article Three&#x27;s Vesting Clause establishes the separation of powers among the three branches of government. 

Section 2 of Article Three delineates federal judicial power. The Case or Controversy Clause restricts the judiciary&#x27;s power to actual cases and controversies, meaning that federal judicial power does not extend to cases which are hypothetical, or which are proscribed due to standing, mootness, or ripeness issues. Section 2 states that the federal judiciary&#x27;s power extends to cases arising under the Constitution, federal laws, federal treaties, controversies involving multiple states or foreign powers, and other enumerated areas. Section 2 gives the Supreme Court original jurisdiction when ambassadors, public officials, or the states are a party in the case, leaving the Supreme Court with appellate jurisdiction in all other areas to which the federal judiciary&#x27;s jurisdiction extends. Section 2 also gives Congress the power to strip the Supreme Court of appellate jurisdiction, and establishes that all federal crimes must be tried before a jury. Section 2 does not expressly grant the federal judiciary the power of judicial review, but the courts have exercised this power since the 1803 case of &quot;Marbury v. Madison&quot;.

Section 3 of Article Three defines treason and empowers Congress to punish treason. Section 3 requires that at least two witnesses testify to the treasonous act, or that the individual accused of treason confess in open court. It also limits the ways in which Congress can punish those convicted of treason.

==Background==

Unlike the Articles of Confederation, the US Constitution separated the legislative, executive and judicial powers. Article III separates and places the judicial power in the judiciary. This idea is most often attributed to Montesquieu. Although not the progenitor, Montesquieu&#x27;s writing on the separation of power in &quot;The Spirit of Laws&quot; was immensely influential on the U.S. Constitution.

== Section 1: Federal courts ==

Section 1 is one of the three vesting clauses of the United States Constitution, which vests the judicial power of the United States in federal courts, requires the supreme court, allows inferior courts, requires good behavior tenure for judges, and prohibits decreasing the salaries of judges.

The Committee of Detail report reads slightly differently: 

=== Clause 1: Vesting of judicial power and number of courts ===
Article III authorizes one Supreme Court, but does not set the number of justices that must be appointed to it. Article One, Section 3, Clause 6 refers to a &quot;Chief Justice&quot; (who shall preside over the impeachment trial of the President of the United States). Since the Judiciary Act of 1869 was enacted, the number of justices has been fixed at nine: one chief justice, and eight associate justices.

Proposals have been made at various times for organizing the Supreme Court into separate panels; none garnered wide support, thus the constitutionality of such a division is unknown. In a 1937 letter (to Senator Burton Wheeler during the Judicial Procedures Reform Bill debate), Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes wrote, &quot;the Constitution does not appear to authorize two or more Supreme Courts functioning in effect as separate courts.&quot;

The Supreme Court is the only federal court that is explicitly established by the Constitution. During the Constitutional Convention, a proposal was made for the Supreme Court to be the only federal court, having both original jurisdiction and appellate jurisdiction. This proposal was rejected in favor of the provision that exists today. The Supreme Court has interpreted this provision as enabling Congress to create inferior (i.e., lower) courts under both Article III, Section 1, and Article I, Section 8. The Article III courts, which are also known as &quot;constitutional courts&quot;, were first created by the Judiciary Act of 1789, and are the only courts with judicial power. Article I courts, which are also known as &quot;legislative courts&quot;, consist of regulatory agencies, such as the United States Tax Court.

In certain types of cases, Article III courts may exercise appellate jurisdiction over Article I courts. In &quot;Murray&#x27;s Lessee v. Hoboken Land &amp; Improvement Co.&quot; (), the Court held that &quot;there are legal matters, involving public rights, which may be presented in such form that the judicial power is capable of acting on them,&quot; and which are susceptible to review by an Article III court. Later, in &quot;Ex parte Bakelite Corp.&quot; (), the Court declared that Article I courts &quot;may be created as special tribunals to examine and determine various matters, arising between the government and others, which from their nature do not require judicial determination and yet are susceptible of it.&quot; Other cases, such as bankruptcy cases, have been held not to involve judicial determination, and may therefore go before Article I courts. Similarly, several courts in the District of Columbia, which is under the exclusive jurisdiction of the Congress, are Article I courts rather than Article III courts. This article was expressly extended to the United States District Court for the District of Puerto Rico by the U.S. Congress through Federal Law 89-571, 80 Stat. 764, signed by President Lyndon B. Johnson in 1966. This transformed the article IV United States territorial court in Puerto Rico, created in 1900, to an Article III federal judicial district court.

The Judicial Procedures Reform Bill of 1937, frequently called the court-packing plan, was a legislative initiative to add more justices to the Supreme Court proposed by President Franklin D. Roosevelt shortly after his victory in the 1936 presidential election. Although the bill aimed generally to overhaul and modernize the entire federal court system, its central and most controversial provision would have granted the President power to appoint an additional justice to the Supreme Court for every incumbent justice over the age of 70, up to a maximum of six.

The Constitution is silent when it comes to judges of courts which have been abolished. The Judiciary Act of 1801 increased the number of courts to permit Federalist President John Adams to appoint a number of Federalist judges before Thomas Jefferson took office. When Jefferson became president, the Congress abolished several of these courts and made no provision for the judges of those courts. The Judicial Code of 1911 abolished circuit riding and transferred the circuit courts authority and jurisdiction to the district courts.

=== Clause 2: Tenure ===
The Constitution provides that judges &quot;shall hold their Offices during good Behaviour.&quot; The term &quot;good behaviour&quot; is interpreted to mean that judges may serve for the remainder of their lives, although they may resign or retire voluntarily. A judge may also be removed by impeachment and conviction by congressional vote (hence the term good behavior); this has occurred fourteen times. Three other judges, Mark W. Delahay, George W. English, and Samuel B. Kent, chose to resign rather than go through the impeachment process.

=== Clause 3: Salaries ===
The compensation of judges may be increased, but not decreased, during their continuance in office.

== Section 2: Judicial power, jurisdiction, and trial by jury ==

Section 2 delineates federal judicial power, and brings that power into execution by conferring original jurisdiction and also appellate jurisdiction upon the Supreme Court. Additionally, this section requires trial by jury in all criminal cases, except impeachment cases.

=== Clause 1: Cases and controversies ===

Clause 1 of Section 2 authorizes the federal courts to hear actual cases and controversies only. Their judicial power does not extend to cases which are hypothetical, or which are proscribed due to standing, mootness, or ripeness issues. Generally, a case or controversy requires the presence of adverse parties who have a genuine interest at stake in the case. In &quot;Muskrat v. United States&quot;, , the Supreme Court denied jurisdiction to cases brought under a statute permitting certain Native Americans to bring suit against the United States to determine the constitutionality of a law allocating tribal lands. Counsel for both sides were to be paid from the federal Treasury. The Supreme Court held that, though the United States was a defendant, the case in question was not an actual controversy; rather, the statute was merely devised to test the constitutionality of a certain type of legislation. Thus the Court&#x27;s ruling would be nothing more than an advisory opinion; therefore, the court dismissed the suit for failing to present a &quot;case or controversy.&quot;

A significant omission is that although Clause 1 provides that federal judicial power shall extend to &quot;the laws of the United States,&quot; it does not also provide that it shall extend to the laws of the &quot;several&quot; or individual states. In turn, the Judiciary Act of 1789 and subsequent acts never granted the U.S. Supreme Court the power to review decisions of state supreme courts on pure issues of state law. It is this silence which tacitly made state supreme courts the final expositors of the common law in their respective states. They were free to diverge from English precedents and from each other on the vast majority of legal issues which had never been made part of federal law by the Constitution, and the U.S. Supreme Court could do nothing, as it would ultimately concede in &quot;Erie Railroad Co. v. Tompkins&quot; (1938). By way of contrast, other English-speaking federations like Australia and Canada never adopted the &quot;Erie&quot; doctrine. That is, their highest courts have always possessed plenary power to impose a uniform nationwide common law upon all lower courts and never adopted the strong American distinction between federal and state common law.

=== Eleventh Amendment and state sovereign immunity ===

In &quot;Chisholm v. Georgia&quot;, , the Supreme Court ruled that Article III, Section 2 abrogated the States&#x27; sovereign immunity and authorized federal courts to hear disputes between private citizens and States. This decision was overturned by the Eleventh Amendment, which was passed by the Congress on March 4, 1794, and ratified by the states on February 7, 1795. It prohibits the federal courts from hearing &quot;any suit in law or equity, commenced or prosecuted against one of the United States by Citizens of another State, or by Citizens or Subjects of any Foreign State&quot;.

=== Clause 2: Original and appellate jurisdiction ===
Clause 2 of Section 2 provides that the Supreme Court has original jurisdiction in cases affecting ambassadors, ministers and consuls, and also in those controversies which are subject to federal judicial power because at least one state is a party; the Court has held that the latter requirement is met if the United States has a controversy with a state. In other cases, the Supreme Court has only appellate jurisdiction, which may be regulated by the Congress. The Congress may not, however, amend the Court&#x27;s original jurisdiction, as was found in &quot;Marbury v. Madison&quot;, (the same decision which established the principle of judicial review). &quot;Marbury&quot; held that Congress can neither expand nor restrict the original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court. However, the appellate jurisdiction of the Court is different. The Court&#x27;s appellate jurisdiction is given &quot;with such exceptions, and under such regulations as the Congress shall make.&quot;

Often a court will assert a modest degree of power over a case for the threshold purpose of determining whether it has jurisdiction, and so the word &quot;power&quot; is not necessarily synonymous with the word &quot;jurisdiction&quot;.

=== Judicial review ===
The power of the federal judiciary to review the constitutionality of a statute or treaty, or to review an administrative regulation for consistency with either a statute, a treaty, or the Constitution itself, is an implied power derived in part from Clause 2 of Section 2.

Though the Constitution does not expressly provide that the federal judiciary has the power of judicial review, many of the Constitution&#x27;s Framers viewed such a power as an appropriate power for the federal judiciary to possess. In &quot;Federalist No. 78&quot;, Alexander Hamilton wrote,

Hamilton goes on to counterbalance the tone of &quot;judicial supremacists,&quot; those demanding that both Congress and the Executive are compelled by the Constitution to enforce all court decisions, including those that, in their eyes, or those of the People, violate fundamental American principles:

&quot;Marbury v. Madison&quot; involved a highly partisan set of circumstances. Though Congressional elections were held in November 1800, the newly elected officers did not take power until March. The Federalist Party had lost the elections. In the words of President Thomas Jefferson, the Federalists &quot;retired into the judiciary as a stronghold&quot;. In the four months following the elections, the outgoing Congress created several new judgeships, which were filled by President John Adams. In the last-minute rush, however, Federalist Secretary of State John Marshall had neglected to deliver 17 of the commissions to their respective appointees. When James Madison took office as Secretary of State, several commissions remained undelivered. Bringing their claims under the Judiciary Act of 1789, the appointees, including William Marbury, petitioned the Supreme Court for the issue of a writ of mandamus, which in English law had been used to force public officials to fulfill their ministerial duties. Here, Madison would be required to deliver the commissions.
&quot;Marbury&quot; posed a difficult problem for the court, which was then led by Chief Justice John Marshall, the same person who had neglected to deliver the commissions when he was the Secretary of State. If Marshall&#x27;s court commanded James Madison to deliver the commissions, Madison might ignore the order, thereby indicating the weakness of the court. Similarly, if the court denied William Marbury&#x27;s request, the court would be seen as weak. Marshall held that appointee Marbury was indeed entitled to his commission. However, Justice Marshall contended that the Judiciary Act of 1789 was unconstitutional, since it purported to grant original jurisdiction to the Supreme Court in cases not involving the States or ambassadors. The ruling thereby established that the federal courts could exercise judicial review over the actions of Congress or the executive branch.

However, Alexander Hamilton, in &quot;Federalist No. 78&quot;, expressed the view that the Courts hold only the power of words, and not the power of compulsion upon those other two branches of government, upon which the Supreme Court is itself dependent. Then in 1820, Thomas Jefferson expressed his deep reservations about the doctrine of judicial review:

=== Clause 3: Federal trials ===

Clause 3 of Section 2 provides that Federal crimes, except impeachment cases, must be tried before a jury, unless the defendant waives their right. Also, the trial must be held in the state where the crime was committed. If the crime was not committed in any particular state, then the trial is held in such a place as set forth by the Congress. The United States Senate has the sole power to try impeachment cases.

Two of the Constitutional Amendments that comprise the Bill of Rights contain related provisions. The Sixth Amendment enumerates the rights of individuals when facing criminal prosecution and the Seventh Amendment establishes an individual&#x27;s right to a jury trial in certain civil cases. It also inhibits courts from overturning a jury&#x27;s findings of fact. The Supreme Court has extended the right to a jury in the Sixth Amendment to individuals facing trial in state courts through the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, but has refused to do so with the Seventh.

== Section 3: Treason==


Section 3 defines treason and limits its punishment.
The Constitution defines treason as specific acts, namely &quot;levying War against [the United States], or in adhering to their Enemies, giving them Aid and Comfort.&quot; A contrast is therefore maintained with the English law, whereby crimes including conspiring to kill the King or &quot;violating&quot; the Queen, were punishable as treason. In &quot;Ex Parte Bollman&quot;, , the Supreme Court ruled that &quot;there must be an actual assembling of men, for the treasonable purpose, to constitute a levying of war.&quot;

Under English law effective during the ratification of the U.S. Constitution, there were several species of treason. Of these, the Constitution adopted only two: levying war and adhering to enemies. Omitted were species of treason involving encompassing (or imagining) the death of the king, certain types of counterfeiting, and finally fornication with women in the royal family of the sort which could call into question the parentage of royal successors. James Wilson wrote the original draft of this section, and he was involved as a defense attorney for some accused of treason against the Patriot cause. The two forms of treason adopted were both derived from the English Treason Act 1351. Joseph Story wrote in his &quot;Commentaries on the Constitution of the United States&quot; of the authors of the Constitution that:
In &quot;Federalist&quot; No. 43 James Madison wrote regarding the Treason Clause:

Based on the above quotation, it was noted by the lawyer William J. Olson in an &quot;amicus curiae&quot; in the case &quot;Hedges v. Obama&quot; that the Treason Clause was one of the enumerated powers of the federal government. He also stated that by defining treason in the U.S. Constitution and placing it in Article III &quot;the founders intended the power to be checked by the judiciary, ruling out trials by military commissions. As James Madison noted, the Treason Clause also was designed to limit the power of the federal government to punish its citizens for &#x27;adhering to [the] enemies [of the United States by], giving them aid and comfort.&#x27;&quot;

Section 3 also requires the testimony of two different witnesses on the same overt act, or a confession by the accused in open court, to convict for treason. This rule was derived from another English statute, the Treason Act 1695. The English law did not require both witnesses to have witnessed the same overt act; this requirement, supported by Benjamin Franklin, was added to the draft Constitution by a vote of 8 states to 3.

In &quot;Cramer v. United States&quot;, , the Supreme Court ruled that &quot;[e]very act, movement, deed, and word of the defendant charged to constitute treason must be supported by the testimony of two witnesses.&quot; In &quot;Haupt v. United States&quot;, , however, the Supreme Court found that two witnesses are not required to prove intent, nor are two witnesses required to prove that an overt act is treasonable. The two witnesses, according to the decision, are required to prove only that the overt act occurred (eyewitnesses and federal agents investigating the crime, for example).

Punishment for treason may not &quot;work Corruption of Blood, or Forfeiture except during the Life of the Person&quot; so convicted. The descendants of someone convicted for treason could not, as they were under English law, be considered &quot;tainted&quot; by the treason of their ancestor.

== See also ==

* United States constitutional criminal procedure
* List of current United States circuit judges

== References ==
== Bibliography ==

== External links ==

* CRS Annotated Constitution: Article 3, law.cornell.edu</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q48429" start="0" end="13" title="Article Three of the United States Constitution" label="Article Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="21" end="47" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q194907" start="64" end="79" title="Federal judiciary of the United States" label="judicial branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="87" end="110" title="Federal government of the United States" label="U.S. federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="169" end="203" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="240" end="248" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q30688219" start="406" end="413" title="Treason laws in the United States" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q11728865" start="777" end="798" title="Judiciary Act of 1789" label="Judiciary Act of 1789"/>
<link wikidata="Q48416" start="1044" end="1055" title="Article One of the United States Constitution" label="Article One"/>
<link wikidata="Q11147" start="1084" end="1097" title="Chief Justice of the United States" label="chief justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923476" start="1114" end="1129" title="Vesting Clauses" label="Vesting Clauses"/>
<link wikidata="Q48416" start="1133" end="1144" title="Article One of the United States Constitution" label="Article One"/>
<link wikidata="Q48423" start="1149" end="1160" title="Article Two of the United States Constitution" label="Article Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="1214" end="1234" title="separation of powers" label="separation of powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048355" start="1343" end="1369" title="Case or Controversy Clause" label="Case or Controversy Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q683979" start="1558" end="1566" title="Standing (law)" label="standing"/>
<link wikidata="Q883942" start="1568" end="1576" title="mootness" label="mootness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335586" start="1581" end="1589" title="ripeness" label="ripeness"/>
<link wikidata="Q864400" start="1857" end="1878" title="original jurisdiction" label="original jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959031" start="1985" end="2007" title="appellate jurisdiction" label="appellate jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6315220" start="2130" end="2153" title="Jurisdiction stripping" label="strip the Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6315147" start="2244" end="2248" title="Juries in the United States" label="jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303028" start="2320" end="2335" title="Judicial review in the United States" label="judicial review"/>
<link wikidata="Q538242" start="2407" end="2425" title="Marbury v. Madison" label="Marbury v. Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q493620" start="2770" end="2795" title="Articles of Confederation" label="Articles of Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="2817" end="2826" title="separation of powers" label="separated"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975" start="2983" end="2994" title="Montesquieu" label="Montesquieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q514727" start="3088" end="3106" title="The Spirit of Laws" label="The Spirit of Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923476" start="3229" end="3244" title="vesting clauses" label="vesting clauses"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="3252" end="3278" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153005" start="3499" end="3518" title="Committee of Detail" label="Committee of Detail"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3733" end="3765" title="Article One of the United States Constitution#Clause 6: Trial of Impeachment" label="Article One, Section 3, Clause 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q11147" start="3778" end="3803" title="Chief Justice of the United States" label="&amp;quot;Chief Justice&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q115702285" start="3832" end="3849" title="Federal impeachment trial in the United States" label="impeachment trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="3857" end="3887" title="President of the United States" label="President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303054" start="3900" end="3921" title="Judiciary Act of 1869" label="Judiciary Act of 1869"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515622" start="4166" end="4183" title="constitutionality" label="constitutionality"/>
<link wikidata="Q711631" start="4244" end="4258" title="Burton K. Wheeler" label="Burton Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302931" start="4270" end="4301" title="Judicial Procedures Reform Bill of 1937" label="Judicial Procedures Reform Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q313252" start="4325" end="4345" title="Charles Evans Hughes" label="Charles Evans Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q194907" start="4511" end="4524" title="United States federal courts" label="federal court"/>
<link wikidata="Q405475" start="4588" end="4613" title="Philadelphia Convention" label="Constitutional Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440562" start="4996" end="5007" title="Article I and Article III tribunals" label="Article III"/>
<link wikidata="Q11728865" start="5101" end="5122" title="Judiciary Act of 1789" label="Judiciary Act of 1789"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440562" start="5169" end="5178" title="Article I and Article III tribunals" label="Article I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892233" start="5287" end="5310" title="United States Tax Court" label="United States Tax Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980796" start="5427" end="5485" title="Murray&amp;#x27;s Lessee v. Hoboken Land &amp;amp; Improvement Co." label="Murray&amp;#x27;s Lessee v. Hoboken Land &amp;amp; Improvement Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q7889788" start="6395" end="6455" title="United States District Court for the District of Puerto Rico" label="United States District Court for the District of Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="6463" end="6476" title="U.S. Congress" label="U.S. Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="6539" end="6556" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893190" start="6598" end="6629" title="United States territorial court" label="United States territorial court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="6633" end="6644" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302931" start="6719" end="6758" title="Judicial Procedures Reform Bill of 1937" label="Judicial Procedures Reform Bill of 1937"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302931" start="6782" end="6800" title="Judicial Procedures Reform Bill of 1937" label="court-packing plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="6895" end="6916" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q634429" start="6950" end="6976" title="1936 United States presidential election" label="1936 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q194907" start="7049" end="7069" title="United States federal courts" label="federal court system"/>
<link wikidata="Q42841" start="7219" end="7228" title="incumbent" label="incumbent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842693" start="7374" end="7395" title="Judiciary Act of 1801" label="Judiciary Act of 1801"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="7458" end="7468" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="7517" end="7533" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302852" start="7685" end="7706" title="Judicial Code of 1911" label="Judicial Code of 1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332963" start="7717" end="7731" title="circuit riding" label="circuit riding"/>
<link wikidata="Q115705182" start="8217" end="8249" title="Federal impeachment in the United States" label="this has occurred fourteen times"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770163" start="8271" end="8286" title="Mark W. Delahay" label="Mark W. Delahay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545603" start="8288" end="8305" title="George W. English" label="George W. English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410833" start="8311" end="8325" title="Samuel B. Kent" label="Samuel B. Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q864400" start="8682" end="8703" title="original jurisdiction" label="original jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959031" start="8713" end="8735" title="appellate jurisdiction" label="appellate jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q13368786" start="8796" end="8809" title="Jury trial" label="trial by jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q115705182" start="8840" end="8851" title="Federal impeachment in the United States" label="impeachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q683979" start="9101" end="9109" title="Standing (law)" label="standing"/>
<link wikidata="Q883942" start="9111" end="9119" title="mootness" label="mootness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335586" start="9124" end="9132" title="ripeness" label="ripeness"/>
<link wikidata="Q175958" start="9274" end="9298" title="Muskrat v. United States" label="Muskrat v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686864" start="9875" end="9891" title="advisory opinion" label="advisory opinion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11728865" start="10257" end="10278" title="Judiciary Act of 1789" label="Judiciary Act of 1789"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="10506" end="10516" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5388337" start="10804" end="10833" title="Erie Railroad Co. v. Tompkins" label="Erie Railroad Co. v. Tompkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="10908" end="10917" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="10922" end="10928" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q661675" start="11259" end="11278" title="Chisholm v. Georgia" label="Chisholm v. Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15214287" start="11340" end="11349" title="Abrogation_doctrine" label="abrogated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457196" start="11367" end="11385" title="sovereign immunity" label="sovereign immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911328" start="11390" end="11400" title="Subject-matter jurisdiction" label="authorized"/>
<link wikidata="Q4388685" start="11424" end="11468" title="Diversity jurisdiction" label="disputes between private citizens and States"/>
<link wikidata="Q169990" start="11506" end="11524" title="Eleventh Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Eleventh Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q223336" start="11550" end="11558" title="3rd United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="11597" end="11603" title="U.S. state" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q864400" start="11958" end="11979" title="original jurisdiction" label="original jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959031" start="12300" end="12322" title="appellate jurisdiction" label="appellate jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q538242" start="12463" end="12481" title="Marbury v. Madison" label="Marbury v. Madison"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12543" end="12558" title="#Judicial review" label="judicial review"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515622" start="13193" end="13210" title="constitutionality" label="constitutionality"/>
<link wikidata="Q820655" start="13216" end="13223" title="statute" label="statute"/>
<link wikidata="Q131569" start="13227" end="13233" title="treaty" label="treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="13687" end="13705" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q538242" start="14024" end="14042" title="Marbury v. Madison" label="Marbury v. Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q42189" start="14220" end="14236" title="Federalist Party" label="Federalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="14287" end="14303" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="14506" end="14516" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q310829" start="14582" end="14595" title="John Marshall" label="John Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="14680" end="14693" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q11728865" start="14803" end="14824" title="Judiciary Act of 1789" label="Judiciary Act of 1789"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020095" start="14852" end="14867" title="William Marbury" label="William Marbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q312424" start="14917" end="14933" title="mandamus" label="writ of mandamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11728865" start="15674" end="15695" title="Judiciary Act of 1789" label="Judiciary Act of 1789"/>
<link wikidata="Q121998" start="15826" end="15836" title="ambassador" label="ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="16249" end="16265" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q115705182" start="16431" end="16442" title="Federal impeachment in the United States" label="impeachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="16844" end="16858" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q246624" start="16891" end="16906" title="Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Sixth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q261204" start="16985" end="17002" title="Seventh Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Seventh Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q13368786" start="17047" end="17057" title="jury trial" label="jury trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q222249" start="17069" end="17074" title="Civil law (common law)" label="civil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271542" start="17137" end="17153" title="Question of fact" label="findings of fact"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002253" start="17177" end="17185" title="Incorporation of the Bill of Rights" label="extended"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17285" end="17331" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution#Due Process Clause" label="Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="17421" end="17428" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419186" start="17812" end="17828" title="Ex Parte Bollman" label="Ex Parte Bollman"/>
<link wikidata="Q365181" start="18442" end="18454" title="James Wilson (Founding Father)" label="James Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3998167" start="18662" end="18678" title="Treason Act 1351" label="Treason Act 1351"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368374" start="18680" end="18692" title="Joseph Story" label="Joseph Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152386" start="18712" end="18765" title="Commentaries on the Constitution of the United States" label="Commentaries on the Constitution of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440616" start="18816" end="18845" title="Federalist No. 43" label="&amp;quot;Federalist&amp;quot; No. 43"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="18846" end="18859" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q46350" start="18983" end="18996" title="amicus curiae" label="amicus curiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5697368" start="19021" end="19036" title="Hedges v. Obama" label="Hedges v. Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773061" start="19082" end="19099" title="enumerated powers" label="enumerated powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q186539" start="19228" end="19240" title="Founding Fathers of the United States" label="the founders"/>
<link wikidata="Q28737" start="19313" end="19333" title="military justice" label="military commissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113994" start="19646" end="19655" title="overt act" label="overt act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6011612" start="19688" end="19701" title="in open court" label="in open court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836627" start="19783" end="19799" title="Treason Act 1695" label="Treason Act 1695"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="19917" end="19934" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181843" start="20010" end="20033" title="Cramer v. United States" label="Cramer v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q19111931" start="20231" end="20253" title="Haupt v. United States" label="Haupt v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q196939" start="20525" end="20537" title="Witness" label="eyewitnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q43702" start="20542" end="20556" title="federal government" label="federal agents"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892396" start="20910" end="20957" title="United States constitutional criminal procedure" label="United States constitutional criminal procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q60518172" start="20960" end="21004" title="List of current United States circuit judges" label="List of current United States circuit judges"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31649" wikidata="Q48412" url="?curid=31649" title="Article Four of the United States Constitution">
<text>Article Four of the United States Constitution outlines the relationship between the various states, as well as the relationship between each state and the United States federal government. It also empowers Congress to admit new states and administer the territories and other federal lands.

The Full Faith and Credit Clause requires states to extend &quot;full faith and credit&quot; to the public acts, records, and court proceedings of other states. The Supreme Court has held that this clause prevents states from reopening cases that have been conclusively decided by the courts of another state. The Privileges and Immunities Clause requires interstate protection of &quot;privileges and immunities,&quot; preventing each state from treating citizens of other states in a discriminatory manner. The Extradition Clause requires that fugitives from justice be extradited on the demand of executive authority of the state from which they flee. Since the 1987 case of &quot;Puerto Rico v. Branstad&quot;, federal courts may also use the Extradition Clause to require the extradition of fugitives. The Fugitive Slave Clause requires the return of fugitive slaves; this clause has not been repealed, but it was rendered moot by the Thirteenth Amendment, which abolished involuntary servitude, except in the prison system.

The Admissions Clause grants Congress the authority to admit new states but forbids the creation of new states from parts of existing states without the consent of the affected states. The Supreme Court has held that the Constitution requires all states to be admitted on an equal footing, though the Admissions Clause does not expressly include this requirement. The Property Clause grants Congress the power to make laws for the territories and other federal lands. The Guarantee Clause mandates that the United States guarantee that all states have a &quot;republican form of government,&quot; though it does not define this term. Article Four also requires the United States to protect each state from invasion, and, at the request of a state, from &quot;domestic violence.&quot;

==Section 1: Full faith and credit==

The first section requires states to extend &quot;full faith and credit&quot; to the public acts, records, and court proceedings of other states. Congress may regulate the manner in which proof of such acts, records, or proceedings may be admitted.

In &quot;Mills v. Duryee&quot;, 1t1 U.S. (7 Cranch) 481 (1813), the United States Supreme Court ruled that the merits of a case, as settled by courts of one state, must be recognized by the courts of other states; state courts may not reopen cases which have been conclusively decided by the courts of another state. Later, Chief Justice John Marshall suggested that the judgment of one state court must be recognized by other states&#x27; courts as final. However, in &quot;McElmoyle v. Cohen&quot;, , the court heard a case where one party obtained a judgment in South Carolina and sought to enforce it in Georgia, which had a statute of limitations that barred actions on judgments after a certain amount of time had passed since the judgment was entered. The court upheld Georgia&#x27;s refusal to enforce the South Carolina judgment. The court found that out-of-state judgments are subject to the procedural law of the states where they are enforced, notwithstanding any priority accorded in the states in which they are issued.

==Section 2: Rights of state citizens; rights of extradition==

===Clause 1: Privileges and Immunities===


Clause One of Section 2 requires interstate protection of &quot;privileges and immunities&quot;. The seeming ambiguity of the clause has given rise to a number of different interpretations. Some contend that the clause requires Congress to treat all citizens equally. Others suggest that citizens of states carry the rights accorded by their home states while traveling in other states.

Neither of these theories has been endorsed by the Supreme Court, which has held that the clause means that a state may not discriminate against citizens of other states in favor of its own citizens. In &quot;Corfield v. Coryell&quot;, 6 F. Cas. 546 (C.C.E.D. Pa. 1823), the federal circuit court held that privileges and immunities in respect of which discrimination is barred include 
protection by the Government; the enjoyment of life and liberty ... the right of a citizen of one State to pass through, or to reside in any other State, for purposes of trade, agriculture, professional pursuits, or otherwise; to claim the benefits of the writ of habeas corpus; to institute and maintain actions of any kind in the courts of the State; to take, hold and dispose of property, either real or personal; and an exemption from higher taxes or impositions than are paid by the other citizens of the State.

Most other benefits were held not to be protected privileges and immunities. In &quot;Corfield,&quot; the circuit court sustained a New Jersey law giving state residents the exclusive right to gather clams and oysters.

===Clause 2: Extradition of fugitives===

Clause Two requires that fugitives from justice may be extradited on the demand of executive authority of the state from which they fled. The Supreme Court has held that it is not compulsory for the fugitive to have fled after an indictment was issued, but only that the fugitive fled after having committed the crime. The Constitution provides for the extradition of fugitives who have committed &quot;treason, felony or other crime.&quot; That phrase incorporates all acts prohibited by the laws of a state, including misdemeanors and small, or petty, offenses.

In &quot;Kentucky v. Dennison&quot; (1860), the Supreme Court held that the federal courts may not compel state governors to surrender fugitives through the issue of writs of mandamus. The &quot;Dennison&quot; decision was overruled by &quot;Puerto Rico v. Branstad&quot; (1987); now, the federal courts may require the extradition of fugitives. Alleged fugitives generally may not challenge extradition proceedings.

The motives of the governor demanding the extradition may not be questioned. The accused cannot defend himself against the charges in the extraditing state; the fugitive must do so in the state receiving him. However, the accused may prevent extradition by offering clear evidence that he was not in the state he allegedly fled from at the time of the crime. There is no constitutional requirement that extradited fugitives be tried only for the crimes named in the extradition proceedings.

Fugitives brought to states by means other than extradition may be tried, even though the means of the conveyance was unlawful; the Supreme Court so ruled in &quot;Mahon v. Justice&quot;, . In &quot;Mahon&quot; a body of armed men from Kentucky forcibly took, without a warrant, a man in West Virginia to bring him back to Kentucky for formal arrest and trial.

===Clause 3: Fugitive Slave Clause===


Pierce Butler and Charles Pinckney, both from South Carolina, submitted this clause to the Constitutional Convention. James Wilson of Pennsylvania objected, stating it would require that state governments enforce slavery at taxpayers&#x27; expense. Butler withdrew the clause. However, on the next day the clause was quietly reinstated and adopted by the Convention without objection. This clause was added to the clause that provided extradition for fugitives from justice.

When first adopted, this clause applied to fugitive slaves and required that they be extradited upon the claims of their masters, but it provided no means for doing so. The Fugitive Slave Act of 1793 created the mechanism for recovering a fugitive slave, overruled any state laws giving sanctuary, made it a federal crime to assist an escaped slave, and allowed slave-catchers into every U.S. state and territory. As free states sought to undermine the federal law, the even more severe Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 was enacted.

In 1864, during the Civil War, an effort to repeal this clause of the Constitution failed. The vote in the House was 69 for repeal and 38 against, which was short of the two-to-one vote required to amend the Constitution. This clause was rendered mostly moot when the Thirteenth Amendment abolished involuntary servitude.

==Section 3: New states and federal property==

=== Clause 1: Admission of new states===


The First Clause of Section Three, also known as the Admissions Clause, grants to Congress the authority to admit new states into the Union. Since the establishment of the United States in 1776, the number of states has expanded from the original 13 to 50. It also forbids the creation of new states from parts of existing states without the consent of the affected states legislature and Congress. This latter provision was designed to give Eastern states that still had claims to Western lands (e.g., Virginia and North Carolina) to have a veto over whether their western counties (which eventually became Kentucky and Tennessee) could become states. It would later be applied with regard to the formation of Maine (from Massachusetts) and West Virginia (from Virginia).

At the 1787 Constitutional Convention, a proposal to include the phrase, &quot;new States shall be admitted on the same terms with the original States&quot;, was defeated. It was feared that the political power of future new western states would eventually overwhelm that of the established eastern states. Once the new Constitution went into effect, however, Congress admitted Vermont and Kentucky on equal terms and thereafter formalized the condition in its acts of admission for subsequent states, declaring that the new state enters &quot;on an equal footing with the original States in all respects whatever.&quot; Thus the Congress, utilizing the discretion allowed by the framers, adopted a policy of equal status for all newly admitted states. With the growth of states&#x27; rights advocacy during the antebellum period, the Supreme Court asserted, in &quot;Lessee of Pollard v. Hagan&quot; (1845), that the Constitution mandated admission of new states on the basis of equality.

Congressional restrictions on the equality of states, even when those limitations have been found in the acts of admission, have been held void by the Supreme Court. For instance the Supreme Court struck down a provision which limited the jurisdiction of the state of Alabama over navigable waters within the state. The Court held, The doctrine, however, can also be applied to the detriment of states, as occurred with Texas. Before admission to the Union, Texas, as an independent nation, controlled water within three miles of the coast, the normal limit for nations. Under the equal footing doctrine, however, Texas was found not to have control over the three-mile belt after admission into the Union, because the original states did not at the time of joining the union control such waters. Instead, by entering the Union, Texas was found to have surrendered control over the water and the soil under it to Congress. Under the Submerged Lands Act of 1953, Congress returned maritime territory to some states, but not to others; the Act was sustained by the Supreme Court.

The constitution is silent on the question of whether or not a state may unilaterally leave, or secede from, the Union. However, the Supreme Court, in &quot;Texas v. White&quot; (1869), held that a state cannot unilaterally do so.
===Clause 2: Property Clause===
This clause, commonly known as the &quot;Property Clause&quot; or &quot;Territorial Clause&quot;, grants Congress the constitutional authority for the management and control of all territories or other property owned by the United States. Additionally, the clause also proclaims that nothing contained within the Constitution may be interpreted to harm (prejudice) any claim of the United States, or of any particular State. The exact scope of this clause has long been a matter of debate.

The federal government owns about twenty-eight percent of the land in the United States. These holdings include national parks, national forests, recreation areas, wildlife refuges, vast tracts of range and public lands managed by the Bureau of Land Management, reservations held in trust for Native American tribes, military bases, and ordinary federal buildings and installations. Although federal property can be found in every state, the largest concentrations are in the Western United States, where, for example, the federal government owns over eighty percent of the land within Nevada.

Pursuant to a parallel clause in Article One, Section Eight, the Supreme Court has held that states may not tax such federal property. In another case, &quot;Kleppe v. New Mexico&quot;, the Court ruled that the federal Wild Horse and Burro Act was a constitutional exercise of congressional power under the Property Clause at least insofar as it was applied to a finding of trespass. The case prohibited the entering upon the public lands of the United States and removing wild burros under the New Mexico Estray Law.

A major issue early in the 20th century was whether the whole Constitution applied to the territories called insular areas by Congress. In a series of opinions by the Supreme Court of the United States, referred to as the Insular Cases, the Court ruled that the territories &quot;belonged to&quot;, but were not &quot;part of&quot; the United States. Therefore, under the Territorial clause, Congress had the power to determine which parts of the Constitution applied to the territories. These rulings have helped shape public opinion among Puerto Ricans during the ongoing debate over the commonwealth&#x27;s political status.

==Section 4: Obligations of the United States==

=== Clause 1: Republican government ===

This clause, sometimes referred to as the Guarantee Clause, has long been at the forefront of the debate about the rights of citizens vis-à-vis the government. The Guarantee Clause mandates that all U.S. states must be grounded in republican principles such as the consent of the governed. By ensuring that all states must have the same basic republican philosophy, the Guarantee Clause is one of several portions of the Constitution which mandates symmetric federalism between the states.

The Constitution does not explain what exactly constitutes a republican form of government. There are, however, several places within it where the principles behind the concept are articulated. Article Seven, the last and shortest of the Constitution&#x27;s original articles, stipulated that the Constitution, before it could become established as the &quot;Law of the Land&quot;, must obtain the consent of the people by being ratified by popular conventions within the several states. Additionally, as it required the ratification of only nine states in order to become established, rather than the unanimous consent required by the Articles of Confederation, the Constitution was more republican, as it protected the majority from effectively being ruled or held captive by the minority.

&quot;The Federalist Papers&quot; also gives some insight as to the intent of the Founders. A republican form of government is distinguished from a direct democracy, which the Founding Fathers had no intentions of entering. As James Madison wrote in Federalist No. 10, &quot;Hence it is that such democracies have ever been spectacles of turbulence and contention; have ever been found incompatible with personal security or the rights of property; and have in general been as short in their lives as they have been violent in their deaths.&quot;

A political crisis in 1840s Rhode Island, the Dorr Rebellion, forced the Supreme Court to rule on the meaning of this clause. At the time, the Rhode Island constitution was the old royal charter established in the 17th century. By the 1840s, only 40% of the state&#x27;s free white males were enfranchised. An attempt to hold a popular convention to write a new constitution was declared insurrection by the charter government, and the convention leaders were arrested. One of them brought suit in federal court, arguing that Rhode Island&#x27;s government was not &quot;republican&quot; in character, and that his arrest (along with all of the government&#x27;s other acts) was invalid. In &quot;Luther v. Borden&quot;, the Court held that the determination of whether a state government is a legitimate republican form as guaranteed by the Constitution is a political question to be resolved by the Congress. In effect, the court held the clause to be nonjusticiable.

The &quot;Luther v. Borden&quot; ruling left the responsibility to establish guidelines for the republican nature of state governments in the hands of the Congress. This power became an important part of Reconstruction after the American Civil War. The Radical Republican majority used this clause as the basis for taking control of the ex-Confederate states and for promoting civil rights for freedmen, plus the limiting of political and voting rights for ex-Confederates, abolishing the ex-Confederate state governments, setting guidelines for the readmission of the rebellious states into the Union.

In 1912, &quot;Luther&quot; was reaffirmed in &quot;Pacific States Telephone and Telegraph Co. v. Oregon&quot;. In &quot;Pacific States&quot;, a utility company challenged an Oregon tax law passed by a referendum, as opposed to the ordinary legislative process. The utility company claimed that the use of referendums, as a form of direct democracy, violated the republican form of government clause, which permits only a representative democracy. The court rejected the challenge, finding the challenge to have presented a nonjusticiable political question that only Congress can resolve. 

The doctrine was later limited in &quot;Baker v. Carr&quot; (1962), which held that the lack of state legislative redistricting to be justiciable. 

While the Supreme Court&#x27;s holding in &quot;Luther v. Borden&quot; still holds today, the Court, by looking to the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment (adopted 19 years after &quot;Luther v. Borden&quot; was decided), has developed new criteria for determining which questions are &quot;political&quot; in nature and which are &quot;justiciable&quot;.

===Clause 2: Protection from invasion and domestic violence===
Section Four requires the United States to protect each state from invasion, and, upon the application of the state legislature (or executive, if the legislature cannot be convened), from domestic violence. This provision was invoked by Colorado governor Elias M. Ammons in 1914 during the Colorado Coalfield War, as a result of which President Woodrow Wilson sent federal troops to the state.

==See also==
* Devolution
* List of states and territories of the United States

==References==
==Further reading==
*Adam H. Kurland, &quot;The Guarantee Clause as a Basis for Federal Prosecutions of State and Local Officials&quot;, 62 369 (1989)

== External links ==

*Kilman, Johnny and George Costello (Eds). (2000). &quot;The Constitution of the United States of America: Analysis and Interpretation.&quot;
*CRS Annotated Constitution: Article 4</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q48412" start="0" end="12" title="Article Four of the United States Constitution" label="Article Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="20" end="46" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="93" end="99" title="U.S. state" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="156" end="188" title="United States federal government" label="United States federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q18350273" start="219" end="235" title="Admission to the Union" label="admit new states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352230" start="255" end="266" title="Territories of the United States" label="territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440540" start="277" end="290" title="federal lands" label="federal lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508034" start="297" end="325" title="Full Faith and Credit Clause" label="Full Faith and Credit Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="458" end="471" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246325" start="607" end="639" title="Privileges and Immunities Clause" label="Privileges and Immunities Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422198" start="806" end="824" title="Extradition Clause" label="Extradition Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258826" start="977" end="1000" title="Puerto Rico v. Branstad" label="Puerto Rico v. Branstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507275" start="1104" end="1125" title="Fugitive Slave Clause" label="Fugitive Slave Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507284" start="1149" end="1164" title="Fugitive slaves in the United States" label="fugitive slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q175613" start="1233" end="1253" title="Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Thirteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384148" start="1599" end="1612" title="equal footing" label="equal footing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352230" start="1755" end="1766" title="Territories of the United States" label="territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440540" start="1777" end="1790" title="federal lands" label="federal lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841076" start="1796" end="1812" title="Guarantee Clause" label="Guarantee Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q302686" start="2433" end="2437" title="United States Reports" label="U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q7314158" start="2441" end="2447" title="Reporter of Decisions of the Supreme Court of the United States" label="Cranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="2465" end="2492" title="United States Supreme Court" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308934" start="2611" end="2623" title="State court (United States)" label="state courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11147" start="2721" end="2734" title="Chief Justice of the United States" label="Chief Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q310829" start="2735" end="2748" title="John Marshall" label="John Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q936044" start="3299" end="3313" title="procedural law" label="procedural law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170485" start="4137" end="4156" title="Corfield v. Coryell" label="Corfield v. Coryell"/>
<link wikidata="Q220596" start="4571" end="4592" title="habeas corpus" label="writ of habeas corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17310301" start="5325" end="5335" title="indictment" label="indictment"/>
<link wikidata="Q210603" start="5448" end="5459" title="extradition" label="extradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="5498" end="5505" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q178844" start="5507" end="5513" title="felony" label="felony"/>
<link wikidata="Q694324" start="5615" end="5626" title="misdemeanor" label="misdemeanor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185628" start="5669" end="5689" title="Kentucky v. Dennison" label="Kentucky v. Dennison"/>
<link wikidata="Q312424" start="5826" end="5843" title="writ of mandamus" label="writs of mandamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258826" start="5902" end="5925" title="Puerto Rico v. Branstad" label="Puerto Rico v. Branstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530426" start="6972" end="6985" title="Pierce Butler (American politician)" label="Pierce Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q662054" start="6990" end="7006" title="Charles Pinckney (governor)" label="Charles Pinckney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="7018" end="7032" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q405475" start="7063" end="7088" title="Constitutional Convention (United States)" label="Constitutional Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q365181" start="7090" end="7102" title="James Wilson (Founding Father)" label="James Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507284" start="7491" end="7505" title="fugitive slave" label="fugitive slave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895269" start="7621" end="7647" title="Fugitive Slave Act of 1793" label="Fugitive Slave Act of 1793"/>
<link wikidata="Q29553" start="7735" end="7744" title="sanctuary" label="sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q535519" start="7935" end="7961" title="Fugitive Slave Act of 1850" label="Fugitive Slave Act of 1850"/>
<link wikidata="Q175613" start="8244" end="8264" title="Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Thirteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6061413" start="8275" end="8296" title="involuntary servitude" label="involuntary servitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="8624" end="8639" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="the original 13"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8763" end="8774" title="State legislature (U.S.)" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="8893" end="8901" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="8906" end="8920" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="8998" end="9006" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="9011" end="9020" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="9101" end="9106" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="9113" end="9126" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="9132" end="9145" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q405475" start="9176" end="9201" title="Constitutional Convention (United States)" label="Constitutional Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="9542" end="9549" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384148" start="9714" end="9727" title="equal footing" label="equal footing"/>
<link wikidata="Q48527" start="9936" end="9955" title="states&amp;#x27; rights" label="states&amp;#x27; rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201622" start="9976" end="9993" title="antebellum period" label="antebellum period"/>
<link wikidata="Q170588" start="10613" end="10618" title="Republic of Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="10626" end="10644" title="Sovereign state" label="independent nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631661" start="11088" end="11115" title="Submerged Lands Act" label="Submerged Lands Act of 1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q687031" start="11330" end="11336" title="Secession" label="secede"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407695" start="11391" end="11405" title="Texas v. White" label="Texas v. White"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267198" start="12100" end="12114" title="List of areas in the United States National Park System" label="national parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q612741" start="12116" end="12132" title="United States National Forest" label="national forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010556" start="12223" end="12248" title="Bureau of Land Management" label="Bureau of Land Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440540" start="12380" end="12396" title="Federal lands" label="federal property"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="12464" end="12485" title="Western United States" label="Western United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="12574" end="12580" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12616" end="12642" title="Article One of the United States Constitution#Section 8: Powers of Congress" label="Article One, Section Eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q6420616" start="12741" end="12761" title="Kleppe v. New Mexico" label="Kleppe v. New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q8000884" start="12802" end="12826" title="Wild and Free-Roaming Horses and Burros Act of 1971" label="Wild Horse and Burro Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q462778" start="13211" end="13223" title="insular area" label="insular area"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="13269" end="13303" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665320" start="13324" end="13337" title="Insular Cases" label="Insular Cases"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859434" start="13712" end="13728" title="Political status of Puerto Rico" label="political status"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277720" start="14052" end="14073" title="Republicanism in the United States" label="republican principles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162861" start="14086" end="14109" title="consent of the governed" label="consent of the governed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661305" start="14270" end="14290" title="symmetric federalism" label="symmetric federalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q48437" start="14506" end="14519" title="Article Seven of the United States Constitution" label="Article Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q493620" start="14948" end="14973" title="Articles of Confederation" label="Articles of Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q858036" start="15111" end="15132" title="The Federalist Papers" label="The Federalist Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q171174" start="15253" end="15269" title="direct democracy" label="direct democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="15332" end="15345" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049689" start="15355" end="15372" title="Federalist No. 10" label="Federalist No. 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387" start="15681" end="15693" title="Rhode Island" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454484" start="15699" end="15713" title="Dorr Rebellion" label="Dorr Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="15726" end="15739" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6705664" start="16350" end="16366" title="Luther v. Borden" label="Luther v. Borden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823570" start="16513" end="16531" title="political question" label="political question"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903118" start="16607" end="16621" title="justiciability" label="nonjusticiable"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="16828" end="16842" title="Reconstruction era of the United States" label="Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="16853" end="16871" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11833539" start="16877" end="16895" title="Radical Republican" label="Radical Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="17001" end="17013" title="civil rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q841571" start="17018" end="17026" title="freedmen" label="freedmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="17084" end="17096" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederates"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020764" start="17280" end="17332" title="Pacific States Telephone and Telegraph Co. v. Oregon" label="Pacific States Telephone and Telegraph Co. v. Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903118" start="17752" end="17766" title="Justiciability" label="nonjusticiable"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823570" start="17767" end="17785" title="political question" label="political question"/>
<link wikidata="Q4849238" start="17860" end="17873" title="Baker v. Carr" label="Baker v. Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137223" start="18088" end="18111" title="Equal Protection Clause" label="Equal Protection Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="18119" end="18139" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q883177" start="18660" end="18675" title="Elias M. Ammons" label="Elias M. Ammons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148759" start="18695" end="18717" title="Colorado Coalfield War" label="Colorado Coalfield War"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="18750" end="18764" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139955" start="18815" end="18825" title="Devolution" label="Devolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682357" start="18828" end="18879" title="List of states and territories of the United States" label="List of states and territories of the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31650" wikidata="Q48434" url="?curid=31650" title="Article Five of the United States Constitution">
<text>Article Five of the United States Constitution describes the procedure for altering the Constitution. Under Article Five, the process to alter the Constitution consists of proposing an amendment or amendments, and subsequent ratification.

Amendments may be proposed either by the Congress with a two-thirds vote in both the House of Representatives and the Senate; or by a convention to propose amendments called by Congress at the request of two-thirds of the state legislatures. To become part of the Constitution, an amendment must then be ratified by either—as determined by Congress—the legislatures of three-quarters of the states or by ratifying conventions conducted in three-quarters of the states, a process utilized only once thus far in American history with the 1933 ratification of the Twenty-First Amendment. The vote of each state (to either ratify or reject a proposed amendment) carries equal weight, regardless of a state&#x27;s population or length of time in the Union. Article Five is silent regarding deadlines for the ratification of proposed amendments, but most amendments proposed since 1917 have included a deadline for ratification. Legal scholars generally agree that the amending process of Article Five can itself be amended by the procedures laid out in Article Five, but there is some disagreement over whether Article Five is the exclusive means of amending the Constitution.

In addition to defining the procedures for altering the Constitution, Article Five also shields three clauses in Article One from ordinary amendment by attaching stipulations. Regarding two of the clauses—one concerning importation of slaves and the other apportionment of direct taxes—the prohibition on amendment was absolute but of limited duration, expiring in 1808; the third was without an expiration date but less absolute: &quot;no state, without its consent, shall be deprived of its equal Suffrage in the Senate.&quot; Scholars disagree as to whether this shielding clause can itself be amended by the procedures laid out in Article Five.

==Text==
==Procedures for amending the Constitution==

Thirty-three amendments to the United States Constitution have been approved by the Congress and sent to the states for ratification. Twenty-seven of these amendments have been ratified and are now part of the Constitution. The first ten amendments were adopted and ratified simultaneously and are known collectively as the Bill of Rights. Six amendments adopted by Congress and sent to the states have not been ratified by the required number of states and are not part of the Constitution. Four of these amendments are still technically open and pending, one is closed and has failed by its own terms, and one is closed and has failed by the terms of the resolution proposing it. All totaled, more than 10,000 measures to amend the Constitution have been proposed in Congress.

===Proposing amendments===
Article V provides two methods for amending the nation&#x27;s frame of government. The first method authorizes Congress, &quot;whenever two-thirds of both houses shall deem it necessary,&quot; to propose constitutional amendments. The second method requires Congress, &quot;on the application of the legislatures of two-thirds of the several states&quot; (34 ), to &quot;call a convention for proposing amendments&quot;.

This duality in Article V is the result of compromises made during the 1787 Constitutional Convention between two groups, one maintaining that the national legislature should have no role in the constitutional amendment process and another contending that proposals to amend the constitution should originate in the national legislature and their ratification should be decided by state legislatures or state conventions. Regarding the consensus amendment process crafted during the convention, James Madison (writing in The Federalist No. 43) declared: 

Each time the Article V process has been initiated since 1789, the first method for crafting and proposing amendments has been used. All 33 amendments submitted to the states for ratification originated in Congress. The second method, the convention option, a political tool that Alexander Hamilton (writing in The Federalist No. 85) argued would enable state legislatures to &quot;erect barriers against the encroachments of the national authority,&quot; has yet to be invoked.
When the 1st Congress considered a series of constitutional amendments, it was suggested that the two houses first adopt a resolution indicating that they deemed amendments necessary. This procedure was not used. Instead, both the House and the Senate proceeded directly to consideration of a joint resolution, thereby implying that both bodies deemed amendments to be necessary. Also, when initially proposed by James Madison, the amendments were designed to be interwoven into the relevant sections of the original document. Instead, they were approved by Congress and sent to the states for ratification as supplemental additions (s) appended to it. Both these precedents have been followed ever since.

Once approved by Congress, the joint resolution proposing a constitutional amendment does not require presidential approval before it goes out to the states. While Article I Section 7 provides that all federal legislation must, before becoming Law, be presented to the president for his or her signature or veto, Article V provides no such requirement for constitutional amendments approved by Congress or by a federal convention. Thus, the president has no official function in the process. In &quot;Hollingsworth v. Virginia&quot; (1798), the Supreme Court affirmed that it is not necessary to place constitutional amendments before the president for approval or veto.

Three times in the 20th century, concerted efforts were undertaken by proponents of particular amendments to secure the number of applications necessary to summon an Article V Convention. These included conventions to consider amendments to (1) provide for the popular election of U.S. Senators; (2) permit the states to include factors other than equality of population in drawing state legislative district boundaries; and (3) to propose an amendment requiring the U.S. budget to be balanced under most circumstances. The campaign for a popularly elected Senate is frequently credited with &quot;prodding&quot; the Senate to join the House of Representatives in proposing what became the Seventeenth Amendment to the states in 1912, while the latter two campaigns came very close to meeting the two-thirds threshold in the 1960s and 1980s, respectively.
===Ratification of amendments===

After being officially proposed, either by Congress or a national convention of the states, a constitutional amendment must then be ratified by three-fourths (38 out of 50) of the states. Congress is authorized to choose whether a proposed amendment is sent to the state legislatures or to state ratifying conventions for ratification. Amendments ratified by the states under either procedure are indistinguishable and have equal validity as part of the Constitution. Of the 33 amendments submitted to the states for ratification, the state convention method has been used for only one, the Twenty-first Amendment. In &quot;United States v. Sprague&quot; (1931), the Supreme Court affirmed the authority of Congress to decide which mode of ratification will be used for each individual constitutional amendment. The Court had earlier, in &quot;Hawke v. Smith&quot; (1920), upheld the Ohio General Assembly&#x27;s ratification of the Eighteenth Amendment—which Congress had sent to the state legislatures for ratification—after Ohio voters successfully vetoed that approval through a popular referendum, ruling that a provision in the Ohio Constitution reserving to the state&#x27;s voters the right to challenge and overturn its legislature&#x27;s ratification of federal constitutional amendments was unconstitutional.

An amendment becomes an operative part of the Constitution when it is ratified by the necessary number of states, rather than on the later date when its ratification is certified. No further action by Congress or anyone is required. On three occasions, Congress has, after being informed that an amendment has reached the ratification threshold, adopted a resolution declaring the process successfully completed. Such actions, while perhaps important for political reasons, are, constitutionally speaking, unnecessary.

Presently, the Archivist of the United States is charged with responsibility for administering the ratification process under the provisions of 1 U.S. Code . The Archivist officially notifies the states, by a registered letter to each state&#x27;s Governor, that an amendment has been proposed. Each Governor then formally submits the amendment to their state&#x27;s legislature (or ratifying convention). When a state ratifies a proposed amendment, it sends the Archivist an original or certified copy of the state&#x27;s action. Upon receiving the necessary number of state ratifications, it is the duty of the Archivist to issue a certificate proclaiming a particular amendment duly ratified and part of the Constitution. The amendment and its certificate of ratification are then published in the &quot;Federal Register&quot; and &quot;United States Statutes at Large&quot;. This serves as official notice to Congress and to the nation that the ratification process has been successfully completed.

This process, argues Steven Levitsky and Daniel Ziblatt, means the U.S. Constitution is the most difficult in the world to amend &quot;by a lot&quot;.

==Ratification deadline and extension==
The Constitution is silent on the issue of whether or not Congress may limit the length of time that the states have to ratify constitutional amendments sent for their consideration. It is also silent on the issue of whether or not Congress, once it has sent an amendment that includes a ratification deadline to the states for their consideration, can extend that deadline.

===Deadlines===
The practice of limiting the time available to the states to ratify proposed amendments began in 1917 with the Eighteenth Amendment. All amendments proposed since then, with the exception of the Nineteenth Amendment and the (still pending) Child Labor Amendment, have included a deadline, either in the body of the proposed amendment, or in the joint resolution transmitting it to the states. The ratification deadline &quot;clock&quot; begins running on the day final action is completed in Congress. An amendment may be ratified at any time after final congressional action, even if the states have not yet been officially notified.

In &quot;Dillon v. Gloss&quot; (1921), the Supreme Court upheld Congress&#x27;s power to prescribe time limitations for state ratifications and intimated that clearly out of date proposals were no longer open for ratification. Granting that it found nothing express in Article V relating to time constraints, the Court yet allowed that it found—intimated in the amending process—a &quot;strongly suggest[ive]&quot; argument that proposed amendments are not open to ratification for all time or by States acting at widely separate times. The court subsequently, in &quot;Coleman v. Miller&quot; (1939), modified its opinion considerably. In that case, related to the proposed Child Labor Amendment, it held that the question of timeliness of ratification is a political and non-justiciable one, leaving the issue to Congress&#x27;s discretion. It would appear that the length of time elapsing between proposal and ratification is irrelevant to the validity of the amendment. Based upon this precedent, the Archivist of the United States, on May 7, 1992, proclaimed the Twenty-seventh Amendment as having been ratified when it surpassed the &quot;three fourths of the several states&quot; plateau for becoming a part of the Constitution. It had been submitted to the states for ratification—without a ratification deadline—on September 25, 1789, an unprecedented time period of .

===Extensions===
Whether once it has prescribed a ratification period Congress may extend the period without necessitating action by already-ratified States embroiled Congress, the states, and the courts in argument with respect to the proposed Equal Rights Amendment (Sent to the states on March 22, 1972, with a seven-year ratification time limit attached). In 1978 Congress, by simple majority vote in both houses, extended the original deadline by (through June 30, 1982).

The amendment&#x27;s proponents argued that the fixing of a time limit and the extending of it were powers committed exclusively to Congress under the political question doctrine and that in any event Congress had power to extend. It was argued that inasmuch as the fixing of a reasonable time was within Congress&#x27; power and that Congress could fix the time either in advance or at some later point, based upon its evaluation of the social and other bases of the necessities of the amendment, Congress did not violate the Constitution when, once having fixed the time, it subsequently extended the time. Proponents recognized that if the time limit was fixed in the text of the amendment Congress could not alter it because the time limit as well as the substantive provisions of the proposal had been subject to ratification by a number of States, making it unalterable by Congress except through the amending process again. Opponents argued that Congress, having by a two-thirds vote sent the amendment and its authorizing resolution to the states, had put the matter beyond changing by passage of a simple resolution, that states had either acted upon the entire package or at least that they had or could have acted affirmatively upon the promise of Congress that if the amendment had not been ratified within the prescribed period it would expire and their assent would not be compelled for longer than they had intended.

In 1981, the United States District Court for the District of Idaho, however, found that Congress did not have the authority to extend the deadline, even when only contained within the proposing joint resolution&#x27;s resolving clause. The Supreme Court had decided to take up the case, bypassing the Court of Appeals, but before they could hear the case, the extended period granted by Congress had been exhausted without the necessary number of states, thus rendering the case moot.

==Constitutional clauses shielded from amendment==
Article V also contains two statements that prohibit amending three clauses in Article I.
* The first prohibition is obsolete due to a sunset provision: two clauses of Section 9 were not amendable until 1808.
** Clause 1, which prevented Congress from passing any law to restrict the importation of slaves prior to 1808, and
** Clause 4, a declaration that direct taxes must be apportioned according to state populations, as described in Article I, Section 2, Clause 3.
* The second prohibition was not given an expiration date and remains in effect. It provides that no amendment shall deprive a state of its equal representation in the Senate, as described in Section 3, Clause 1, without that state&#x27;s consent.

Designed to seal two compromises reached at the Constitutional Convention after contentious debates, these are the only entrenched provisions of the Constitution.

The guarantee of equal suffrage in the Senate is arguably subject to being amended through the procedures outlined within the article. Law professor George Mader holds that the shielding provision can be amended because it is not &quot;self-entrenched,&quot; meaning that it does not contain a provision preventing its own amendment. Thus, under Mader&#x27;s argument, a two-step amendment process could repeal the provision that prevents the equal suffrage provision from being amended and then repeal the equal suffrage provision itself. Mader contrasts the provision preventing the modification of the equal suffrage clause with the unratified Corwin Amendment, which contains a self-entrenching, unamendable provision. Law professor Richard Albert agrees, contrasting the U.S. Constitution with other constitutions in which the provision that protects certain provisions from ever being amended also protects itself. Another legal scholar, Akhil Reed Amar, argues that such a two-step process is a &quot;sly scheme.&quot;

==Exclusive means for amending the Constitution==
According to constitutional theorist and scholar Lawrence G. Sager, there is debate among commentators about whether Article V is the exclusive means of amending the Constitution, or whether there are routes to amendment, including some routes in which the Constitution could be unconsciously or unwittingly amended in a period of sustained political activity on the part of a mobilized national constituency. For example, Akhil Amar rejects the notion that Article V excludes other modes of constitutional change, arguing instead that the procedure provided for in Article V is simply the exclusive method the government may use to amend the Constitution. He asserts that Article V nowhere prevents the People themselves, acting apart from ordinary Government, from exercising their legal right to alter or abolish Government via the proper legal procedures.

Other scholars disagree. Some argue that the Constitution itself provides no mechanism for the American people to adopt constitutional amendments independently of Article V. Darren Patrick Guerra has argued that Article V is a vital part of the American constitutional tradition and he defends it against modern critiques that Article V is either too difficult, too undemocratic, or too formal. Instead he argues that Article V provides a clear and stable way of amending the document that is explicit, authentic, and the exclusive means of amendment; it promotes wisdom and justice through enhancing deliberation and prudence; and its process complements federalism and separation of powers that are key features of the Constitution. He argues that Article V remains the most clear and powerful way to register the sovereign desires of the American public with regard to alterations of their fundamental law. In the end, Article V is an essential bulwark to maintaining a written Constitution that secures the rights of the people against both elites and themselves.

The view that the Article V amendment process is the only legitimate vehicle for bringing about constitutional change is, as pointed out by constitutional law scholar Joel K. Goldstein, &quot;challenged by numerous widely-accepted judicial decisions that have introduced new meaning into constitutional language by departing from original intentions, expectations, or meaning&quot;. He also points out how constitutional institutions have, independent of both judicial activity and alterations effected though the Article V process, evolved &quot;to take forms inconsistent with what the Founders imagined or the language they wrote suggested&quot;.

In his farewell address, President George Washington said:
If in the opinion of the People the distribution or modification of the Constitutional powers be in any particular wrong, let it be corrected by an amendment in the way which the Constitution designates. But let there be no change by usurpation; for though this, in one instance, may be the instrument of good, it is the customary weapon by which free governments are destroyed. The precedent must always greatly overbalance in permanent evil any partial or transient benefit which the use can at any time yield.

This statement by Washington has become controversial, and scholars disagree about whether it still describes the proper constitutional order in the United States. Scholars who dismiss Washington&#x27;s position often argue that the Constitution itself was adopted without following the procedures in the Articles of Confederation, while Constitutional attorney Michael Farris disagrees, saying the convention was a product of the States&#x27; residual power, and the amendment in adoption process was legal, having received the unanimous assent of the States&#x27; legislatures.

==Amending Article V==
Article V lays out the procedures for amending the Constitution, but it does not explicitly state whether those procedures apply to Article V itself. According to law professor George Mader, there have been numerous proposals to amend the Constitution&#x27;s amending procedures, and &quot;it is generally accepted that constitutional amending provisions can be used to amend themselves.&quot; Even so, Article V has never been amended.

==See also==
* Democratic backsliding in the United States#Undemocratic institutions – for a critique of the U.S. Constitution&#x27;s amendment process
* Gödel&#x27;s Loophole
* List of amendments to the United States Constitution
* List of proposed amendments to the United States Constitution
* List of state applications for an Article V Convention
* List of rescissions of Article V Convention applications

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

*U.S. Government Printing Office (2013) &quot;The Constitution of the United States of America: Analysis and Interpretation&quot;
*CRS Annotated Constitution: Article 5</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q48434" start="0" end="12" title="Article Five of the United States Constitution" label="Article Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="20" end="46" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q53463" start="185" end="194" title="Constitutional amendment" label="amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q193170" start="225" end="237" title="ratification" label="ratification"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="281" end="289" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362323" start="308" end="312" title="supermajority" label="vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="325" end="349" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="358" end="364" title="United States Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166316" start="374" end="406" title="Convention to propose amendments to the United States Constitution" label="convention to propose amendments"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270264" start="462" end="480" title="State legislature (United States)" label="state legislatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="631" end="637" title="U.S. state" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603862" start="644" end="665" title="state ratifying conventions" label="ratifying conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q213443" start="801" end="823" title="Twenty-First Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twenty-First Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384148" start="906" end="918" title="Equal footing" label="equal weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q17990855" start="1501" end="1508" title="Entrenched clause" label="shields"/>
<link wikidata="Q48416" start="1526" end="1537" title="Article One of the United States Constitution" label="Article One"/>
<link wikidata="Q12981973" start="1648" end="1654" title="History of slavery" label="slaves"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1686" end="1698" title="direct tax#U.S. constitutional law sense" label="direct taxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q779351" start="1748" end="1764" title="Sunset provision" label="limited duration"/>
<link wikidata="Q230698" start="2118" end="2141" title="List of amendments to the United States Constitution" label="Thirty-three amendments"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="2442" end="2456" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362323" start="3061" end="3071" title="two-thirds majority" label="two-thirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q405475" start="3418" end="3448" title="Constitutional Convention (United States)" label="1787 Constitutional Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="3842" end="3855" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440616" start="3872" end="3889" title="Federalist No. 43" label="Federalist No. 43"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="4183" end="4201" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440664" start="4218" end="4235" title="Federalist No. 85" label="Federalist No. 85"/>
<link wikidata="Q162932" start="4391" end="4403" title="1st United States Congress" label="1st Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="4415" end="4452" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="a series of constitutional amendments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475062" start="4675" end="4691" title="joint resolution" label="joint resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="4795" end="4808" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q665141" start="5046" end="5055" title="precedent" label="precedent"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="5191" end="5203" title="President of the United States" label="presidential"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241017" start="5263" end="5272" title="Presentment Clause" label="Section 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q476068" start="5291" end="5310" title="Act of Congress" label="federal legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q188675" start="5383" end="5392" title="signature" label="signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="5396" end="5400" title="veto" label="veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q15042681" start="5590" end="5615" title="Hollingsworth v. Virginia" label="Hollingsworth v. Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="5634" end="5647" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q192611" start="6161" end="6169" title="Electoral district" label="district"/>
<link wikidata="Q836357" start="6204" end="6213" title="Balanced budget amendment" label="amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q197656" start="6451" end="6472" title="Seventeenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Seventeenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603862" start="6941" end="6968" title="state ratifying conventions" label="state ratifying conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q213443" start="7242" end="7264" title="Twenty-first Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twenty-first Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893485" start="7275" end="7299" title="United States v. Sprague" label="United States v. Sprague"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684923" start="7495" end="7509" title="Hawke v. Smith" label="Hawke v. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080820" start="7535" end="7556" title="Ohio General Assembly" label="Ohio General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q156784" start="7584" end="7604" title="Eighteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Eighteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q331513" start="7734" end="7752" title="popular referendum" label="popular referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164222" start="7785" end="7802" title="Constitution of Ohio" label="Ohio Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q635713" start="8507" end="8537" title="Archivist of the United States" label="Archivist of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810051" start="8636" end="8647" title="Title 1 of the United States Code" label="1 U.S. Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378260" start="8701" end="8711" title="Registered mail" label="registered"/>
<link wikidata="Q889821" start="8740" end="8748" title="Governor (United States)" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q446780" start="9138" end="9149" title="Promulgation" label="proclaiming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440362" start="9299" end="9315" title="Federal Register" label="Federal Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q909723" start="9332" end="9363" title="United States Statutes at Large" label="United States Statutes at Large"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614979" start="9517" end="9532" title="Steven Levitsky" label="Steven Levitsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q60775852" start="9537" end="9551" title="Daniel Ziblatt" label="Daniel Ziblatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q156784" start="10191" end="10211" title="Eighteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Eighteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097736" start="10320" end="10341" title="Child Labor Amendment" label="Child Labor Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276951" start="10725" end="10740" title="Dillon v. Gloss" label="Dillon v. Gloss"/>
<link wikidata="Q5143039" start="11286" end="11303" title="Coleman v. Miller" label="Coleman v. Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q219736" start="11784" end="11808" title="Twenty-seventh Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twenty-seventh Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382648" start="12483" end="12491" title="majority" label="majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889772" start="14019" end="14073" title="United States District Court for the District of Idaho" label="United States District Court for the District of Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q883942" start="14486" end="14490" title="Mootness" label="moot"/>
<link wikidata="Q779351" start="14679" end="14695" title="sunset provision" label="sunset provision"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14756" end="14764" title="Article One of the United States Constitution#Slave trade" label="Clause 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="14843" end="14849" title="Slavery in the United States" label="slaves"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14872" end="14880" title="Article One of the United States Constitution#Apportionment of direct taxes" label="Clause 4"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14901" end="14913" title="direct tax#U.S. constitutional law" label="direct taxes"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14982" end="15012" title="Article One of the United States Constitution#Clause 3: Apportionment of Representatives and taxes" label="Article I, Section 2, Clause 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="15182" end="15188" title="United States Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15206" end="15225" title="Article One of the United States Constitution#Clause 1: Composition; Election of Senators" label="Section 3, Clause 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q17990855" start="15383" end="15404" title="Entrenched clause" label="entrenched provisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904872" start="16074" end="16090" title="Corwin Amendment" label="Corwin Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q112555964" start="16164" end="16178" title="Richard Albert (professor)" label="Richard Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540431" start="16371" end="16386" title="Akhil Reed Amar" label="Akhil Reed Amar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6504558" start="16553" end="16570" title="Lawrence G. Sager" label="Lawrence G. Sager"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540431" start="16927" end="16937" title="Akhil Amar" label="Akhil Amar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545908" start="19088" end="19108" title="George Washington&amp;#x27;s Farewell Address" label="his farewell address"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="19120" end="19137" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q493620" start="19963" end="19988" title="Articles of Confederation" label="Articles of Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q758225" start="20011" end="20019" title="attorney-at-law" label="attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6830227" start="20020" end="20034" title="Michael Farris (lawyer)" label="Michael Farris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315291" start="20102" end="20116" title="residual power" label="residual power"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20368" end="20410" title="Constitutional amendment#Inadmissible amendments" label="those procedures apply to Article V itself"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20715" end="20784" title="Democratic backsliding in the United States#Undemocratic institutions" label="Democratic backsliding in the United States#Undemocratic institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q106178755" start="20854" end="20875" title="Gödel&amp;#x27;s Loophole" label="Gödel&amp;#x27;s Loophole"/>
<link wikidata="Q230698" start="20878" end="20930" title="List of amendments to the United States Constitution" label="List of amendments to the United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6635450" start="20933" end="20994" title="List of proposed amendments to the United States Constitution" label="List of proposed amendments to the United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6640528" start="20997" end="21051" title="List of state applications for an Article V Convention" label="List of state applications for an Article V Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595630" start="21054" end="21110" title="List of rescissions of Article V Convention applications" label="List of rescissions of Article V Convention applications"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31651" wikidata="Q48436" url="?curid=31651" title="Article Six of the United States Constitution">
<text>Article Six of the United States Constitution establishes the laws and treaties of the United States made in accordance with it as the supreme law of the land, forbids a religious test as a requirement for holding a governmental position, and holds the United States under the Constitution responsible for debts incurred by the United States under the Articles of Confederation.

==Text==

== Clauses ==
===Debts===

The first clause of the Article provides that debts contracted prior to the adoption of the Constitution remain valid, as they were under the Articles of Confederation.

===Supremacy===

Clause two provides that the Constitution, federal laws made pursuant to it, and treaties made under its authority constitute the supreme law of the land. It provides that state courts are bound by the supreme law; in case of conflict between federal and state law, the federal law must be applied. Even state constitutions are subordinate to federal law.

The Supreme Court under John Marshall (the Marshall Court) was influential in construing the supremacy clause. It first ruled that it had the power to review the decisions of state courts allegedly in conflict with the supreme law, claims of &quot;state sovereignty&quot; notwithstanding. In &quot;Martin v. Hunter&#x27;s Lessee&quot; (1816), the Supreme Court confronted the Chief Justice of Virginia, Spencer Roane, who had previously declared a Supreme Court decision unconstitutional and refused to permit the state courts to abide by it. The Court upheld the Judiciary Act, which permitted it to hear appeals from state courts, on the grounds that Congress had passed it under the supremacy clause.

The Supreme Court has also struck down attempts by states to control or direct the affairs of federal institutions. &quot;McCulloch v. Maryland&quot; (1819) was a significant case in this regard. The state of Maryland had levied a tax on banks not chartered by the state; the tax applied, state judges ruled, to the Bank of the United States chartered by Congress in 1816. Marshall wrote that &quot;the States have no power, by taxation or otherwise, to retard, impede, burden, or in any manner control, the operations of the constitutional laws enacted by Congress to carry into execution the powers vested in the general government.&quot; United States property is wholly immune to state taxation, as are government activities and institutions. Congress may explicitly provide immunity from taxation in certain cases, for instance by immunizing a federal contractor. Federal employees, however, may not be immunized from taxes, as the tax would not in any way impede government activities.

&quot;Gibbons v. Ogden&quot; (1824) was another influential case involving the supremacy clause. The state of New York had granted Aaron Ogden a monopoly over the steamboat business in the Hudson River. The other party, Thomas Gibbons, had obtained a federal permit under the Coastal Licensing Act to perform the same task. The Supreme Court upheld the federal permit. John Marshall wrote, &quot;The nullity of an act, inconsistent with the Constitution, is produced by the declaration, that the Constitution is the supreme law. The appropriate application of that part of the clause which confers the same supremacy on laws and treaties, is to such acts of the State legislatures as do not transcend their powers, but though enacted in the execution of acknowledged State powers, interfere with, or are contrary to the laws of Congress, made in pursuance of the Constitution, or some treaty made under the authority of the United States. In every such case, the act of Congress, or the treaty, is supreme; and the law of the State, though enacted in the exercise of powers not controverted, must yield to it.&quot;

&quot;Reid v. Covert&quot; (1957) ruled that no branch of the United States Government can have powers conferred upon it by treaty that have not been conferred by the United States Constitution.

===Oaths===
Federal and state legislators, executive officers and judges are, by the third clause of the article, bound by oath or affirmation to support the Constitution. Congress may determine the form of such an oath. In &quot;Ex parte Garland&quot; (1866), the Supreme Court held that a test oath would violate the Constitution, so it invalidated the law requiring the following oath:

The Supreme Court found that the law constituted an unconstitutional &quot;ex post facto&quot; law, for it retroactively punished the offenses mentioned in the oath by preventing those who committed them from taking office.

Congress may not require religious tests for an office under the United States. Thus, Congress may include the customary words &quot;so help me God&quot; in an oath, but an individual would be under no compulsion to utter them, as such a requirement would constitute a religious test.

The current oath administered is as follows:

During the 1960 presidential campaign, the issue of whether the nation would for the first time elect a Catholic to the highest office in the land raised the specter of an implicit, but no less effective, religious test. John F. Kennedy, in his on 12 September 1960, addressed the question directly, saying,

== References ==
== Further reading ==
*Irons, Peter. (1999). &quot;A People&#x27;s History of the Supreme Court.&quot; New York: Penguin.

== External links ==

*Kilman, Johnny and George Costello (Eds). (2000). &quot;The Constitution of the United States of America: Analysis and Interpretation.&quot;
*CRS Annotated Constitution: Article 6</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q48436" start="0" end="11" title="Article Six of the United States Constitution" label="Article Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="19" end="45" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="62" end="65" title="law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q131569" start="71" end="79" title="treaty" label="treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="87" end="100" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428908" start="170" end="184" title="Test Act" label="religious test"/>
<link wikidata="Q493620" start="352" end="377" title="Articles of Confederation" label="Articles of Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q493620" start="559" end="584" title="Articles of Confederation" label="Articles of Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308934" start="776" end="788" title="State court (United States)" label="state courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603671" start="908" end="927" title="State constitutions in the United States" label="state constitutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q310829" start="985" end="998" title="John Marshall" label="John Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773534" start="1000" end="1018" title="Marshall Court" label="the Marshall Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776984" start="1259" end="1289" title="Martin v. Hunter&amp;#x27;s Lessee" label="Martin v. Hunter&amp;#x27;s Lessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="1354" end="1362" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576169" start="1364" end="1377" title="Spencer Roane" label="Spencer Roane"/>
<link wikidata="Q908270" start="1788" end="1809" title="McCulloch v. Maryland" label="McCulloch v. Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="1875" end="1883" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308289" start="2665" end="2681" title="Gibbons v. Ogden" label="Gibbons v. Ogden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="2769" end="2777" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="2848" end="2860" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310001" start="3782" end="3796" title="Reid v. Covert" label="Reid v. Covert"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="3943" end="3969" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q381045" start="4095" end="4099" title="oath" label="oath"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688993" start="4103" end="4114" title="Affirmation in law" label="affirmation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419190" start="4202" end="4218" title="Ex parte Garland" label="Ex parte Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q328293" start="4431" end="4460" title="Ex post facto law" label="&amp;quot;ex post facto&amp;quot; law"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="5140" end="5155" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31653" wikidata="Q12616" url="?curid=31653" title="First Amendment to the United States Constitution">
<text>The First Amendment (Amendment I) to the United States Constitution prevents Congress from making laws respecting an establishment of religion; prohibiting the free exercise of religion; or abridging the freedom of speech, the freedom of the press, the freedom of assembly, or the right to petition the government for redress of grievances. It was adopted on December 15, 1791, as one of the ten amendments that constitute the Bill of Rights. In the original draft of the Bill of Rights, what is now the First Amendment occupied third place. The first two articles were not ratified by the states, so the article on disestablishment and free speech ended up being first.

The Bill of Rights was proposed to assuage Anti-Federalist opposition to Constitutional ratification. Initially, the First Amendment applied only to laws enacted by the Congress, and many of its provisions were interpreted more narrowly than they are today. Beginning with &quot;Gitlow v. New York&quot; (1925), the Supreme Court applied the First Amendment to states—a process known as incorporation—through the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.

In &quot;Everson v. Board of Education&quot; (1947), the Court drew on Thomas Jefferson&#x27;s correspondence to call for &quot;a wall of separation between church and State&quot;, a literary but clarifying metaphor for the separation of religions from government and vice versa as well as the free exercise of religious beliefs that many Founders favored. Through decades of contentious litigation, the precise boundaries of the mandated separation have been adjudicated in ways that periodically created controversy. Speech rights were expanded significantly in a series of 20th and 21st century court decisions which protected various forms of political speech, anonymous speech, campaign finance, pornography, and school speech; these rulings also defined a series of exceptions to First Amendment protections. The Supreme Court overturned English common law precedent to increase the burden of proof for defamation and libel suits, most notably in &quot;New York Times Co. v. Sullivan&quot; (1964). Commercial speech, however, is less protected by the First Amendment than political speech, and is therefore subject to greater regulation.

The Free Press Clause protects publication of information and opinions, and applies to a wide variety of media. In &quot;Near v. Minnesota&quot; (1931) and &quot;New York Times v. United States&quot; (1971), the Supreme Court ruled that the First Amendment protected against prior restraint—pre-publication censorship—in almost all cases. The Petition Clause protects the right to petition all branches and agencies of government for action. In addition to the right of assembly guaranteed by this clause, the Court has also ruled that the amendment implicitly protects freedom of association.

Although the First Amendment applies only to state actors, there is a common misconception that it prohibits anyone from limiting free speech, including private, non-governmental entities. Moreover, the Supreme Court has determined that protection of speech is not absolute.

==Text==


==Background==


The right to petition for redress of grievances was a principle included in the 1215 Magna Carta, as well as the 1689 English Bill of Rights. In 1776, the second year of the American Revolutionary War, the Virginia colonial legislature passed a Declaration of Rights that included the sentence &quot;The freedom of the press is one of the greatest bulwarks of liberty, and can never be restrained but by despotic Governments.&quot; Eight of the other twelve states made similar pledges. However, these declarations were generally considered &quot;mere admonitions to state legislatures&quot;, rather than enforceable provisions.

After several years of comparatively weak government under the Articles of Confederation, a Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia proposed a new constitution on September 17, 1787, featuring among other changes a stronger chief executive. George Mason, a Constitutional Convention delegate and the drafter of Virginia&#x27;s Declaration of Rights, proposed that the Constitution include a bill of rights listing and guaranteeing civil liberties. Other delegates—including future Bill of Rights drafter James Madison—disagreed, arguing that existing state guarantees of civil liberties were sufficient and any attempt to enumerate individual rights risked the implication that other, unnamed rights were unprotected. After a brief debate, Mason&#x27;s proposal was defeated by a unanimous vote of the state delegations.

For the constitution to be ratified, however, nine of the thirteen states were required to approve it in state conventions. Opposition to ratification (&quot;Anti-Federalism&quot;) was partly based on the Constitution&#x27;s lack of adequate guarantees for civil liberties. Supporters of the Constitution in states where popular sentiment was against ratification (including Virginia, Massachusetts, and New York) successfully proposed that their state conventions both ratify the Constitution and call for the addition of a bill of rights. The U.S. Constitution was eventually ratified by all thirteen states. In the 1st United States Congress, following the state legislatures&#x27; request, James Madison proposed twenty constitutional amendments, and his proposed draft of the First Amendment read as follows:
The civil rights of none shall be abridged on account of religious belief or worship, nor shall any national religion be established, nor shall the full and equal rights of conscience be in any manner, or on any pretext, infringed. The people shall not be deprived or abridged of their right to speak, to write, or to publish their sentiments; and the freedom of the press, as one of the great bulwarks of liberty, shall be inviolable. The people shall not be restrained from peaceably assembling and consulting for their common good; nor from applying to the Legislature by petitions, or remonstrances, for redress of their grievances.

This language was greatly condensed by Congress, and passed the House and Senate with almost no recorded debate, complicating future discussion of the Amendment&#x27;s intent. Congress approved and submitted to the states for their ratification twelve articles of amendment on September 25, 1789. The revised text of the third article became the First Amendment, because the last ten articles of the submitted 12 articles were ratified by the requisite number of states on December 15, 1791, and are now known collectively as the Bill of Rights.

==Freedom of religion==

Religious liberty, also known as freedom of religion, is &quot;the right of all persons to believe, speak, and act – individually and in community with others, in private and in public – in accord with their understanding of ultimate truth.&quot; The acknowledgement of religious freedom as the first right protected in the Bill of Rights points toward the American founders&#x27; understanding of the importance of religion to human, social, and political flourishing. Freedom of religion is protected by the First Amendment through its Establishment Clause and Free Exercise Clause, which together form the religious liberty clauses of the First Amendment. The first clause prohibits any governmental &quot;establishment of religion&quot; and the second prohibits any governmental interference with &quot;the free exercise thereof.&quot; These clauses of the First Amendment encompass &quot;the two big arenas of religion in constitutional law. Establishment cases deal with the Constitution&#x27;s ban on Congress endorsing, promoting or becoming too involved with religion. Free exercise cases deal with Americans&#x27; rights to practice their faith.&quot; Both clauses sometimes compete with each other. The Supreme Court in &quot;McCreary County v. American Civil Liberties Union&quot; (2005) clarified this by the following example: When the government spends money on the clergy, then it looks like establishing religion, but if the government cannot pay for military chaplains, then many soldiers and sailors would be kept from the opportunity to exercise their chosen religions. The Supreme Court developed the preferred position doctrine. In &quot;Murdock v. Pennsylvania&quot; (1943) the Supreme Court stated that &quot;Freedom of press, freedom of speech, freedom of religion are in a preferred position&quot;. The Court added:

Plainly, a community may not suppress, or the state tax, the dissemination of views because they are unpopular, annoying or distasteful. If that device were ever sanctioned, there would have been forged a ready instrument for the suppression of the faith which any minority cherishes but which does not happen to be in favor. That would be a complete repudiation of the philosophy of the Bill of Rights.

In his dissenting opinion in &quot;McGowan v. Maryland&quot; (1961), Justice William O. Douglas illustrated the broad protections offered by the First Amendment&#x27;s religious liberty clauses:

The First Amendment commands government to have no interest in theology or ritual; it admonishes government to be interested in allowing religious freedom to flourish—whether the result is to produce Catholics, Jews, or Protestants, or to turn the people toward the path of Buddha, or to end in a predominantly Moslem nation, or to produce in the long run atheists or agnostics. On matters of this kind, government must be neutral. This freedom plainly includes freedom from religion, with the right to believe, speak, write, publish and advocate anti-religious programs. &quot;Board of Education v. Barnette, supra&quot;, 319 U. S. 641. Certainly the &quot;free exercise&quot; clause does not require that everyone embrace the theology of some church or of some faith, or observe the religious practices of any majority or minority sect. The First Amendment, by its &quot;establishment&quot; clause, prevents, of course, the selection by government of an &quot;official&quot; church. Yet the ban plainly extends farther than that. We said in &quot;Everson v. Board of Education&quot;, 330 U. S. 1, 330 U. S. 16, that it would be an &quot;establishment&quot; of a religion if the Government financed one church or several churches. For what better way to &quot;establish&quot; an institution than to find the fund that will support it? The &quot;establishment&quot; clause protects citizens also against any law which selects any religious custom, practice, or ritual, puts the force of government behind it, and fines, imprisons, or otherwise penalizes a person for not observing it. The Government plainly could not join forces with one religious group and decree a universal and symbolic circumcision. Nor could it require all children to be baptized or give tax exemptions only to those whose children were baptized.

The First Amendment tolerates neither governmentally established religion nor governmental interference with religion. One of the central purposes of the First Amendment, the Supreme Court wrote in &quot;Gillette v. United States&quot; (1970), consists &quot;of ensuring governmental neutrality in matters of religion.&quot; The history of the Establishment Clause and the Free Exercise Clause and the Supreme Court&#x27;s own constitutional jurisprudence with respect to these clauses was explained in the 1985 case &quot;Wallace v. Jaffree&quot;. The Supreme Court noted at the outset that the First Amendment limits equally the power of Congress and of the states to abridge the individual freedoms it protects. The First Amendment was adopted to curtail the power of Congress to interfere with the individual&#x27;s freedom to believe, to worship, and to express himself in accordance with the dictates of his own conscience. The Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment imposes on the states the same limitations the First Amendment had always imposed on the Congress. This &quot;elementary proposition of law&quot; was confirmed and endorsed time and time again in cases like &quot;Cantwell v. Connecticut&quot;, 310 U. S. 296, 303 (1940) and &quot;Wooley v. Maynard&quot; (1977). The central liberty that unifies the various clauses in the First Amendment is the individual&#x27;s freedom of conscience:

Just as the right to speak and the right to refrain from speaking are complementary components of a broader concept of individual freedom of mind, so also the individual&#x27;s freedom to choose his own creed is the counterpart of his right to refrain from accepting the creed established by the majority. At one time, it was thought that this right merely proscribed the preference of one Christian sect over another, but would not require equal respect for the conscience of the infidel, the atheist, or the adherent of a non-Christian faith such as Islam or Judaism. But when the underlying principle has been examined in the crucible of litigation, the Court has unambiguously concluded that the individual freedom of conscience protected by the First Amendment embraces the right to select any religious faith or none at all. This conclusion derives support not only from the interest in respecting the individual&#x27;s freedom of conscience, but also from the conviction that religious beliefs worthy of respect are the product of free and voluntary choice by the faithful, and from recognition of the fact that the political interest in forestalling intolerance extends beyond intolerance among Christian sects – or even intolerance among &quot;religions&quot; – to encompass intolerance of the disbeliever and the uncertain.

===Establishment of religion===

The precise meaning of the Establishment Clause can be traced back to the beginning of the 19th century. Thomas Jefferson wrote about the First Amendment and its restriction on Congress in an 1802 reply to the Danbury Baptists, a religious minority that was concerned about the dominant position of the Congregational church in Connecticut, who had written to the newly elected president about their concerns. Jefferson wrote back:
Believing with you that religion is a matter which lies solely between Man &amp; his God, that he owes account to none other for his faith or his worship, that the legitimate powers of government reach actions only, and not opinions, I contemplate with sovereign reverence that act of the whole American people which declared that their legislature should &quot;make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof&quot;, thus building a wall of separation between Church &amp; State. Adhering to this expression of the supreme will of the nation in behalf of the rights of conscience, I shall see with sincere satisfaction the progress of those sentiments which tend to restore to man all his natural rights, convinced he has no natural right in opposition to his social duties.

In &quot;Reynolds v. United States&quot; (1878) the Supreme Court used these words to declare that &quot;it may be accepted almost as an authoritative declaration of the scope and effect of the amendment thus secured. Congress was deprived of all legislative power over mere [religious] opinion, but was left free to reach [only those religious] actions which were in violation of social duties or subversive of good order.&quot; Quoting from Jefferson&#x27;s Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom the court stated further in &quot;Reynolds&quot;:
In the preamble of this act... religious freedom is defined; and after a recital &#x27;that to suffer the civil magistrate to intrude his powers into the field of opinion, and to restrain the profession or propagation of principles on supposition of their ill tendency, is a dangerous fallacy which at once destroys all religious liberty,&#x27; it is declared &#x27;that it is time enough for the rightful purposes of civil government for its officers to interfere [only] when [religious] principles break out into overt acts against peace and good order.&#x27; In these two sentences is found the true distinction between what properly belongs to the church and what to the State.
&quot;Reynolds&quot; was the first Supreme Court decision to use the metaphor &quot;a wall of separation between Church and State.&quot; American historian George Bancroft was consulted by Chief Justice Morrison Waite in &quot;Reynolds&quot; regarding the views on establishment by the Founding Fathers. Bancroft advised Waite to consult Jefferson and Waite then discovered the above quoted letter in a library after skimming through the index to Jefferson&#x27;s collected works according to historian Don Drakeman.

The Establishment Clause forbids federal, state, and local laws whose purpose is &quot;an establishment of religion.&quot; The term &quot;establishment&quot; denoted in general direct aid to the church by the government. In &quot;Larkin v. Grendel&#x27;s Den, Inc.&quot; (1982) the Supreme Court stated that &quot;the core rationale underlying the Establishment Clause is preventing &#x27;a fusion of governmental and religious functions,&#x27; &quot;Abington School District v. Schempp&quot;, 374 U. S. 203, 374 U. S. 222 (1963).&quot; The Establishment Clause acts as a double security, for its aim is as well the prevention of religious control over government as the prevention of political control over religion. The First Amendment&#x27;s framers knew that intertwining government with religion could lead to bloodshed or oppression, because this happened too often historically. To prevent this dangerous development they set up the Establishment Clause as a line of demarcation between the functions and operations of the institutions of religion and government in society. The Federal government of the United States as well as the state governments are prohibited from establishing or sponsoring religion, because, as observed by the Supreme Court in &quot;Walz v. Tax Commission of the City of New York&quot; (1970), the &#x27;establishment&#x27; of a religion historically implied sponsorship, financial support, and active involvement of the sovereign in religious activity. The Establishment Clause thus serves to ensure laws, as said by Supreme Court in &quot;Gillette v. United States&quot; (1970), which are &quot;secular in purpose, evenhanded in operation, and neutral in primary impact&quot;.

The First Amendment&#x27;s prohibition on an establishment of religion includes many things from prayer in widely varying government settings over financial aid for religious individuals and institutions to comment on religious questions. The Supreme Court stated in this context: &quot;In these varied settings, issues of about interpreting inexact Establishment Clause language, like difficult interpretative issues generally, arise from the tension of competing values, each constitutionally respectable, but none open to realization to the logical limit.&quot; The National Constitution Center observes that, absent some common interpretations by jurists, the precise meaning of the Establishment Clause is unclear and that decisions by the United Supreme Court relating to the Establishment Clause often are by 5–4 votes. The Establishment Clause, however, reflects a widely held consensus that there should be no nationally established church after the American Revolutionary War. Against this background the National Constitution Center states:
Virtually all jurists agree that it would violate the Establishment Clause for the government to compel attendance or financial support of a religious institution as such, for the government to interfere with a religious organization&#x27;s selection of clergy or religious doctrine; for religious organizations or figures acting in a religious capacity to exercise governmental power; or for the government to extend benefits to some religious entities and not others without adequate secular justification.

Originally, the First Amendment applied only to the federal government, and some states continued official state religions after ratification. Massachusetts, for example, was officially Congregational until the 1830s. In &quot;Everson v. Board of Education&quot; (1947), the Supreme Court incorporated the Establishment Clause (i.e., made it apply against the states):
The &#x27;establishment of religion&#x27; clause of the First Amendment means at least this: Neither a state nor the Federal Government can set up a church. Neither can pass laws which aid one religion, aid all religions, or prefer one religion to another... in the words of Jefferson, the [First Amendment] clause against establishment of religion by law was intended to erect &#x27;a wall of separation between church and State&#x27;... That wall must be kept high and impregnable. We could not approve the slightest breach.

Citing Justice Hugo Black in &quot;Torcaso v. Watkins&quot; (1961) the Supreme Court repeated its statement from &quot;Everson v. Board of Education&quot; (1947) in &quot;Abington School District v. Schempp&quot; (1963): 

We repeat and again reaffirm that neither a State nor the Federal Government can constitutionally force a person &#x27;to profess a belief or disbelief in any religion.&#x27; Neither can it constitutionally pass laws or impose requirements which aid all religions as against non-believers, and neither can it aid those religions based on a belief in the existence of God as against those religions founded on different beliefs.

At the core of the Establishment Clause lays the core principle of denominational neutrality. In &quot;Epperson v. Arkansas&quot; (1968) the Supreme Court outlined the broad principle of denominational neutrality mandated by the First Amendment: &quot;Government in our democracy, state and national, must be neutral in matters of religious theory, doctrine, and practice. It may not be hostile to any religion or to the advocacy of no-religion, and it may not aid, foster, or promote one religion or religious theory against another or even against the militant opposite. The First Amendment mandates governmental neutrality between religion and religion, and between religion and nonreligion.&quot; The clearest command of the Establishment Clause is, according to the Supreme Court in &quot;Larson v. Valente&quot;, , that one religious denomination cannot be officially preferred over another. In &quot;Zorach v. Clauson&quot; (1952) the Supreme Court further observed: &quot;Government may not finance religious groups nor undertake religious instruction nor blend secular and sectarian education nor use secular institutions to force one or some religion on any person. But we find no constitutional requirement which makes it necessary for government to be hostile to religion and to throw its weight against efforts to widen the effective scope of religious influence. The government must be neutral when it comes to competition between sects. It may not thrust any sect on any person. It may not make a religious observance compulsory. It may not coerce anyone to attend church, to observe a religious holiday, or to take religious instruction. But it can close its doors or suspend its operations as to those who want to repair to their religious sanctuary for worship or instruction.&quot; In &quot;McCreary County v. American Civil Liberties Union&quot; (2005) the Court explained that when the government acts with the ostensible and predominant purpose of advancing religion, then it violates that central Establishment Clause value of official religious neutrality, because there is no neutrality when the government&#x27;s ostensible object is to take sides.

In &quot;Torcaso v. Watkins&quot; (1961), the Supreme Court ruled that the Constitution prohibits states and the federal government from requiring any kind of religious test for public office. The Supreme Court in the same case made it also clear that state governments and the federal government are prohibited from passing laws or imposing requirements which aid all religions as against non-believers, as well as aiding those religions based on a belief in the existence of God as against those religions founded on different beliefs. In &quot;Board of Education of Kiryas Joel Village School District v. Grumet&quot; (1994), the Court concluded that &quot;government should not prefer one religion to another, or religion to irreligion.&quot; In a series of cases in the first decade of the 2000s—&quot;Van Orden v. Perry&quot; (2005), &quot;McCreary County v. ACLU&quot; (2005), and &quot;Salazar v. Buono&quot; (2010)—the Court considered the issue of religious monuments on federal lands without reaching a majority reasoning on the subject.

====Separationists====

&quot;Everson&quot; used the metaphor of a wall of separation between church and state, derived from the correspondence of President Thomas Jefferson. It had been long established in the decisions of the Supreme Court, beginning with &quot;Reynolds v. United States&quot; (1878), when the Court reviewed the history of the early Republic in deciding the extent of the liberties of Mormons. Chief Justice Morrison Waite, who consulted the historian George Bancroft, also discussed at some length the &quot;Memorial and Remonstrance against Religious Assessments&quot; by James Madison, who drafted the First Amendment; Madison used the metaphor of a &quot;great barrier&quot;.

In &quot;Everson&quot;, the Court adopted Jefferson&#x27;s words. The Court has affirmed it often, with majority, but not unanimous, support. Warren Nord, in &quot;Does God Make a Difference?&quot;, characterized the general tendency of the dissents as a weaker reading of the First Amendment; the dissents tend to be &quot;less concerned about the dangers of establishment and less concerned to protect free exercise rights, particularly of religious minorities&quot;.

Beginning with &quot;Everson&quot;, which permitted New Jersey school boards to pay for transportation to parochial schools, the Court has used various tests to determine when the wall of separation has been breached. &quot;Everson&quot; laid down the test that establishment existed when aid was given to religion, but that the transportation was justifiable because the benefit to the children was more important.

Felix Frankfurter called in his concurrence opinion in &quot;McCollum v. Board of Education&quot; (1948) for a strict separation between state and church: &quot;Separation means separation, not something less. Jefferson&#x27;s metaphor in describing the relation between Church and State speaks of a &#x27;wall of separation&#x27;, not of a fine line easily overstepped. ... &#x27;The great American principle of eternal separation&#x27;—Elihu Root&#x27;s phrase bears repetition—is one of the vital reliances of our Constitutional system for assuring unities among our people stronger than our diversities. It is the Court&#x27;s duty to enforce this principle in its full integrity.&quot;

In the school prayer cases of the early 1960s &quot;Engel v. Vitale&quot; and &quot;Abington School District v. Schempp&quot;, aid seemed irrelevant. The Court ruled on the basis that a legitimate action both served a secular purpose and did not &quot;primarily&quot; assist religion.

In &quot;Walz v. Tax Commission of the City of New York&quot; (1970), the Court ruled that a legitimate action could not entangle government with religion. In &quot;Lemon v. Kurtzman&quot; (1971), these points were combined into the Lemon test, declaring that an action was an establishment if:
# the statute (or practice) lacked a secular purpose;
# its principal or primary effect advanced or inhibited religion; or
# it fostered an excessive government entanglement with religion.

The &quot;Lemon&quot; test has been criticized by justices and legal scholars, but it has remained the predominant means by which the Court enforced the Establishment Clause. In &quot;Agostini v. Felton&quot; (1997), the entanglement prong of the &quot;Lemon&quot; test was converted to simply being a factor in determining the effect of the challenged statute or practice. In &quot;Zelman v. Simmons-Harris&quot; (2002), the opinion of the Court considered secular purpose and the absence of primary effect; a concurring opinion saw both cases as having treated entanglement as part of the primary purpose test. Further tests, such as the endorsement test and coercion test, have been developed to determine whether a government action violated the Establishment Clause.

In &quot;Lemon&quot;, the Court stated that the separation of church and state could never be absolute: &quot;Our prior holdings do not call for total separation between church and state; total separation is not possible in an absolute sense. Some relationship between government and religious organizations is inevitable&quot;, the court wrote. &quot;Judicial caveats against entanglement must recognize that the line of separation, far from being a &#x27;wall&#x27;, is a blurred, indistinct, and variable barrier depending on all the circumstances of a particular relationship.&quot;

After the Supreme Court ruling in the coach praying case of &quot;Kennedy v. Bremerton School District&quot; (2022), the Lemon Test may have been replaced or complemented with a reference to historical practices and understandings.

====Accommodationists====

Accommodationists, in contrast, argue along with Justice William O. Douglas that &quot;[w]e are a religious people whose institutions presuppose a Supreme Being.&quot; Furthermore, as observed by Chief Justice Warren E. Burger in &quot;Walz v. Tax Commission of the City of New York&quot; (1970) with respect to the separation of church and state: &quot;No perfect or absolute separation is really possible; the very existence of the Religion Clauses is an involvement of sorts—one that seeks to mark boundaries to avoid excessive entanglement.&quot; He also coined the term &quot;benevolent neutrality&quot; as a combination of neutrality and accommodationism in &quot;Walz&quot; to characterize a way to ensure that there is no conflict between the Establishment Clause and the Free Exercise Clause. Burger&#x27;s successor, William Rehnquist, called for the abandonment of the &quot;wall of separation between church and State&quot; metaphor in &quot;Wallace v. Jaffree&quot; (1985), because he believed this metaphor was based on bad history and proved itself useless as a guide to judging.

David Shultz has said that accommodationists claim the &quot;Lemon&quot; test should be applied selectively. As such, for many conservatives, the Establishment Clause solely prevents the establishment of a state church, not public acknowledgements of God nor &#x27;developing policies that encourage general religious beliefs that do not favor a particular sect and are consistent with the secular government&#x27;s goals&#x27;. In &quot;Lynch v. Donnelly&quot; (1984), the Supreme Court observed that the &quot;concept of a &quot;wall&quot; of separation between church and state is a useful metaphor, but is not an accurate description of the practical aspects of the relationship that in fact exists. The Constitution does not require complete separation of church and state; it affirmatively mandates accommodation, not merely tolerance, of all religions, and forbids hostility toward any.&quot;

===Free exercise of religion===


The acknowledgement of religious freedom as the first right protected in the Bill of Rights points toward the American founders&#x27; understanding of the importance of religion to human, social, and political flourishing. The First Amendment makes clear that it sought to protect &quot;the free exercise&quot; of religion, or what might be called &quot;free exercise equality.&quot; Free exercise is the liberty of persons to reach, hold, practice and change beliefs freely according to the dictates of conscience. The Free Exercise Clause prohibits governmental interference with religious belief and, within limits, religious practice. &quot;Freedom of religion means freedom to hold an opinion or belief, but not to take action in violation of social duties or subversive to good order.&quot; The clause withdraws from legislative power, state and federal, the exertion of any restraint on the free exercise of religion. Its purpose is to secure religious liberty in the individual by prohibiting any invasions thereof by civil authority. &quot;The door of the Free Exercise Clause stands tightly closed against any governmental regulation of religious beliefs as such, &quot;Cantwell v. Connecticut&quot;, 310 U. S. 296, 310 U. S. 303. Government may neither compel affirmation of a repugnant belief, &quot;Torcaso v. Watkins&quot;, 367 U. S. 488; nor penalize or discriminate against individuals or groups because they hold religious views abhorrent to the authorities, &quot;Fowler v. Rhode Island&quot;, 345 U. S. 67; nor employ the taxing power to inhibit the dissemination of particular religious views, &quot;Murdock v. Pennsylvania&quot;, 319 U. S. 105; &quot;Follett v. McCormick&quot;, 321 U. S. 573; cf. &quot;Grosjean v. American Press Co.&quot;, 297 U. S. 233.&quot;

The Free Exercise Clause offers a double protection, for it is a shield not only against outright prohibitions with respect to the free exercise of religion, but also against penalties on the free exercise of religion and against indirect governmental coercion. Relying on &quot;Employment Division v. Smith&quot; (1990) and quoting from &quot;Church of the Lukumi Babalu Aye, Inc. v. Hialeah&quot; (1993) the Supreme Court stated in &quot;Trinity Lutheran Church of Columbia, Inc. v. Comer&quot; (2017) that religious observers are protected against unequal treatment by virtue of the Free Exercise Clause and laws which target the religious for &quot;special disabilities&quot; based on their &quot;religious status&quot; must be covered by the application of strict scrutiny.

In &quot;Reynolds v. United States&quot; (1878), the Supreme Court found that while laws cannot interfere with religious belief and opinions, laws can regulate religious practices like human sacrifice or the obsolete Hindu practice of suttee. The Court stated that to rule otherwise, &quot;would be to make the professed doctrines of religious belief superior to the law of the land, and in effect permit every citizen to become a law unto himself. Government would exist only in name under such circumstances.&quot; If the purpose or effect of a law is to impede the observance of one or all religions, or is to discriminate invidiously between religions, that law is constitutionally invalid even though the burden may be characterized as being only indirect. But if the State regulates conduct by enacting a general law within its power, the purpose and effect of which is to advance the State&#x27;s secular goals, the statute is valid despite its indirect burden on religious observance unless the State may accomplish its purpose by means which do not impose such a burden.
In &quot;Cantwell v. Connecticut&quot; (1940), the Court held that the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment applied the Free Exercise Clause to the states. While the right to have religious beliefs is absolute, the freedom to act on such beliefs is not absolute. Religious freedom is a universal right of all human beings and all religions, providing for the free exercise of religion or &quot;free exercise equality&quot;. Due to its nature as fundamental to the American founding and to the ordering of human society, it is rightly seen as a capricious right, i.e. universal, broad, and deep—though not absolute. Justice Field put it clearly in &quot;Davis v. Beason&quot; (1890): &quot;However free the exercise of religion may be, it must be subordinate to the criminal laws of the country, passed with reference to actions regarded by general consent as properly the subjects of punitive legislation.&quot; Furthermore, the Supreme Court in &quot;Employment Division v. Smith&quot; made clear that &quot;the right of free exercise does not relieve an individual of the obligation to comply with a &quot;valid and neutral law of general applicability on the ground that the law proscribes (or prescribes) conduct that his religion prescribes (or proscribes).&quot; &quot;United States v. Lee&quot;, 455 U. S. 252, 455 U. S. 263, n. 3 (1982) (STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment); &quot;see Minersville School Dist. Bd. of Educ. v. Gobitis, supra&quot;, 310 U.S. at 310 U. S. 595 (collecting cases).&quot; &quot;Smith&quot; also set the precedent &quot;that laws affecting certain religious practices do not violate the right to free exercise of religion as long as the laws are neutral, generally applicable, and not motivated by animus to religion.&quot;

To accept any creed or the practice of any form of worship cannot be compelled by laws, because, as stated by the Supreme Court in &quot;Braunfeld v. Brown&quot; (1961), the freedom to hold religious beliefs and opinions is absolute. Federal or state legislation cannot therefore make it a crime to hold any religious belief or opinion due to the Free Exercise Clause. Legislation by the United States or any constituent state of the United States which forces anyone to embrace any religious belief or to say or believe anything in conflict with his religious tenets is also barred by the Free Exercise Clause. Against this background, the Supreme Court stated that Free Exercise Clause broadly protects religious beliefs and opinions:
The free exercise of religion means, first and foremost, the right to believe and profess whatever religious doctrine one desires. Thus, the First Amendment obviously excludes all &quot;governmental regulation of religious beliefs as such.&quot; &quot;Sherbert v. Verner&quot; supra, 374 U.S. at 374 U. S. 402. The government may not compel affirmation of religious belief, see &quot;Torcaso v. Watkins&quot;, 367 U. S. 488 (1961), punish the expression of religious doctrines it believes to be false, &quot;United States v. Ballard&quot;, 322 U. S. 78, 322 U. S. 86–88 (1944), impose special disabilities on the basis of religious views or religious status, see &quot;McDaniel v. Paty&quot;, 435 U. S. 618 (1978); &quot;Fowler v. Rhode Island&quot;, 345 U. S. 67, 345 U. S. 69 (1953); cf. &quot;Larson v. Valente&quot;, 456 U. S. 228, 456 U. S. 245 (1982), or lend its power to one or the other side in controversies over religious authority or dogma, see &quot;Presbyterian Church v. Hull Church&quot;, 393 U. S. 440, 393 U. S. 445–452 (1969); &quot;Kedroff v. St. Nicholas Cathedral&quot;, 344 U. S. 94, 344 U. S. 95–119 (1952); &quot;Serbian Eastern Orthodox Diocese v. Milivojevich&quot;, 426 U. S. 696, 426 U. S. 708–725 (1976). But the &quot;exercise of religion&quot; often involves not only belief and profession but the performance of (or abstention from) physical acts: assembling with others for a worship service, participating in sacramental use of bread and wine, proselytizing, abstaining from certain foods or certain modes of transportation. It would be true, we think (though no case of ours has involved the point), that a state would be &quot;prohibiting the free exercise [of religion]&quot; if it sought to ban such acts or abstentions only when they are engaged in for religious reasons, or only because of the religious belief that they display. It would doubtless be unconstitutional, for example, to ban the casting of &quot;statues that are to be used for worship purposes,&quot; or to prohibit bowing down before a golden calf.&quot;

In &quot;Sherbert v. Verner&quot; (1963), the Supreme Court required states to meet the &quot;strict scrutiny&quot; standard when refusing to accommodate religiously motivated conduct. This meant the government needed to have a &quot;compelling interest&quot; regarding such a refusal. The case involved Adele Sherbert, who was denied unemployment benefits by South Carolina because she refused to work on Saturdays, something forbidden by her Seventh-day Adventist faith. In &quot;Wisconsin v. Yoder&quot; (1972), the Court ruled that a law which &quot;unduly burdens the practice of religion&quot; without a compelling interest, even though it might be &quot;neutral on its face&quot;, would be unconstitutional.
The need for a compelling governmental interest was narrowed in &quot;Employment Division v. Smith&quot; (1990), which held no such interest was required under the Free Exercise Clause regarding a neutral law of general applicability that happens to affect a religious practice, as opposed to a law that targets a particular religious practice (which does require a compelling governmental interest). In &quot;Church of Lukumi Babalu Aye v. City of Hialeah&quot; (1993), in which the meaning of &quot;neutral law of general applicability&quot; was elaborated by the court, the Supreme Court ruled Hialeah had passed an ordinance banning ritual slaughter, a practice central to the Santería religion, while providing exceptions for some practices such as the kosher slaughter. Since the ordinance was not &quot;generally applicable&quot;, the Court ruled that it needed to have a compelling interest, which it failed to have, and so was declared unconstitutional. In this case the Supreme Court also stated that inquiries whether laws discriminate based on religion does not end with the text of the laws at issue. Facial neutrality of laws (i.e. laws which are apparently neutral in their language but in reality discriminate against a particular group) is not determinative in these inquiries, because both the Free Exercise Clause and the Establishment Clause extends beyond facial discrimination. The Supreme Court explained that &quot;[o]fficial action that targets religious conduct for distinctive treatment cannot be shielded by mere compliance with the requirement of facial neutrality&quot; and &quot;[t]he Free Exercise Clause protects against governmental hostility which is masked as well as overt.&quot; The neutrality of a law is also suspect if First Amendment freedoms are curtailed to prevent isolated collateral harms not themselves prohibited by direct regulation. The Court also observed: &quot;The Free Exercise Clause &quot;protect[s] religious observers against unequal treatment,&quot; &quot;Hobbie v. Unemployment Appeals Comm&#x27;n of Fla.&quot;, 480 U. S. 136, 148 (1987) (STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment), and inequality results when a legislature decides that the governmental interests it seeks to advance are worthy of being pursued only against conduct with a religious motivation. The principle that government, in pursuit of legitimate interests, cannot in a selective manner impose burdens only on conduct motivated by religious belief is essential to the protection of the rights guaranteed by the Free Exercise Clause.&quot;

In 1993, the Congress passed the Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA), seeking to restore the compelling interest requirement applied in &quot;Sherbert&quot; and &quot;Yoder&quot;. In &quot;City of Boerne v. Flores&quot; (1997), the Court struck down the provisions of RFRA that forced state and local governments to provide protections exceeding those required by the First Amendment, on the grounds that while the Congress could enforce the Supreme Court&#x27;s interpretation of a constitutional right, the Congress could not impose its own interpretation on states and localities. Congress can enact legislation to expand First Amendment free exercise rights through its enforcement powers in Section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment, but to do so &quot;there must be a congruence and proportionality between the injury to be prevented or remedied and the means adopted to that end.&quot; The decision in &quot;City of Boerne&quot; struck down the Religious Freedom Restoration Act RFRA in so far as it applied to states and other local municipalities within them., so that partly in response to it 21 states enacted State Religious Freedom Restoration Acts since 1993. According to the court&#x27;s ruling in &quot;Gonzales v. UDV&quot; (2006), RFRA remains applicable to federal laws and so those laws must still have a &quot;compelling interest.&quot;

RFRA secures Congress’ view of the right to free exercise under the First Amendment, and it provides a remedy to redress violations of that right. The Supreme Court decided in light of this in &quot;Tanzin v. Tanvir&quot; (2020) that the Religious Freedom Restoration Act&#x27;s express remedies provision permits litigants, when appropriate, to obtain money damages against federal officials in their individual capacities. This decision is significant &quot;not only for the plaintiffs but also for cases involving violations of religious rights more broadly.&quot; In the 1982 U.S. Supreme Court case &quot;United States v. Lee (1982)&quot; (1982) the Court declared: &quot;Congress and the courts have been sensitive to the needs flowing from the Free Exercise Clause, but every person cannot be shielded from all the burdens incident to exercising every aspect of the right to practice religious beliefs. When followers of a particular sect enter into commercial activity as a matter of choice, the limits they accept on their own conduct as a matter of conscience and faith are not to be superimposed on the statutory schemes which are binding on others in that activity.&quot; The Supreme Court in &quot;Estate of Thornton v. Caldor, Inc.&quot; (1985) echoed this statement by quoting Judge Learned Hand from his 1953 case &quot;Otten v. Baltimore &amp; Ohio R. Co.&quot;, 205 F.2d 58, 61 (CA2 1953): &quot;The First Amendment ... gives no one the right to insist that, in pursuit of their own interests others must conform their conduct to his own religious necessities.&quot; In &quot;Burwell v. Hobby Lobby Stores, Inc.&quot; (2014) the Supreme Court had to decide, with a view to the First Amendment&#x27;s Free Exercise Clause and the federal Religious Freedom Restoration Act, &quot;the profound cultural question of whether a private, profit-making business organized as a corporation can &quot;exercise&quot; religion and, if it can, how far that is protected from government interference.&quot; The Court decided that closely held, for-profit corporations have free exercise rights under the RFRA, but its decision was not based on the constitutional protections of the First Amendment.

In &quot;Locke v. Davey&quot; (2004), the Court stated, &quot;[g]iven the historic and substantial state interest at issue, it cannot be concluded that the denial of funding for vocational religious instruction alone is inherently constitutionally suspect&quot;, explaining that denying funding a scholarship when it was going to be used for education in theology and when that state&#x27;s constitution forbids state aid to religious institutions &quot;was not presumptively unconstitutional, because the state was neither criminalizing nor penalizing the study of theology.&quot; The Court ruled therefore that a state has a &quot;substantial state interest&quot; in denying funding a scholarship when it was going to be used for education in theology and when that state&#x27;s constitution forbids state aid to religious institutions. In &quot;Trinity Lutheran Church of Columbia, Inc. v. Comer&quot; (2017), the Court ruled that denying a generally available public benefit on account of the religious nature of an institution violates the Free Exercise Clause. In &quot;Espinoza v. Montana Department of Revenue&quot; (2020), the Court ruled that the Free Exercise Clause forbad a state from denying a tax credit on the basis of a Blaine Amendment in that state&#x27;s constitution, which the Court said is subject to the &quot;strictest scrutiny&quot; and can only survive if it is &quot;narrowly tailored&quot; to promote &quot;interests of the highest order&quot;. Citing &quot;Lyng v. Northwest Indian Cemetery Protective Association&quot; (1988) the Supreme Court decided in the &quot;Espinoza &quot; follow-up case &quot;Carson v. Makin&quot; (2022) that the Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment protects against “indirect coercion or penalties on the free exercise of religion, not just outright prohibitions.”

==Freedom of speech and of the press==

The First Amendment broadly protects the rights of free speech and free press. Free speech means the free and public expression of opinions without censorship, interference, or restraint by the government. The term &quot;freedom of speech&quot; embedded in the First Amendment encompasses the decision what to say as well as what not to say. The speech covered by the First Amendment covers many ways of expression and therefore protects what people say as well as how they express themselves. Free press means the right of individuals to express themselves through publication and dissemination of information, ideas, and opinions without interference, constraint, or prosecution by the government. In &quot;Murdock v. Pennsylvania&quot; (1943), the Supreme Court stated that &quot;Freedom of press, freedom of speech, freedom of religion are in a preferred position&quot;. The Court added that a community may not suppress, or the state tax, the dissemination of views because they are unpopular, annoying, or distasteful. That would be a complete repudiation of the philosophy of the Bill of Rights, according to the Court. In &quot;Stanley v. Georgia&quot; (1969), the Supreme Court stated that the First Amendment protects the right to receive information and ideas, regardless of their social worth, and to be generally free from governmental intrusions into one&#x27;s privacy and control of one&#x27;s own thoughts.

The Supreme Court of the United States characterized the rights of free speech and free press as fundamental personal rights and liberties and noted that the exercise of these rights lies at the foundation of free government by free men. The Supreme Court stated in &quot;Thornhill v. Alabama&quot; (1940) that the freedom of speech and of the press guaranteed by the United States Constitution embraces at the least the liberty to discuss publicly and truthfully all matters of public concern, without previous restraint or fear of subsequent punishment. In &quot;Bond v. Floyd&quot; (1966), a case involving the Constitutional shield around the speech of elected officials, the Supreme Court declared that the First Amendment central commitment is that, in the words of &quot;New York Times Co. v. Sullivan&quot; (1964), &quot;debate on public issues should be uninhibited, robust, and wide-open&quot;. The Court further explained that just as erroneous statements must be protected to give freedom of expression the breathing space it needs to survive, so statements criticizing public policy and the implementation of it must be similarly protected. The Supreme Court in &quot;Chicago Police Dept. v. Mosley&quot; (1972) said:

The level of protections with respect to free speech and free press given by the First Amendment is not limitless. As stated in his concurrence in &quot;Chicago Police Dept. v. Mosley&quot; (1972), Chief Justice Warren E. Burger said:

Attached to the core rights of free speech and free press are several peripheral rights that make these core rights more secure. The peripheral rights encompass not only freedom of association, including privacy in one&#x27;s associations, but also, in the words of &quot;Griswold v. Connecticut&quot; (1965), &quot;the freedom of the entire university community&quot;, i.e., the right to distribute, the right to receive, and the right to read, as well as freedom of inquiry, freedom of thought, and freedom to teach. The United States Constitution protects, according to the Supreme Court in &quot;Stanley v. Georgia&quot; (1969), the right to receive information and ideas, regardless of their social worth, and to be generally free from governmental intrusions into one&#x27;s privacy and control of one&#x27;s thoughts. As stated by the Court in &quot;Stanley&quot;: &quot;If the First Amendment means anything, it means that a State has no business telling a man, sitting alone in his own house, what books he may read or what films he may watch. Our whole constitutional heritage rebels at the thought of giving government the power to control men&#x27;s minds.&quot;

===Wording of the clause===

The First Amendment bars Congress from &quot;abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press&quot;. U.S. Supreme Court Justice John Paul Stevens commented about this phraseology in a 1993 journal article: &quot;I emphasize the word &#x27;the&#x27; in the term &#x27;the freedom of speech&#x27; because the definite article suggests that the draftsmen intended to immunize a previously identified category or subset of speech.&quot; Stevens said that, otherwise, the clause might absurdly immunize things like false testimony under oath. Like Stevens, journalist Anthony Lewis wrote: &quot;The word &#x27;the&#x27; can be read to mean what was understood at the time to be included in the concept of free speech.&quot; But what was understood at the time is not entirely clear. In the late 1790s, the lead author of the speech and press clauses, James Madison, argued against narrowing this freedom to what had existed under English common law:

Madison wrote this in 1799, when he was in a dispute about the constitutionality of the Alien and Sedition Laws, which was legislation enacted in 1798 by President John Adams&#x27; Federalist Party to ban seditious libel. Madison believed that legislation to be unconstitutional, and his adversaries in that dispute, such as John Marshall, advocated the narrow freedom of speech that had existed in the English common law.

===Speech critical of the government===

The Supreme Court declined to rule on the constitutionality of any federal law regarding the Free Speech Clause until the 20th century. For example, the Supreme Court never ruled on the Alien and Sedition Acts; three Supreme Court justices riding circuit presided over sedition trials without indicating any reservations. The leading critics of the law, Vice President Thomas Jefferson and James Madison, argued for the Acts&#x27; unconstitutionality based on the First Amendment and other Constitutional provisions. Jefferson succeeded Adams as president, in part due to the unpopularity of the latter&#x27;s sedition prosecutions; he and his party quickly overturned the Acts and pardoned those imprisoned by them. In the majority opinion in &quot;New York Times Co. v. Sullivan&quot; (1964), the Court noted the importance of this public debate as a precedent in First Amendment law and ruled that the Acts had been unconstitutional: &quot;Although the Sedition Act was never tested in this Court, the attack upon its validity has carried the day in the court of history.&quot;

====World War I====

During the patriotic fervor of World War I and the First Red Scare, the Espionage Act of 1917 imposed a maximum sentence of twenty years for anyone who caused or attempted to cause &quot;insubordination, disloyalty, mutiny, or refusal of duty in the military or naval forces of the United States&quot;. Specifically, the Espionage Act of 1917 states that if anyone allows any enemies to enter or fly over the United States and obtain information from a place connected with the national defense, they will be punished. Hundreds of prosecutions followed. In 1919, the Supreme Court heard four appeals resulting from these cases: &quot;Schenck v. United States&quot;, &quot;Debs v. United States&quot;, &quot;Frohwerk v. United States&quot;, and &quot;Abrams v. United States&quot;.

In the first of these cases, Socialist Party of America official Charles Schenck had been convicted under the Espionage Act for publishing leaflets urging resistance to the draft. Schenck appealed, arguing that the Espionage Act violated the Free Speech Clause of the First Amendment. In &quot;Schenck v. United States&quot;, the Supreme Court unanimously rejected Schenck&#x27;s appeal and affirmed his conviction. Debate continued over whether &quot;Schenck&quot; went against the right to freedom of speech protected by the First Amendment. Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr., writing for the Court, explained that &quot;the question in every case is whether the words used are used in such circumstances and are of such a nature as to create a clear and present danger that they will bring about the substantive evils that Congress has a right to prevent.&quot; One week later, in &quot;Frohwerk v. United States&quot;, the court again upheld an Espionage Act conviction, this time that of a journalist who had criticized U.S. involvement in foreign wars.

In &quot;Debs v. United States&quot;, the Court elaborated on the &quot;clear and present danger&quot; test established in &quot;Schenck&quot;. On June 16, 1918, Eugene V. Debs, a political activist, delivered a speech in Canton, Ohio, in which he spoke of &quot;most loyal comrades were paying the penalty to the working class—these being , Baker and Ruthenberg, who had been convicted of aiding and abetting another in failing to register for the draft.&quot; Following his speech, Debs was charged and convicted under the Espionage Act. In upholding his conviction, the Court reasoned that although he had not spoken any words that posed a &quot;clear and present danger&quot;, taken in context, the speech had a &quot;natural tendency and a probable effect to obstruct the recruiting services&quot;. In &quot;Abrams v. United States&quot;, four Russian refugees appealed their conviction for throwing leaflets from a building in New York; the leaflets argued against President Woodrow Wilson&#x27;s intervention in Russia against the October Revolution. The majority upheld their conviction, but Holmes and Justice Louis Brandeis dissented, holding that the government had demonstrated no &quot;clear and present danger&quot; in the four&#x27;s political advocacy.
====Extending protections====

The Supreme Court denied a number of Free Speech Clause claims throughout the 1920s, including the appeal of a labor organizer, Benjamin Gitlow, who had been convicted after distributing a manifesto calling for a &quot;revolutionary dictatorship of the proletariat&quot;. In &quot;Gitlow v. New York&quot; (1925), the Court upheld the conviction, but a majority also found that the First Amendment applied to state laws as well as federal laws, via the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. Holmes and Brandeis dissented in several more cases in this decade, however, advancing the argument that the Free Speech Clause protected a far greater range of political speech than the Court had previously acknowledged. In &quot;Whitney v. California&quot; (1927), in which Communist Party USA organizer Charlotte Anita Whitney had been arrested for &quot;criminal syndicalism&quot;, Brandeis wrote a dissent in which he argued for broader protections for political speech:

In &quot;Herndon v. Lowry&quot; (1937), the Court heard the case of African American Communist Party organizer Angelo Herndon, who had been convicted under the Slave Insurrection Statute for advocating black rule in the southern United States. The Court reversed Herndon&#x27;s conviction, holding that Georgia had failed to demonstrate any &quot;clear and present danger&quot; in Herndon&#x27;s political advocacy. The clear and present danger test was again invoked by the majority in the 1940 &quot;Thornhill v. Alabama&quot; decision in which a state antipicketing law was invalidated. The importance of freedom of speech in the context of &quot;clear and present danger&quot; was emphasized in &quot;Terminiello v. City of Chicago&quot; (1949) where the Supreme Court noted that the vitality of civil and political institutions in society depends on free discussion. Democracy requires free speech because it is only through free debate and free exchange of ideas that government remains responsive to the will of the people and peaceful change is effected. Restrictions on free speech are only permissible when the speech at issue is likely to produce a clear and present danger of a serious substantive evil that rises far above public inconvenience, annoyance, or unrest. Justice William O. Douglas wrote for the Court that &quot;a function of free speech under our system is to invite dispute. It may indeed best serve its high purpose when it induces a condition of unrest, creates dissatisfaction with conditions as they are, or even stirs people to anger.&quot;

Although the Court referred to the clear and present danger test in a few decisions following &quot;Thornhill&quot;, the bad tendency test was not explicitly overruled, and the clear and present danger test was not applied in several subsequent free speech cases involving incitement to violence. In 1940, Congress enacted the Smith Act, making it illegal to advocate &quot;the propriety of overthrowing or destroying any government in the United States by force and violence&quot;. The statute provided law enforcement a tool to combat Communist leaders. Eugene Dennis was convicted in the Foley Square trial for attempting to organize a Communist Party. In &quot;Dennis v. United States&quot; (1951), the Court upheld the Smith Act. Chief Justice Fred M. Vinson relied on Holmes&#x27; &quot;clear and present danger&quot; test as adapted by Learned Hand: &quot;In each case [courts] must ask whether the gravity of the &#x27;evil&#x27;, discounted by its improbability, justifies such invasion of free speech as necessary to avoid the danger.&quot; Clearly, Vinson suggested, clear and present danger did not intimate &quot;that before the Government may act, it must wait until the &quot;putsch&quot; is about to be executed, the plans have been laid and the signal is awaited.&quot; In a concurring opinion, Justice Felix Frankfurter proposed a &quot;balancing test&quot;, which soon supplanted the &quot;clear and present danger&quot; test:

In &quot;Yates v. United States&quot; (1957), the Supreme Court limited the Smith Act prosecutions to &quot;advocacy of action&quot; rather than &quot;advocacy in the realm of ideas&quot;. Advocacy of abstract doctrine remained protected while speech explicitly inciting the forcible overthrow of the government was punishable under the Smith Act.

During the Vietnam War, the Court&#x27;s position on public criticism of the government changed drastically. Though the Court upheld a law prohibiting the forgery, mutilation, or destruction of draft cards in &quot;United States v. O&#x27;Brien&quot; (1968), fearing that burning draft cards would interfere with the &quot;smooth and efficient functioning&quot; of the draft system, the next year, the court handed down its decision in &quot;Brandenburg v. Ohio&quot; (1969), expressly overruling &quot;Whitney v. California&quot;. &quot;Brandenburg&quot; discarded the &quot;clear and present danger&quot; test introduced in &quot;Schenck&quot; and further eroded &quot;Dennis&quot;. Now the Supreme Court referred to the right to speak openly of violent action and revolution in broad terms:

In &quot;Cohen v. California&quot; (1971), the Court voted reversed the conviction of a man wearing a jacket reading &quot;Fuck the Draft&quot; in the corridors of a Los Angeles County courthouse. Justice John Marshall Harlan II wrote in the majority opinion that Cohen&#x27;s jacket fell in the category of protected political speech despite the use of an expletive: &quot;One man&#x27;s vulgarity is another man&#x27;s lyric.&quot; In &quot;Matal v. Tam&quot; (2017) the Supreme Court noted that &quot;the Free Speech Clause of the First Amendment&quot; contains &quot;a bedrock First Amendment principle: Speech may not be banned on the ground that it expresses ideas that offend.&quot; The Court ruled that the government cannot ban expression merely because it is offensive. In the majority opinion, Justice Alito wrote:

A plurality opinion in &quot;Matal v. Tam&quot; (2017) affirmed the principle &quot;that “the public expression of ideas may not be prohibited merely because the ideas are themselves offensive to some of their hearers.” &quot;Street v. New York&quot;, 394 U. S. 576, 592 (1969).&quot;

===Political speech===
The ability to publicly criticize even the most prominent politicians and leaders without fear of retaliation is part of the First Amendment, because political speech is core First Amendment speech. As the Supreme Court stated with respect to the judicial branch of the government exemplarily that the First Amendment prohibits &quot;any law abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press ... It must be taken as a command of the broadest scope that explicit language, read in the context of a liberty-loving society, will allow. [...] The assumption that respect for the judiciary can be won by shielding judges from published criticism wrongly appraises the character of American public opinion. For it is a prized American privilege to speak one&#x27;s mind, although not always with perfect good taste, on all public institutions. And an enforced silence, however limited, solely in the name of preserving the dignity of the bench would probably engender resentment, suspicion, and contempt much more than it would enhance respect.&quot;

====Anonymous speech====

In &quot;Talley v. California&quot; (1960), the Court struck down a Los Angeles city ordinance that made it a crime to distribute anonymous pamphlets. Justice Hugo Black wrote in the majority opinion: &quot;There can be no doubt that such an identification requirement would tend to restrict freedom to distribute information and thereby freedom of expression... Anonymous pamphlets, leaflets, brochures and even books have played an important role in the progress of mankind.&quot; In &quot;McIntyre v. Ohio Elections Commission&quot; (1995), the Court struck down an Ohio statute that made it a crime to distribute anonymous campaign literature. However, in &quot;Meese v. Keene&quot; (1987), the Court upheld the Foreign Agents Registration Act of 1938, under which several Canadian films were defined as &quot;political propaganda&quot;, requiring their sponsors to be identified.

====Campaign finance====


In &quot;Buckley v. Valeo&quot; (1976), the Supreme Court reviewed the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 and related laws, which restricted the monetary contributions that may be made to political campaigns and expenditure by candidates. The Court affirmed the constitutionality of limits on campaign contributions, saying they &quot;serve[d] the basic governmental interest in safeguarding the integrity of the electoral process without directly impinging upon the rights of individual citizens and candidates to engage in political debate and discussion.&quot; However, the Court overturned the spending limits, which it found imposed &quot;substantial restraints on the quantity of political speech&quot;.

The court again scrutinized campaign finance regulation in &quot;McConnell v. Federal Election Commission&quot; (2003). The case centered on the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 2002 (BCRA), a federal law that imposed new restrictions on campaign financing. The Supreme Court upheld provisions which barred the raising of soft money by national parties and the use of soft money by private organizations to fund certain advertisements related to elections. However, the Court struck down the &quot;choice of expenditure&quot; rule, which required that parties could either make coordinated expenditures for all its candidates, or permit candidates to spend independently, but not both, which the Court agreed &quot;placed an unconstitutional burden on the parties&#x27; right to make unlimited independent expenditures&quot;. The Court also ruled that the provision preventing minors from making political contributions was unconstitutional, relying on &quot;Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District&quot;.

In &quot;Federal Election Commission v. Wisconsin Right to Life, Inc.&quot; (2007), the Court sustained an &quot;as applied&quot; challenge to BCRA, holding that issue ads may not be banned from the months preceding a primary or general election. In &quot;Davis v. Federal Election Commission&quot; (2008), the Supreme Court declared the &quot;Millionaire&#x27;s Amendment&quot; provisions of the BCRA to be unconstitutional. The Court held that easing BCRA restrictions for an opponent of a self-financing candidate spending at least $350,000 of his or her own money violated the freedom of speech of the self-financing candidate.

In &quot;Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission&quot; (2010), the Court ruled that the BCRA&#x27;s federal restrictions on electoral advocacy by corporations or unions were unconstitutional for violating the Free Speech Clause of the First Amendment. The Court overruled &quot;Austin v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce&quot; (1990), which had upheld a state law that prohibited corporations from using treasury funds to support or oppose candidates in elections did not violate the First or Fourteenth Amendments. The Court also overruled the portion of &quot;McConnell&quot; that upheld such restrictions under the BCRA. In other words, the ruling was considered to hold that &quot;political spending is a form of protected speech under the First Amendment&quot;.

In &quot;McCutcheon v. Federal Election Commission&quot; (2014), the Court ruled that federal aggregate limits on how much a person can donate to candidates, political parties, and political action committees, combined respectively in a two-year period known as an &quot;election cycle&quot;, violated the Free Speech Clause of the First Amendment.

====Flag desecration====

The divisive issue of flag desecration as a form of protest first came before the Supreme Court in &quot;Street v. New York&quot; (1969). In response to hearing an erroneous report of the murder of civil rights activist James Meredith, Sidney Street burned a 48-star U.S. flag. Street was arrested and charged with a New York state law making it a crime &quot;publicly [to] mutilate, deface, defile, or defy, trample upon, or cast contempt upon either by words or act [any flag of the United States]&quot;. The Court, relying on &quot;Stromberg v. California&quot; (1931), found that because the provision of the New York law criminalizing &quot;words&quot; against the flag was unconstitutional, and the trial did not sufficiently demonstrate he had been convicted solely under the provisions not yet deemed unconstitutional, the conviction was unconstitutional. The Court, however, &quot;resist[ed] the pulls to decide the constitutional issues involved in this case on a broader basis&quot; and left the constitutionality of flag-burning unaddressed.

The ambiguity with regard to flag-burning statutes was eliminated in &quot;Texas v. Johnson&quot; (1989). In that case, Gregory Lee Johnson burned an American flag at a demonstration during the 1984 Republican National Convention in Dallas, Texas. Charged with violating a Texas law prohibiting the vandalizing of venerated objects, Johnson was convicted, sentenced to one year in prison, and fined $2,000. The Supreme Court reversed his conviction. Justice William J. Brennan Jr. wrote in the decision that &quot;if there is a bedrock principle underlying the First Amendment, it is that government may not prohibit the expression of an idea simply because society finds the idea offensive or disagreeable.&quot; Congress then passed a federal law barring flag burning, but the Supreme Court struck it down as well in &quot;United States v. Eichman&quot; (1990). A Flag Desecration Amendment to the U.S. Constitution has been proposed repeatedly in Congress since 1989, and in 2006 failed to pass the Senate by a single vote.

====Falsifying military awards====

While the unauthorized wear or sale of the Medal of Honor has been a punishable offense under federal law since the early twentieth century, the Stolen Valor Act criminalized the act of not only wearing, but also verbally claiming entitlement to military awards a person did not in fact earn. In &quot;United States v. Alvarez&quot; (2012), the Supreme Court struck down the Act, ruling that the First Amendment bars the government from punishing people for making false claims regarding military service or honors where the false claim was not &quot;made to effect a fraud or secure moneys or other valuable considerations&quot;. The Supreme Court could not agree on a single rationale for its decision.

===Compelled speech===

The Supreme Court has determined that the First Amendment also protects citizens from being compelled by the government to say or to pay for certain speech.

In &quot;West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette&quot; (1943), the Court ruled that school children could not be punished for refusing either to say the pledge of allegiance or salute the American flag. The Court also overruled &quot;Minersville School District v. Gobitis&quot; (1940), which had upheld such punishments of school children.

In &quot;National Institute of Family and Life Advocates v. Becerra&quot; (2018), the Court ruled that a California law requiring crisis pregnancy centers to post notices informing patients they can obtain free or low-cost abortions and include the number of the state agency that can connect the women with abortion providers violated those centers&#x27; right to free speech.

In &quot;Janus v. AFSCME&quot; (2018), the Court ruled that requiring a public sector employee to pay dues to a union of which he is not a member violated the First Amendment. According to the Court, &quot;the First Amendment does not permit the government to compel a person to pay for another party&#x27;s speech just because the government thinks that the speech furthers the interests of the person who does not want to pay.&quot; The Court also overruled &quot;Abood v. Detroit Board of Education&quot; (1977), which had upheld legally obligating public sector employees to pay such dues.

===Commercial speech===

Commercial speech is speech done on behalf of a company or individual for the purpose of making a profit. Unlike political speech, the Supreme Court does not afford commercial speech full protection under the First Amendment. To effectively distinguish commercial speech from other types of speech for purposes of litigation, the Court uses a list of four indicia:
# The contents do &quot;no more than propose a commercial transaction&quot;.
# The contents may be characterized as advertisements.
# The contents reference a specific product.
# The disseminator is economically motivated to distribute the speech.

Alone, each indicium does not compel the conclusion that an instance of speech is commercial; however, &quot;[t]he combination of &quot;all&quot; these characteristics... provides strong support for... the conclusion that the [speech is] properly characterized as commercial speech.&quot;

In &quot;Valentine v. Chrestensen&quot; (1942), the Court upheld a New York City ordinance forbidding the &quot;distribution in the streets of commercial and business advertising matter&quot;, ruling the First Amendment protection of free speech did not include commercial speech.

In &quot;Virginia State Pharmacy Board v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council&quot; (1976), the Court overturned &quot;Valentine&quot; and ruled that commercial speech was entitled to First Amendment protection:

In &quot;Ohralik v. Ohio State Bar Association&quot; (1978), the Court ruled that commercial speech was not protected by the First Amendment as much as other types of speech:

In &quot;Central Hudson Gas &amp; Electric Corp. v. Public Service Commission&quot; (1980), the Court clarified what analysis was required before the government could justify regulating commercial speech:
# Is the expression protected by the First Amendment? Lawful? Misleading? Fraud?
# Is the asserted government interest substantial?
# Does the regulation directly advance the governmental interest asserted?
# Is the regulation more extensive than is necessary to serve that interest?

Six years later, the U.S. Supreme Court, applying the &quot;Central Hudson&quot; standards in &quot;Posadas de Puerto Rico Associates v. Tourism Company of Puerto Rico&quot; (1986), affirmed the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico&#x27;s conclusion that Puerto Rico&#x27;s &quot;Games of Chance Act of 1948&quot;, including the regulations thereunder, was not facially unconstitutional. The lax interpretation of &quot;Central Hudson&quot; adopted by &quot;Posadas&quot; was soon restricted under &quot;44 Liquormart, Inc. v. Rhode Island&quot; (1996), when the Court invalidated a Rhode Island law prohibiting the publication of liquor prices.

===School speech===

In &quot;Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District&quot; (1969), the Supreme Court extended free speech rights to students in school. The case involved several students who were punished for wearing black armbands to protest the Vietnam War. The Court ruled that the school could not restrict symbolic speech that did not &quot;materially and substantially&quot; interrupt school activities. Justice Abe Fortas wrote:

In &quot;Healy v. James&quot; (1972), the Court ruled that Central Connecticut State College&#x27;s refusal to recognize a campus chapter of Students for a Democratic Society was unconstitutional, reaffirming &quot;Tinker&quot;.

However, since 1969 the Court has also placed several limitations on &quot;Tinker&quot;. In &quot;Bethel School District v. Fraser&quot; (1986), the Court ruled that a student could be punished for his sexual-innuendo-laced speech before a school assembly and, in &quot;Hazelwood v. Kuhlmeier&quot; (1988), the Court found that schools need not tolerate student speech that is inconsistent with their basic educational mission. In &quot;Morse v. Frederick&quot; (2007), the Court ruled that schools could restrict student speech at school-sponsored events, even events away from school grounds, if students promote &quot;illegal drug use&quot;.

In 2014, the University of Chicago released the &quot;Chicago Statement&quot;, a free speech policy statement designed to combat censorship on campus. This statement was later adopted by a number of top-ranked universities including Princeton University, Washington University in St. Louis, Johns Hopkins University, and Columbia University.

===Internet access===

In &quot;Packingham v. North Carolina&quot; (2017), the Supreme Court held that a North Carolina law prohibiting registered sex offenders from accessing various websites impermissibly restricted lawful speech in violation of the First Amendment. The Court held that &quot;a fundamental principle of the First Amendment is that all persons have access to places where they can speak and listen, and then, after reflection, speak and listen once more.&quot;

===Obscenity===


According to the U.S. Supreme Court, the First Amendment&#x27;s protection of free speech does not apply to obscene speech. Therefore, both the federal government and the states have tried to prohibit or otherwise restrict obscene speech, in particular the form that is called pornography. , pornography, except for child pornography, is in practice free of governmental restrictions in the United States, though pornography about &quot;extreme&quot; sexual practices is occasionally prosecuted. The change in the twentieth century, from total prohibition in 1900 to near-total tolerance in 2000, reflects a series of court cases involving the definition of obscenity. The U.S. Supreme Court has found that most pornography is not obscene, a result of changing definitions of both obscenity and pornography. The legal tolerance also reflects changed social attitudes: one reason there are so few prosecutions for pornography is that juries will not convict.

In &quot;Rosen v. United States&quot; (1896), the Supreme Court adopted the same obscenity standard as had been articulated in a famous British case, &quot;Regina v. Hicklin&quot; (1868). The &quot;Hicklin&quot; test defined material as obscene if it tended &quot;to deprave or corrupt those whose minds are open to such immoral influences, and into whose hands a publication of this sort may fall&quot;. In the early twentieth century, literary works including &quot;An American Tragedy&quot; (Theodore Dreiser, 1925) and &quot;Lady Chatterley&#x27;s Lover&quot; (D.H. Lawrence, 1928) were banned for obscenity. In the federal district court case &quot;United States v. One Book Called Ulysses&quot; (1933), Judge John M. Woolsey established a new standard to evaluate James Joyce&#x27;s novel &quot;Ulysses&quot; (1922), stating that works must be considered in their entirety, rather than declared obscene on the basis of an individual part of the work.

The Supreme Court ruled in &quot;Roth v. United States&quot; (1957) that the First Amendment did not protect obscenity. It also ruled that the &quot;Hicklin&quot; test was inappropriate; instead, the &quot;Roth&quot; test for obscenity was &quot;whether to the average person, applying contemporary community standards, the dominant theme of the material, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest&quot;. This definition proved hard to apply, however, and in the following decade, members of the Court often reviewed films individually in a court building screening room to determine if they should be considered obscene. Justice Potter Stewart, in &quot;Jacobellis v. Ohio&quot; (1964), famously said that, although he could not precisely define pornography, &quot;I know it when I see it&quot;.

The &quot;Roth&quot; test was expanded when the Court decided &quot;Miller v. California&quot; (1973). Under the &quot;Miller&quot; test, a work is obscene if:

&quot;Community&quot; standards—not national standards—are applied to determine whether allegedly obscene material appeals to the prurient interest and is patently offensive. By contrast, the question whether a work lacks serious value depends upon &quot;whether a reasonable person would find such value in the material, taken as a whole.&quot;

Child pornography is not subject to the &quot;Miller&quot; test, as the Supreme Court decided in &quot;New York v. Ferber&quot; (1982) and &quot;Osborne v. Ohio&quot; (1990), ruling that the government&#x27;s interest in protecting children from abuse was paramount.

Personal possession of obscene material in the home may not be prohibited by law. In &quot;Stanley v. Georgia&quot; (1969), the Court ruled that &quot;[i]f the First Amendment means anything, it means that a State has no business telling a man, sitting in his own house, what books he may read or what films he may watch.&quot; However, it is constitutionally permissible for the government to prevent the mailing or sale of obscene items, though they may be viewed only in private. &quot;Ashcroft v. Free Speech Coalition&quot; (2002) further upheld these rights by invalidating the Child Pornography Prevention Act of 1996, holding that, because the act &quot;[p]rohibit[ed] child pornography that does not depict an actual child&quot; (simulated child pornography) it was overly broad and unconstitutional under the First Amendment and:

In &quot;United States v. Williams&quot; (2008), the Court upheld the PROTECT Act of 2003, ruling that prohibiting offers to provide and requests to obtain child pornography did not violate the First Amendment, even if a person charged under the Act did not possess child pornography.

===Memoirs of convicted criminals===

In some states, there are Son of Sam laws prohibiting convicted criminals from publishing memoirs for profit. These laws were a response to offers to David Berkowitz to write memoirs about the murders he committed. The Supreme Court struck down a law of this type in New York as a violation of the First Amendment in the case &quot;Simon &amp; Schuster v. Crime Victims Board&quot; (1991). That statute did not prohibit publication of a memoir by a convicted criminal. Instead, it provided that all profits from the book were to be put in escrow for a time. The interest from the escrow account was used to fund the New York State Crime Victims Board—an organization that pays the medical and related bills of victims of crime. Similar laws in other states remain unchallenged.

===Defamation===


American tort liability for defamatory speech or publications traces its origins to English common law. For the first two hundred years of American jurisprudence, the basic substance of defamation law continued to resemble that existing in England at the time of the Revolution. An 1898 American legal textbook on defamation provides definitions of libel and slander nearly identical to those given by William Blackstone and Edward Coke. An action of slander required the following:
# Actionable words, such as those imputing the injured party: is guilty of some offense, suffers from a contagious disease or psychological disorder, is unfit for public office because of moral failings or an inability to discharge his or her duties, or lacks integrity in profession, trade or business;
# That the charge must be false;
# That the charge must be articulated to a third person, verbally or in writing;
# That the words are not subject to legal protection, such as those uttered in Congress; and
# That the charge must be motivated by malice.

An action of libel required the same five general points as slander, except that it specifically involved the publication of defamatory statements. For certain criminal charges of libel, such as seditious libel, the truth or falsity of the statements was immaterial, as such laws were intended to maintain public support of the government and true statements could damage this support even more than false ones. Instead, libel placed specific emphasis on the result of the publication. Libelous publications tended to &quot;degrade and injure another person&quot; or &quot;bring him into contempt, hatred or ridicule&quot;.

Concerns that defamation under common law might be incompatible with the new republican form of government caused early American courts to struggle between William Blackstone&#x27;s argument that the punishment of &quot;dangerous or offensive writings... [was] necessary for the preservation of peace and good order, of government and religion, the only solid foundations of civil liberty&quot; and the argument that the need for a free press guaranteed by the Constitution outweighed the fear of what might be written. Consequently, very few changes were made in the first two centuries after the ratification of the First Amendment.

The Supreme Court&#x27;s ruling in &quot;New York Times Co. v. Sullivan&quot; (1964) fundamentally changed American defamation law. The case redefined the type of &quot;malice&quot; needed to sustain a libel case. Common law malice consisted of &quot;ill-will&quot; or &quot;wickedness&quot;. Now, a public officials seeking to sustain a civil action against a tortfeasor needed to prove by &quot;clear and convincing evidence&quot; that there was actual malice. The case involved an advertisement published in &quot;The New York Times&quot; indicating that officials in Montgomery, Alabama had acted violently in suppressing the protests of African-Americans during the civil rights movement. The Montgomery Police Commissioner, L. B. Sullivan, sued the &quot;Times&quot; for libel, saying the advertisement damaged his reputation. The Supreme Court unanimously reversed the $500,000 judgment against the &quot;Times&quot;. Justice Brennan suggested that public officials may sue for libel only if the statements in question were published with &quot;actual malice&quot;—&quot;knowledge that it was false or with reckless disregard of whether it was false or not&quot;. In sum, the court held that &quot;the First Amendment protects the publication of all statements, even false ones, about the conduct of public officials except when statements are made with actual malice (with knowledge that they are false or in reckless disregard of their truth or falsity).&quot;

While actual malice standard applies to public officials and public figures, in &quot;Philadelphia Newspapers v. Hepps&quot; (1988), the Court found that, with regard to private individuals, the First Amendment does &quot;not necessarily force any change in at least some features of the common-law landscape&quot;. In &quot;Dun &amp; Bradstreet, Inc. v. Greenmoss Builders, Inc.&quot; (1985) the Court ruled that &quot;actual malice&quot; need not be shown in cases involving private individuals, holding that &quot;[i]n light of the reduced constitutional value of speech involving no matters of public concern... the state interest adequately supports awards of presumed and punitive damages—even absent a showing of &#x27;actual malice&#x27;.&quot; In &quot;Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc.&quot; (1974), the Court ruled that a private individual had to prove malice only to be awarded punitive damages, not actual damages. In &quot;Hustler Magazine v. Falwell&quot; (1988), the Court extended the &quot;actual malice&quot; standard to intentional infliction of emotional distress in a ruling which protected parody, in this case a fake advertisement in &quot;Hustler&quot; suggesting that evangelist Jerry Falwell&#x27;s first sexual experience had been with his mother in an outhouse. Since Falwell was a public figure, the Court ruled that &quot;importance of the free flow of ideas and opinions on matters of public interest and concern&quot; was the paramount concern, and reversed the judgement Falwell had won against &quot;Hustler&quot; for emotional distress.

In &quot;Milkovich v. Lorain Journal Co.&quot; (1990), the Court ruled that the First Amendment offers no wholesale exception to defamation law for statements labeled &quot;opinion&quot;, but instead that a statement must be provably false (falsifiable) before it can be the subject of a libel suit. Nonetheless, it has been argued that &quot;Milkovich&quot; and other cases effectively provide for an opinion privilege.

===Private action===

Despite the common misconception that the First Amendment prohibits anyone from limiting free speech, the text of the amendment prohibits only the federal government, the states and local governments from doing so.

State constitutions provide free speech protections similar to those of the U.S. Constitution. In a few states, such as California, a state constitution has been interpreted as providing more comprehensive protections than the First Amendment. The Supreme Court has permitted states to extend such enhanced protections, most notably in &quot;Pruneyard Shopping Center v. Robins&quot;. In that case, the Court unanimously ruled that while the First Amendment may allow private property owners to prohibit trespass by political speakers and petition-gatherers, California was permitted to restrict property owners whose property is equivalent to a traditional public forum (often shopping malls and grocery stores) from enforcing their private property rights to exclude such individuals. However, the Court did maintain that shopping centers could impose &quot;reasonable restrictions on expressive activity&quot;. Subsequently, New Jersey, Colorado, Massachusetts and Puerto Rico courts have adopted the doctrine; California&#x27;s courts have repeatedly reaffirmed it.

===Freedom of the press===
The free speech and free press clauses have been interpreted as providing the same protection to speakers as to writers, except for radio and television wireless broadcasting which have, for historical reasons, been given less constitutional protections. The Free Press Clause protects the right of individuals to express themselves through publication and dissemination of information, ideas and opinions without interference, constraint or prosecution by the government. This right was described in &quot;Branzburg v. Hayes&quot; as &quot;a fundamental personal right&quot; that is not confined to newspapers and periodicals, but also embraces pamphlets and leaflets. In &quot;Lovell v. City of Griffin&quot; (1938), Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes defined &quot;press&quot; as &quot;every sort of publication which affords a vehicle of information and opinion&quot;. This right has been extended to media including newspapers, books, plays, movies, and video games. While it is an open question whether people who blog or use social media are journalists entitled to protection by media shield laws, they are protected equally by the Free Speech Clause and the Free Press Clause, because both clauses do not distinguish between media businesses and nonprofessional speakers. This is further shown by the Supreme Court consistently refusing to recognize the First Amendment as providing greater protection to the institutional media than to other speakers. For example, in a case involving campaign finance laws the Court rejected the &quot;suggestion that communication by corporate members of the institutional press is entitled to greater constitutional protection than the same communication by&quot; non-institutional-press businesses. Justice Felix Frankfurter stated in a concurring opinion in another case succinctly: &quot;[T]he purpose of the Constitution was not to erect the press into a privileged institution but to protect all persons in their right to print what they will as well as to utter it.&quot; In &quot;Mills v. Alabama&quot; (1943) the Supreme Court laid out the purpose of the free press clause:

A landmark decision for press freedom came in &quot;Near v. Minnesota&quot; (1931), in which the Supreme Court rejected prior restraint (pre-publication censorship). In this case, the Minnesota legislature passed a statute allowing courts to shut down &quot;malicious, scandalous and defamatory newspapers&quot;, allowing a defense of truth only in cases where the truth had been told &quot;with good motives and for justifiable ends&quot;. The Court applied the Free Press Clause to the states, rejecting the statute as unconstitutional. Hughes quoted Madison in the majority decision, writing, &quot;The impairment of the fundamental security of life and property by criminal alliances and official neglect emphasizes the primary need of a vigilant and courageous press.&quot;
However, &quot;Near&quot; also noted an exception, allowing prior restraint in cases such as &quot;publication of sailing dates of transports or the number or location of troops&quot;. This exception was a key point in another landmark case four decades later: &quot;New York Times Co. v. United States&quot; (1971), in which the administration of President Richard Nixon sought to ban the publication of the &quot;Pentagon Papers&quot;, classified government documents about the Vietnam War secretly copied by analyst Daniel Ellsberg. The Court found that the Nixon administration had not met the heavy burden of proof required for prior restraint. Justice Brennan, drawing on &quot;Near&quot; in a concurrent opinion, wrote that &quot;only governmental allegation and proof that publication must inevitably, directly, and immediately cause the occurrence of an evil kindred to imperiling the safety of a transport already at sea can support even the issuance of an interim restraining order.&quot; Justices Black and Douglas went still further, writing that prior restraints were never justified.

The courts have rarely treated content-based regulation of journalism with any sympathy. In &quot;Miami Herald Publishing Co. v. Tornillo&quot; (1974), the Court unanimously struck down a state law requiring newspapers criticizing political candidates to publish their responses. The state claimed the law had been passed to ensure journalistic responsibility. The Supreme Court found that freedom, but not responsibility, is mandated by the First Amendment and so it ruled that the government may not force newspapers to publish that which they do not desire to publish.

Content-based regulation of television and radio, however, have been sustained by the Supreme Court in various cases. Since there is a limited number of frequencies for non-cable television and radio stations, the government licenses them to various companies. However, the Supreme Court has ruled that the problem of scarcity does not allow the raising of a First Amendment issue. The government may restrain broadcasters, but only on a content-neutral basis. In &quot;Federal Communications Commission v. Pacifica Foundation&quot;, the Supreme Court upheld the Federal Communications Commission&#x27;s authority to restrict the use of &quot;indecent&quot; material in broadcasting.

State governments retain the right to tax newspapers, just as they may tax other commercial products. Generally, however, taxes that focus exclusively on newspapers have been found unconstitutional. In &quot;Grosjean v. American Press Co.&quot; (1936), the Court invalidated a state tax on newspaper advertising revenues, holding that the role of the press in creating &quot;informed public opinion&quot; was vital. Similarly, some taxes that give preferential treatment to the press have been struck down. In &quot;Arkansas Writers&#x27; Project v. Ragland&quot; (1987), for instance, the Court invalidated an Arkansas law exempting &quot;religious, professional, trade and sports journals&quot; from taxation since the law amounted to the regulation of newspaper content. In &quot;Leathers v. Medlock&quot; (1991), the Supreme Court found that states may treat different types of the media differently, such as by taxing cable television, but not newspapers. The Court found that &quot;differential taxation of speakers, even members of the press, does not implicate the First Amendment unless the tax is directed at, or presents the danger of suppressing, particular ideas.&quot;

In &quot;Branzburg v. Hayes&quot; (1972), the Court ruled that the First Amendment did not give a journalist the right to refuse a subpoena from a grand jury. The issue decided in the case was whether a journalist could refuse to &quot;appear and testify before state and Federal grand juries&quot; basing the refusal on the belief that such appearance and testimony &quot;abridges the freedom of speech and press guaranteed by the First Amendment&quot;. The decision was that such a protection was not provided by the First Amendment. However, a concurring opinion by Justice Lewis F. Powell, in which he said a claim for press privilege &quot;should be judged on its facts by the striking of a proper balance between freedom of the press and the obligation of all citizens to give relevant testimony with respect to criminal conduct. The balance of these vital constitutional and societal interests on a case-by-case basis accords with the tried and traditional way of adjudicating such questions,&quot; has been frequently cited by lower courts since the decision.

==Petition and assembly==


The Petition Clause protects the right &quot;to petition the government for a redress of grievances&quot;. The right expanded over the years: &quot;It is no longer confined to demands for &#x27;a redress of grievances&#x27;, in any accurate meaning of these words, but comprehends demands for an exercise by the government of its powers in furtherance of the interest and prosperity of the petitioners and of their views on politically contentious matters.&quot; The right to petition the government for a redress of grievances therefore includes the right to communicate with government officials, lobbying government officials and petitioning the courts by filing lawsuits with a legal basis. The Petition Clause first came to prominence in the 1830s, when Congress established the gag rule barring anti-slavery petitions from being heard; the rule was overturned by Congress several years later. Petitions against the Espionage Act of 1917 resulted in imprisonments. The Supreme Court did not rule on either issue.

In &quot;California Motor Transport Co. v. Trucking Unlimited&quot; (1972), the Supreme Court said the right to petition encompasses &quot;the approach of citizens or groups of them to administrative agencies (which are both creatures of the legislature, and arms of the executive) and to courts, the third branch of Government. Certainly the right to petition extends to all departments of the Government. The right of access to the courts is indeed but one aspect of the right of petition.&quot; Today, thus, this right encompasses petitions to all three branches of the federal government—the Congress, the executive and the judiciary—and has been extended to the states through incorporation. According to the Supreme Court, &quot;redress of grievances&quot; is to be construed broadly: it includes not solely appeals by the public to the government for the redressing of a grievance in the traditional sense, but also, petitions on behalf of private interests seeking personal gain. The right protects not only demands for &quot;a redress of grievances&quot; but also demands for government action. The petition clause includes according to the Supreme Court the opportunity to institute non-frivolous lawsuits and mobilize popular support to change existing laws in a peaceful manner.

In &quot;Borough of Duryea v. Guarnieri&quot; (2011), the Supreme Court stated regarding the Free Speech Clause and the Petition Clause:
The right of assembly is the individual right of people to come together and collectively express, promote, pursue, and defend their collective or shared ideas. This right is equally important as those of free speech and free press, because, as observed by the Supreme Court of the United States in &quot;De Jonge v. Oregon&quot;, 299 U.S. 353, 364, 365 (1937), the right of peaceable assembly is &quot;cognate to those of free speech and free press and is equally fundamental... [It] is one that cannot be denied without violating those fundamental principles of liberty and justice which lie at the base of all civil and political institutions—principles which the Fourteenth Amendment embodies in the general terms of its due process clause... The holding of meetings for peaceable political action cannot be proscribed. Those who assist in the conduct of such meetings cannot be branded as criminals on that score. The question... is not as to the auspices under which the meeting is held but as to its purpose; not as to the relations of the speakers, but whether their utterances transcend the bounds of the freedom of speech which the Constitution protects.&quot; The right of peaceable assembly was originally distinguished from the right to petition. In &quot;United States v. Cruikshank&quot; (1875), the first case in which the right to assembly was before the Supreme Court, the court broadly declared the outlines of the right of assembly and its connection to the right of petition:
The right of the people peaceably to assemble for the purpose of petitioning Congress for a redress of grievances, or for anything else connected with the powers or duties of the National Government, is an attribute of national citizenship, and, as such, under protection of, and guaranteed by, the United States. The very idea of a government, republican in form, implies a right on the part of its citizens to meet peaceably for consultation in respect to public affairs and to petition for a redress of grievances.

Justice Morrison Waite&#x27;s opinion for the Court carefully distinguished the right to peaceably assemble as a secondary right, while the right to petition was labeled to be a primary right. Later cases, however, paid less attention to these distinctions. An example for this is &quot;Hague v. Committee for Industrial Organization&quot; (1939), where it was decided that the freedom of assembly covered by the First Amendment applies to public forums like streets and parks. In &quot;Hague&quot; the right of assembly was given a broad meaning, because the right of assembly can be used &quot;for communication of views on national questions&quot; as well as for &quot;holding meetings and disseminating information whether for the organization of labor unions or for any other lawful purpose.&quot; In two 1960s decisions collectively known as forming the Noerr-Pennington doctrine, the Court established that the right to petition prohibited the application of antitrust law to statements made by private entities before public bodies: a monopolist may freely go before the city council and encourage the denial of its competitor&#x27;s building permit without being subject to Sherman Act liability.

==Freedom of association==

Although the First Amendment does not explicitly mention freedom of association, the Supreme Court ruled, in &quot;NAACP v. Alabama&quot; (1958), that this freedom was protected by the amendment and that privacy of membership was an essential part of this freedom. In &quot;Roberts v. United States Jaycees&quot; (1984), the Court stated that &quot;implicit in the right to engage in activities protected by the First Amendment&quot; is &quot;a corresponding right to associate with others in pursuit of a wide variety of political, social, economic, educational, religious, and cultural ends&quot;. In &quot;Roberts&quot; the Court held that associations may not exclude people for reasons unrelated to the group&#x27;s expression, such as gender.

However, in &quot;Hurley v. Irish-American Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Group of Boston&quot; (1995), the Court ruled that a group may exclude people from membership if their presence would affect the group&#x27;s ability to advocate a particular point of view. Likewise, in &quot;Boy Scouts of America v. Dale&quot; (2000), the Court ruled that a New Jersey law, which forced the Boy Scouts of America to admit an openly gay member, to be an unconstitutional abridgment of the Boy Scouts&#x27; right to free association.

In &quot;Americans for Prosperity Foundation v. Bonta&quot; (2021), the Court ruled that California&#x27;s requiring disclosure of the identities of nonprofit companies&#x27; big-money donors did not serve a narrowly tailored government interest and, thus, violated those donors&#x27; First Amendment rights.

==See also==

* Censorship in the United States
* First Amendment audits
* Free speech zone
* Freedom of speech
* Government speech
* List of amendments to the United States Constitution
* List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
* Marketplace of ideas
* Military expression
* Photography Is Not a Crime
* Section 116 of the Constitution of Australia
* United States Postal Service
* United States free speech exceptions
* Williamsburg Charter
* Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
== Explanatory notes ==
==References==
=== Citations ===
=== General and cited references ===
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* Daniel L. Dreisbach and Mark David Hall. &quot;The Sacred Rights of Conscience: Selected Readings on Religious Liberty and Church-State Relations in the American Founding&quot;. Indianapolis, IN: Liberty Fund Press, 2009.
* Daniel L. Dreisbach, Mark David Hall, and Jeffry Morrison. &quot;The Forgotten Founders on Religion and Public Life&quot; Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 2009.
* Thomas I. Emerson, &quot;Toward a General Theory of the First Amendment&quot;, &quot;Yale Law Journal&quot;, vol. 72, no. 5 (1963), pp. 877–956. . .
* Peter Irons, &quot;A People&#x27;s History of the Supreme Court&quot;. New York: Penguin, 1999.
* Kabala, James S., &quot;Church-State Relations in the Early American Republic, 1787–1846&quot;. London: Pickering and Chatto, 2013.
* Johnny Killian and George Costello (eds.) (2000). &quot;The Constitution of the United States of America: Analysis and Interpretation&quot;. Current version 
* Nicholas P. Miller, &quot;The Religious Roots of the First Amendment: Dissenting Protestants and the Separation of Church and State&quot;. New York: Oxford University Press, 2012.

==External links==

* Cornell Law School—Annotated Constitution
* 
* – Updated May 24, 2005</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12616" start="4" end="19" title="First Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="First Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q12616" start="21" end="32" title="First Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Amendment I"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="41" end="67" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="77" end="85" title="Federal government of the United States" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308297" start="117" end="142" title="Establishment Clause" label="establishment of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499816" start="160" end="185" title="Free Exercise Clause" label="free exercise of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237850" start="204" end="221" title="Freedom of speech in the United States" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500836" start="227" end="247" title="Freedom of the press in the United States" label="freedom of the press"/>
<link wikidata="Q162254" start="253" end="272" title="freedom of assembly" label="freedom of assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333690" start="281" end="298" title="Right to petition in the United States" label="right to petition"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="427" end="441" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q257855" start="715" end="730" title="Anti-Federalism" label="Anti-Federalist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="745" end="772" title="History of the United States Constitution#Ratification of the Constitution" label="Constitutional ratification"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="841" end="849" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5565132" start="951" end="969" title="Gitlow v. New York" label="Gitlow v. New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="988" end="1001" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1059" end="1072" title="Incorporation of the Bill of Rights#Amendment I" label="incorporation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1085" end="1131" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution#Due Process Clause" label="Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417348" start="1143" end="1172" title="Everson v. Board of Education" label="Everson v. Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="1205" end="1221" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352232" start="1817" end="1833" title="campaign finance" label="campaign finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q10953735" start="1852" end="1865" title="freedom of speech in schools in the United States" label="school speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892497" start="1906" end="1947" title="United States free speech exceptions" label="exceptions to First Amendment protections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="1978" end="1996" title="English common law" label="English common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="2043" end="2053" title="defamation" label="defamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="2058" end="2063" title="libel" label="libel"/>
<link wikidata="Q19073411" start="2093" end="2123" title="New York Times Co. v. Sullivan" label="New York Times Co. v. Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6984410" start="2400" end="2417" title="Near v. Minnesota" label="Near v. Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014761" start="2441" end="2472" title="New York Times v. United States" label="New York Times v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546654" start="2554" end="2569" title="prior restraint" label="prior restraint"/>
<link wikidata="Q688503" start="2849" end="2871" title="freedom of association" label="freedom of association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603645" start="2919" end="2931" title="state actors" label="state actors"/>
<link wikidata="Q12519" start="3263" end="3274" title="Magna Carta" label="Magna Carta"/>
<link wikidata="Q219447" start="3291" end="3318" title="Bill of Rights 1689" label="1689 English Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="3352" end="3378" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q530970" start="3384" end="3413" title="Virginia General Assembly" label="Virginia colonial legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q944717" start="3423" end="3444" title="Virginia Declaration of Rights" label="Declaration of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q493620" start="3871" end="3896" title="Articles of Confederation" label="Articles of Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q405475" start="3900" end="3925" title="Constitutional Convention (United States)" label="Constitutional Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q532329" start="4051" end="4063" title="George Mason" label="George Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q29556" start="4241" end="4256" title="civil liberties" label="civil liberties"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="4314" end="4327" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q162932" start="5250" end="5276" title="1st United States Congress" label="1st United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="6614" end="6628" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="6980" end="6994" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="7126" end="7145" title="Freedom of religion" label="Freedom of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308297" start="7194" end="7214" title="Establishment Clause" label="Establishment Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499816" start="7219" end="7239" title="Free Exercise Clause" label="Free Exercise Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q11206" start="7583" end="7601" title="constitutional law" label="constitutional law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6800694" start="7893" end="7942" title="McCreary County v. American Civil Liberties Union" label="McCreary County v. American Civil Liberties Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q918824" start="8124" end="8142" title="military chaplains" label="military chaplains"/>
<link wikidata="Q17011693" start="8316" end="8339" title="Murdock v. Pennsylvania" label="Murdock v. Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="8887" end="8901" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6801406" start="8939" end="8958" title="McGowan v. Maryland" label="McGowan v. Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391996" start="8981" end="8999" title="William O. Douglas" label="William O. Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q311547" start="9300" end="9309" title="Catholicity" label="Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="9320" end="9331" title="Protestants" label="Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="9374" end="9380" title="Buddhism" label="Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="9411" end="9417" title="Muslims" label="Moslem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="9456" end="9464" title="Atheism" label="atheists"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166064" start="9504" end="9530" title="Separation of church and state in the United States" label="government must be neutral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986912" start="9678" end="9708" title="West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette" label="Board of Education v. Barnette"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417348" start="10149" end="10178" title="Everson v. Board of Education" label="Everson v. Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q83345" start="10791" end="10803" title="circumcision" label="circumcision"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="10845" end="10853" title="Baptism" label="baptized"/>
<link wikidata="Q19048081" start="11126" end="11151" title="Gillette v. United States" label="Gillette v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962938" start="11445" end="11463" title="Wallace v. Jaffree" label="Wallace v. Jaffree"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="11562" end="11570" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312127" start="11856" end="11874" title="Due Process Clause" label="Due Process Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="11882" end="11902" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034088" start="12116" end="12139" title="Cantwell v. Connecticut" label="Cantwell v. Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033801" start="12183" end="12200" title="Wooley v. Maynard" label="Wooley v. Maynard"/>
<link wikidata="Q277569" start="12316" end="12337" title="Freedom of thought" label="freedom of conscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q19097" start="12740" end="12744" title="sect" label="sect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587978" start="12821" end="12828" title="infidel" label="infidel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="12834" end="12841" title="Atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6957341" start="12850" end="12858" title="Religious adherence" label="adherent"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="12892" end="12897" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q13408093" start="13498" end="13509" title="Religious intolerance" label="intolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587978" start="13639" end="13654" title="Infidel" label="the disbeliever"/>
<link wikidata="Q13649246" start="13659" end="13672" title="Uncertainty" label="the uncertain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="13813" end="13829" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857728" start="13918" end="13934" title="Baptists in the history of separation of church and state" label="Danbury Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q18245005" start="14011" end="14032" title="Congregationalism in the United States" label="Congregational church"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="14036" end="14047" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14057" end="14064" title="Baptists in the history of separation of church and state#American Baptists" label="written"/>
<link wikidata="Q753623" start="14617" end="14664" title="Separation of church and state" label="a wall of separation between Church &amp;amp; State"/>
<link wikidata="Q7319687" start="14971" end="14996" title="Reynolds v. United States" label="Reynolds v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4086736" start="15422" end="15460" title="Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom" label="Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q741482" start="16349" end="16364" title="George Bancroft" label="George Bancroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349419" start="16396" end="16410" title="Morrison Waite" label="Morrison Waite"/>
<link wikidata="Q186539" start="16479" end="16495" title="Founding Fathers of the United States" label="Founding Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q109373947" start="16941" end="16975" title="Larkin v. Grendel&amp;#x27;s Den, Inc." label="Larkin v. Grendel&amp;#x27;s Den, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q4667872" start="17162" end="17197" title="Abington School District v. Schempp" label="Abington School District v. Schempp"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="17797" end="17836" title="Federal government of the United States" label="Federal government of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7966883" start="17978" end="18024" title="Walz v. Tax Commission of the City of New York" label="Walz v. Tax Commission of the City of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304859" start="18166" end="18175" title="sovereign" label="sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="18179" end="18197" title="Religion" label="religious activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q19048081" start="18286" end="18311" title="Gillette v. United States" label="Gillette v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q538275" start="18994" end="19022" title="National Constitution Center" label="National Constitution Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="19344" end="19373" title="State religion" label="nationally established church"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="19384" end="19410" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="20130" end="20143" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417348" start="20214" end="20243" title="Everson v. Board of Education" label="Everson v. Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002253" start="20276" end="20288" title="Incorporation of the Bill of Rights" label="incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q459752" start="20899" end="20909" title="Hugo Black" label="Hugo Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825517" start="20919" end="20937" title="Torcaso v. Watkins" label="Torcaso v. Watkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417348" start="21003" end="21032" title="Everson v. Board of Education" label="Everson v. Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q4667872" start="21055" end="21090" title="Abington School District v. Schempp" label="Abington School District v. Schempp"/>
<link wikidata="Q725798" start="21639" end="21659" title="Epperson v. Arkansas" label="Epperson v. Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8074306" start="22443" end="22460" title="Zorach v. Clauson" label="Zorach v. Clauson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6800694" start="23346" end="23395" title="McCreary County v. American Civil Liberties Union" label="McCreary County v. American Civil Liberties Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825517" start="23721" end="23739" title="Torcaso v. Watkins" label="Torcaso v. Watkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311388" start="23849" end="23903" title="Religious qualifications for public office in the United States" label="requiring any kind of religious test for public office"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931318" start="24259" end="24326" title="Board of Education of Kiryas Joel Village School District v. Grumet" label="Board of Education of Kiryas Joel Village School District v. Grumet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959910" start="24519" end="24537" title="Van Orden v. Perry" label="Van Orden v. Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6800694" start="24558" end="24581" title="McCreary County v. ACLU" label="McCreary County v. ACLU"/>
<link wikidata="Q7403737" start="24606" end="24622" title="Salazar v. Buono" label="Salazar v. Buono"/>
<link wikidata="Q753623" start="24837" end="24872" title="separation between church and state" label="separation between church and state"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="24919" end="24935" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q741482" start="25234" end="25249" title="George Bancroft" label="George Bancroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403472" start="26351" end="26368" title="Felix Frankfurter" label="Felix Frankfurter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6800439" start="26412" end="26442" title="McCollum v. Board of Education" label="McCollum v. Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q220619" start="26789" end="26799" title="Elihu Root" label="Elihu Root"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377485" start="27095" end="27110" title="Engel v. Vitale" label="Engel v. Vitale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4667872" start="27127" end="27162" title="Abington School District v. Schempp" label="Abington School District v. Schempp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7966883" start="27338" end="27384" title="Walz v. Tax Commission of the City of New York" label="Walz v. Tax Commission of the City of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973373" start="27494" end="27511" title="Lemon v. Kurtzman" label="Lemon v. Kurtzman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27562" end="27572" title="Lemon v. Kurtzman#Lemon test" label="Lemon test"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693613" start="27998" end="28016" title="Agostini v. Felton" label="Agostini v. Felton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068821" start="28197" end="28221" title="Zelman v. Simmons-Harris" label="Zelman v. Simmons-Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376405" start="28454" end="28470" title="endorsement test" label="endorsement test"/>
<link wikidata="Q6515708" start="28475" end="28488" title="coercion test" label="coercion test"/>
<link wikidata="Q110588839" start="29241" end="29277" title="Kennedy v. Bremerton School District" label="Kennedy v. Bremerton School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q111942851" start="29435" end="29452" title="Accommodationists" label="Accommodationists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391996" start="29492" end="29510" title="William O. Douglas" label="William O. Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q346685" start="29645" end="29661" title="Warren E. Burger" label="Warren E. Burger"/>
<link wikidata="Q311562" start="30262" end="30279" title="William Rehnquist" label="William Rehnquist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962938" start="30389" end="30407" title="Wallace v. Jaffree" label="Wallace v. Jaffree"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="30658" end="30671" title="Conservatism in the United States" label="conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="30737" end="30749" title="state church" label="state church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6708457" start="30969" end="30986" title="Lynch v. Donnelly" label="Lynch v. Donnelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="32308" end="32313" title="U.S. state" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="32318" end="32325" title="Federal government of the United States" label="federal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034088" start="32646" end="32669" title="Cantwell v. Connecticut" label="Cantwell v. Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825517" start="32778" end="32796" title="Torcaso v. Watkins" label="Torcaso v. Watkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476441" start="32948" end="32970" title="Fowler v. Rhode Island" label="Fowler v. Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q17011693" start="33086" end="33109" title="Murdock v. Pennsylvania" label="Murdock v. Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q15147965" start="33191" end="33221" title="Grosjean v. American Press Co." label="Grosjean v. American Press Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q5374335" start="33530" end="33558" title="Employment Division v. Smith" label="Employment Division v. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116930" start="33595" end="33643" title="Church of the Lukumi Babalu Aye v. City of Hialeah" label="Church of the Lukumi Babalu Aye, Inc. v. Hialeah"/>
<link wikidata="Q39053176" start="33691" end="33741" title="Trinity Lutheran Church of Columbia, Inc. v. Comer" label="Trinity Lutheran Church of Columbia, Inc. v. Comer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623621" start="34013" end="34028" title="strict scrutiny" label="strict scrutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q7319687" start="34040" end="34065" title="Reynolds v. United States" label="Reynolds v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="34084" end="34097" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q119094" start="34216" end="34231" title="human sacrifice" label="human sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q208088" start="34266" end="34272" title="suttee" label="suttee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034088" start="35120" end="35143" title="Cantwell v. Connecticut" label="Cantwell v. Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35182" end="35228" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution#Due Process Clause" label="Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002253" start="35229" end="35236" title="Incorporation of the Bill of Rights" label="applied"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234235" start="35736" end="35749" title="Stephen Johnson Field" label="Justice Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242000" start="35774" end="35789" title="Davis v. Beason" label="Davis v. Beason"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374335" start="36073" end="36101" title="Employment Division v. Smith" label="Employment Division v. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q17027902" start="36396" end="36416" title="United States v. Lee (1982)" label="United States v. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q11109" start="36467" end="36478" title="John Paul Stevens" label="STEVENS, J."/>
<link wikidata="Q3314891" start="36515" end="36563" title="Minersville School District v. Gobitis" label="Minersville School Dist. Bd. of Educ. v. Gobitis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36661" end="36670" title="Precedent#United States legal system" label="precedent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958270" start="37019" end="37037" title="Braunfeld v. Brown" label="Braunfeld v. Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494708" start="37871" end="37889" title="Sherbert v. Verner" label="Sherbert v. Verner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825517" start="38003" end="38021" title="Torcaso v. Watkins" label="Torcaso v. Watkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893221" start="38127" end="38151" title="United States v. Ballard" label="United States v. Ballard"/>
<link wikidata="Q17492346" start="38288" end="38304" title="McDaniel v. Paty" label="McDaniel v. Paty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476441" start="38340" end="38362" title="Fowler v. Rhode Island" label="Fowler v. Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240767" start="38582" end="38616" title="Presbyterian Church v. Hull Church" label="Presbyterian Church v. Hull Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q12751591" start="38757" end="38805" title="Serbian Eastern Orthodox Diocese v. Milivojevich" label="Serbian Eastern Orthodox Diocese v. Milivojevich"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38919" end="38925" title="Belief#Religion" label="belief"/>
<link wikidata="Q28640" start="38930" end="38940" title="profession" label="profession"/>
<link wikidata="Q906066" start="39029" end="39044" title="Church service" label="worship service"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="39046" end="39096" title="Eucharist" label="participating in sacramental use of bread and wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q217170" start="39098" end="39111" title="Proselytism" label="proselytizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="39260" end="39267" title="U.S. state" label="a state"/>
<link wikidata="Q221323" start="39663" end="39674" title="golden calf" label="golden calf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494708" start="39692" end="39710" title="Sherbert v. Verner" label="Sherbert v. Verner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623621" start="39777" end="39792" title="strict scrutiny" label="strict scrutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589162" start="39879" end="39942" title="Government interest" label="the government needed to have a &amp;quot;compelling interest&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="40043" end="40057" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="40127" end="40148" title="Seventh-day Adventist Church" label="Seventh-day Adventist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027380" start="40165" end="40183" title="Wisconsin v. Yoder" label="Wisconsin v. Yoder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374335" start="40468" end="40496" title="Employment Division v. Smith" label="Employment Division v. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116930" start="40808" end="40854" title="Church of Lukumi Babalu Aye v. City of Hialeah" label="Church of Lukumi Babalu Aye v. City of Hialeah"/>
<link wikidata="Q927277" start="41079" end="41087" title="Santería" label="Santería"/>
<link wikidata="Q191498" start="41156" end="41172" title="Kashrut" label="kosher slaughter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41236" end="41296" title="Church of the Lukumi Babalu Aye v. City of Hialeah#Opinion of the Court" label="the Court ruled that it needed to have a compelling interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311296" start="42999" end="43032" title="Religious Freedom Restoration Act" label="Religious Freedom Restoration Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123597" start="43160" end="43184" title="City of Boerne v. Flores" label="City of Boerne v. Flores"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43645" end="43704" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution#Power of enforcement" label="enforcement powers in Section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q17125915" start="44088" end="44128" title="State Religious Freedom Restoration Acts" label="State Religious Freedom Restoration Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582156" start="44187" end="44202" title="Gonzales v. O Centro Espirita Beneficente Uniao do Vegetal" label="Gonzales v. UDV"/>
<link wikidata="Q104880243" start="44526" end="44542" title="Tanzin v. Tanvir" label="Tanzin v. Tanvir"/>
<link wikidata="Q17027902" start="44937" end="44964" title="United States v. Lee (1982)" label="United States v. Lee (1982)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17019480" start="45538" end="45572" title="Estate of Thornton v. Caldor, Inc." label="Estate of Thornton v. Caldor, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q493155" start="45625" end="45637" title="Learned Hand" label="Learned Hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q16961547" start="45921" end="45956" title="Burwell v. Hobby Lobby Stores, Inc." label="Burwell v. Hobby Lobby Stores, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q6665371" start="46540" end="46554" title="Locke v. Davey" label="Locke v. Davey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842707" start="46935" end="46978" title="Blaine Amendment" label="forbids state aid to religious institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q39053176" start="47379" end="47429" title="Trinity Lutheran Church of Columbia, Inc. v. Comer" label="Trinity Lutheran Church of Columbia, Inc. v. Comer"/>
<link wikidata="Q97188996" start="47607" end="47648" title="Espinoza v. Montana Department of Revenue" label="Espinoza v. Montana Department of Revenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062630" start="47739" end="47749" title="tax credit" label="tax credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6708852" start="48018" end="48074" title="Lyng v. Northwest Indian Cemetery Protective Association" label="Lyng v. Northwest Indian Cemetery Protective Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q107555785" start="48164" end="48179" title="Carson v. Makin" label="Carson v. Makin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17011693" start="49112" end="49135" title="Murdock v. Pennsylvania" label="Murdock v. Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="49490" end="49504" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q4444798" start="49539" end="49557" title="Stanley v. Georgia" label="Stanley v. Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796445" start="50100" end="50120" title="Thornhill v. Alabama" label="Thornhill v. Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="50196" end="50222" title="Constitution of the United States" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4941328" start="50393" end="50406" title="Bond v. Floyd" label="Bond v. Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q19073411" start="50606" end="50636" title="New York Times Co. v. Sullivan" label="New York Times Co. v. Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48797837" start="51009" end="51039" title="Chicago Police Dept. v. Mosley" label="Chicago Police Dept. v. Mosley"/>
<link wikidata="Q688503" start="51466" end="51488" title="freedom of association" label="freedom of association"/>
<link wikidata="Q188728" start="51500" end="51507" title="privacy" label="privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053373" start="51568" end="51591" title="Griswold v. Connecticut" label="Griswold v. Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q414706" start="51612" end="51658" title="Academic freedom" label="the freedom of the entire university community"/>
<link wikidata="Q277569" start="51773" end="51791" title="freedom of thought" label="freedom of thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q4444798" start="51896" end="51914" title="Stanley v. Georgia" label="Stanley v. Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11109" start="52629" end="52646" title="John Paul Stevens" label="John Paul Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q573532" start="53064" end="53077" title="Anthony Lewis" label="Anthony Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="53347" end="53360" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="53434" end="53444" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118757" start="53535" end="53558" title="Alien and Sedition Laws" label="Alien and Sedition Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="53611" end="53621" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q42189" start="53628" end="53644" title="Federalist Party" label="Federalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445335" start="53652" end="53667" title="seditious libel" label="seditious libel"/>
<link wikidata="Q310829" start="53772" end="53785" title="John Marshall" label="John Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515622" start="53954" end="53971" title="constitutionality" label="constitutionality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118757" start="54098" end="54121" title="Alien and Sedition Acts" label="Alien and Sedition Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332963" start="54152" end="54166" title="riding circuit" label="riding circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q19073411" start="54662" end="54692" title="New York Times Co. v. Sullivan" label="New York Times Co. v. Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="55046" end="55057" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092510" start="55066" end="55081" title="First Red Scare" label="First Red Scare"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118913" start="55087" end="55108" title="Espionage Act of 1917" label="Espionage Act of 1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q6124208" start="55649" end="55673" title="Schenck v. United States" label="Schenck v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248577" start="55687" end="55708" title="Debs v. United States" label="Debs v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505324" start="55722" end="55747" title="Frohwerk v. United States" label="Frohwerk v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2785898" start="55765" end="55788" title="Abrams v. United States" label="Abrams v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353232" start="55826" end="55852" title="Socialist Party of America" label="Socialist Party of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6124208" start="55862" end="55877" title="Charles Schenck" label="Charles Schenck"/>
<link wikidata="Q360574" start="56349" end="56374" title="Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr." label="Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5130803" start="56544" end="56568" title="clear and present danger" label="clear and present danger"/>
<link wikidata="Q334993" start="57019" end="57033" title="Eugene V. Debs" label="Eugene V. Debs"/>
<link wikidata="Q491239" start="57079" end="57091" title="Canton, Ohio" label="Canton, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065967" start="57209" end="57219" title="C. E. Ruthenberg" label="Ruthenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="57838" end="57852" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="57895" end="57913" title="October Revolution" label="October Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q520840" start="57976" end="57990" title="Louis Brandeis" label="Louis Brandeis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5565132" start="58438" end="58456" title="Gitlow v. New York" label="Gitlow v. New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312127" start="58610" end="58628" title="Due Process Clause" label="Due Process Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="58636" end="58656" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996770" start="58889" end="58910" title="Whitney v. California" label="Whitney v. California"/>
<link wikidata="Q308714" start="58934" end="58953" title="Communist Party USA" label="Communist Party USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960938" start="58964" end="58987" title="Charlotte Anita Whitney" label="Charlotte Anita Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988817" start="59016" end="59036" title="criminal syndicalism" label="criminal syndicalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4762893" start="59144" end="59160" title="Herndon v. Lowry" label="Herndon v. Lowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4762893" start="59246" end="59260" title="Angelo Herndon" label="Angelo Herndon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="59438" end="59445" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796445" start="59637" end="59657" title="Thornhill v. Alabama" label="Thornhill v. Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q17089604" start="59840" end="59870" title="Terminiello v. City of Chicago" label="Terminiello v. City of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391996" start="60423" end="60441" title="William O. Douglas" label="William O. Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541283" start="61037" end="61046" title="Smith Act" label="Smith Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373081" start="61266" end="61279" title="Eugene Dennis" label="Eugene Dennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545067" start="61301" end="61319" title="Foley Square trial" label="Foley Square trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259108" start="61375" end="61398" title="Dennis v. United States" label="Dennis v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q460151" start="61459" end="61473" title="Fred M. Vinson" label="Fred M. Vinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q493155" start="61553" end="61565" title="Learned Hand" label="Learned Hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403472" start="62030" end="62047" title="Felix Frankfurter" label="Felix Frankfurter"/>
<link wikidata="Q8050221" start="62166" end="62188" title="Yates v. United States" label="Yates v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="62517" end="62528" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="62700" end="62710" title="draft card" label="draft card"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893418" start="62721" end="62750" title="United States v. O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="United States v. O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304755" start="62778" end="62797" title="Draft-card burning" label="burning draft cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956667" start="62948" end="62967" title="Brandenburg v. Ohio" label="Brandenburg v. Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141332" start="63310" end="63329" title="Cohen v. California" label="Cohen v. California"/>
<link wikidata="Q104994" start="63467" end="63485" title="Los Angeles County, California" label="Los Angeles County"/>
<link wikidata="Q957749" start="63506" end="63529" title="John Marshall Harlan II" label="John Marshall Harlan II"/>
<link wikidata="Q24885792" start="63744" end="63756" title="Matal v. Tam" label="Matal v. Tam"/>
<link wikidata="Q11138" start="64114" end="64119" title="Samuel Alito" label="Alito"/>
<link wikidata="Q124357284" start="64130" end="64147" title="Plurality decision" label="plurality opinion"/>
<link wikidata="Q24885792" start="64157" end="64169" title="Matal v. Tam" label="Matal v. Tam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623063" start="64354" end="64372" title="Street v. New York" label="Street v. New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7680120" start="65517" end="65537" title="Talley v. California" label="Talley v. California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6801660" start="66000" end="66037" title="McIntyre v. Ohio Elections Commission" label="McIntyre v. Ohio Elections Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="66077" end="66081" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263070" start="66224" end="66255" title="Foreign Agents Registration Act" label="Foreign Agents Registration Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927471" start="66430" end="66446" title="Buckley v. Valeo" label="Buckley v. Valeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258618" start="66492" end="66521" title="Federal Election Campaign Act" label="Federal Election Campaign Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6800508" start="67200" end="67240" title="McConnell v. Federal Election Commission" label="McConnell v. Federal Election Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904291" start="67280" end="67310" title="Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act" label="Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027774" start="67458" end="67468" title="Campaign finance in the United States" label="soft money"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808335" start="68095" end="68153" title="Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District" label="Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440200" start="68171" end="68231" title="Federal Election Commission v. Wisconsin Right to Life, Inc." label="Federal Election Commission v. Wisconsin Right to Life, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q5428554" start="68269" end="68301" title="&amp;quot;as applied&amp;quot; challenge" label="&amp;quot;as applied&amp;quot; challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242006" start="68418" end="68454" title="Davis v. Federal Election Commission" label="Davis v. Federal Election Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092602" start="68804" end="68850" title="Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission" label="Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="68964" end="68970" title="Trade union" label="unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823346" start="69080" end="69118" title="Austin v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce" label="Austin v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932920" start="69575" end="69616" title="McCutcheon v. Federal Election Commission" label="McCutcheon v. Federal Election Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q618536" start="69712" end="69721" title="candidate" label="candidate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101438" start="69747" end="69773" title="political action committee" label="political action committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426793" start="69964" end="69980" title="flag desecration" label="flag desecration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623063" start="70047" end="70065" title="Street v. New York" label="Street v. New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040" start="70162" end="70176" title="James Meredith" label="James Meredith"/>
<link wikidata="Q42537" start="70201" end="70218" title="Flag of the United States" label="48-star U.S. flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q17097124" start="70477" end="70500" title="Stromberg v. California" label="Stromberg v. California"/>
<link wikidata="Q949984" start="71072" end="71088" title="Texas v. Johnson" label="Texas v. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607034" start="71117" end="71136" title="Gregory Lee Johnson" label="Gregory Lee Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581844" start="71191" end="71226" title="1984 Republican National Convention" label="1984 Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="71230" end="71236" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q717401" start="71455" end="71477" title="William J. Brennan Jr." label="William J. Brennan Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5228369" start="71822" end="71846" title="United States v. Eichman" label="United States v. Eichman"/>
<link wikidata="Q493960" start="71863" end="71889" title="Flag Desecration Amendment" label="Flag Desecration Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q203535" start="72104" end="72118" title="Medal of Honor" label="Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618638" start="72206" end="72222" title="Stolen Valor Act" label="Stolen Valor Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q784242" start="72307" end="72322" title="Awards and decorations of the United States military" label="military awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893211" start="72363" end="72387" title="United States v. Alvarez" label="United States v. Alvarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986912" start="72958" end="73008" title="West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette" label="West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette"/>
<link wikidata="Q875611" start="73113" end="73133" title="Pledge of Allegiance (United States)" label="pledge of allegiance"/>
<link wikidata="Q42537" start="73148" end="73161" title="Flag of the United States" label="American flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314891" start="73194" end="73232" title="Minersville School District v. Gobitis" label="Minersville School District v. Gobitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q48815554" start="73311" end="73369" title="National Institute of Family and Life Advocates v. Becerra" label="National Institute of Family and Life Advocates v. Becerra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185985" start="73432" end="73455" title="crisis pregnancy center" label="crisis pregnancy center"/>
<link wikidata="Q50638467" start="73690" end="73705" title="Janus v. AFSCME" label="Janus v. AFSCME"/>
<link wikidata="Q294217" start="73753" end="73766" title="public sector" label="public sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668305" start="74147" end="74182" title="Abood v. Detroit Board of Education" label="Abood v. Detroit Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q7911036" start="75214" end="75238" title="Valentine v. Chrestensen" label="Valentine v. Chrestensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934534" start="75496" end="75563" title="Virginia State Pharmacy Board v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council" label="Virginia State Pharmacy Board v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061224" start="75884" end="75952" title="Central Hudson Gas &amp;amp; Electric Corp. v. Public Service Commission" label="Central Hudson Gas &amp;amp; Electric Corp. v. Public Service Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232958" start="76465" end="76532" title="Posadas de Puerto Rico Associates v. Tourism Company of Puerto Rico" label="Posadas de Puerto Rico Associates v. Tourism Company of Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644991" start="76560" end="76588" title="Supreme Court of Puerto Rico" label="Supreme Court of Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="76612" end="76623" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q4638035" start="76861" end="76896" title="44 Liquormart, Inc. v. Rhode Island" label="44 Liquormart, Inc. v. Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387" start="76940" end="76952" title="Rhode Island" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q318143" start="77442" end="77452" title="Abe Fortas" label="Abe Fortas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5691478" start="77470" end="77484" title="Healy v. James" label="Healy v. James"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053764" start="77520" end="77560" title="Central Connecticut State University" label="Central Connecticut State College&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250103" start="77602" end="77635" title="Students for a Democratic Society" label="Students for a Democratic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897932" start="77789" end="77821" title="Bethel School District v. Fraser" label="Bethel School District v. Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5688208" start="77961" end="77983" title="Hazelwood v. Kuhlmeier" label="Hazelwood v. Kuhlmeier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6914266" start="78128" end="78146" title="Morse v. Frederick" label="Morse v. Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="78350" end="78371" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q25536254" start="78391" end="78408" title="Chicago principles" label="Chicago Statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="78570" end="78590" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q777403" start="78592" end="78626" title="Washington University in St. Louis" label="Washington University in St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q193727" start="78628" end="78652" title="Johns Hopkins University" label="Johns Hopkins University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="78658" end="78677" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q29097445" start="78712" end="78740" title="Packingham v. North Carolina" label="Packingham v. North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="78785" end="78799" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5659979" start="78827" end="78840" title="sex offenders" label="sex offenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6315482" start="80111" end="80134" title="jury nullification in the United States" label="juries will not convict"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368511" start="80146" end="80168" title="Rosen v. United States" label="Rosen v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4456446" start="80329" end="80353" title="Hicklin test" label="&amp;quot;Hicklin&amp;quot; test"/>
<link wikidata="Q604418" start="80605" end="80624" title="An American Tragedy" label="An American Tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q486096" start="80632" end="80648" title="Theodore Dreiser" label="Theodore Dreiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q750670" start="80666" end="80694" title="Lady Chatterley&amp;#x27;s Lover" label="Lady Chatterley&amp;#x27;s Lover"/>
<link wikidata="Q34970" start="80702" end="80715" title="D.H. Lawrence" label="D.H. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614849" start="80757" end="80779" title="United States district court" label="federal district court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895062" start="80791" end="80831" title="United States v. One Book Called Ulysses" label="United States v. One Book Called Ulysses"/>
<link wikidata="Q6882" start="80907" end="80918" title="James Joyce" label="James Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6511" start="80938" end="80945" title="Ulysses (novel)" label="Ulysses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370388" start="81128" end="81149" title="Roth v. United States" label="Roth v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359993" start="81734" end="81748" title="Potter Stewart" label="Potter Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004280" start="81759" end="81777" title="Jacobellis v. Ohio" label="Jacobellis v. Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q15008" start="81870" end="81893" title="I know it when I see it" label="I know it when I see it"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314318" start="81970" end="81990" title="Miller v. California" label="Miller v. California"/>
<link wikidata="Q246748" start="82015" end="82038" title="Miller test" label="&amp;quot;Miller&amp;quot; test"/>
<link wikidata="Q660567" start="82410" end="82427" title="Child pornography" label="Child pornography"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015136" start="82513" end="82531" title="New York v. Ferber" label="New York v. Ferber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105815" start="82555" end="82570" title="Osborne v. Ohio" label="Osborne v. Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4444798" start="82769" end="82787" title="Stanley v. Georgia" label="Stanley v. Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804760" start="83167" end="83200" title="Ashcroft v. Free Speech Coalition" label="Ashcroft v. Free Speech Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097767" start="83262" end="83302" title="Child Pornography Prevention Act of 1996" label="Child Pornography Prevention Act of 1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q7521294" start="83417" end="83444" title="simulated child pornography" label="simulated child pornography"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893518" start="83528" end="83553" title="United States v. Williams (2008)" label="United States v. Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429227" start="83589" end="83608" title="PROTECT Act of 2003" label="PROTECT Act of 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q7560663" start="83869" end="83883" title="Son of Sam law" label="Son of Sam law"/>
<link wikidata="Q352717" start="83993" end="84008" title="David Berkowitz" label="David Berkowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7518129" start="84175" end="84218" title="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster v. Crime Victims Board" label="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster v. Crime Victims Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q338451" start="84423" end="84429" title="escrow" label="escrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893194" start="84641" end="84664" title="United States tort law" label="American tort liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="84669" end="84679" title="Defamation" label="defamatory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="84725" end="84743" title="English law#Common law" label="English common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q332449" start="85043" end="85061" title="William Blackstone" label="William Blackstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q332435" start="85066" end="85077" title="Edward Coke" label="Edward Coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q332449" start="86464" end="86482" title="William Blackstone" label="William Blackstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079846" start="87392" end="87405" title="actual malice" label="actual malice"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="87461" end="87479" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q29364" start="87515" end="87534" title="Montgomery, Alabama" label="Montgomery, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="87615" end="87636" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182756" start="88501" end="88533" title="Philadelphia Newspapers v. Hepps" label="Philadelphia Newspapers v. Hepps"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314015" start="88740" end="88794" title="Dun &amp;amp; Bradstreet, Inc. v. Greenmoss Builders, Inc." label="Dun &amp;amp; Bradstreet, Inc. v. Greenmoss Builders, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q5553423" start="89177" end="89204" title="Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc." label="Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1704342" start="89347" end="89374" title="Hustler Magazine v. Falwell" label="Hustler Magazine v. Falwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044480" start="89450" end="89494" title="intentional infliction of emotional distress" label="intentional infliction of emotional distress"/>
<link wikidata="Q823373" start="89574" end="89581" title="Hustler (magazine)" label="Hustler"/>
<link wikidata="Q313896" start="89615" end="89628" title="Jerry Falwell" label="Jerry Falwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6858116" start="89993" end="90024" title="Milkovich v. Lorain Journal Co." label="Milkovich v. Lorain Journal Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q25312913" start="90386" end="90403" title="opinion privilege" label="opinion privilege"/>
<link wikidata="Q7253048" start="90986" end="91021" title="Pruneyard Shopping Center v. Robins" label="Pruneyard Shopping Center v. Robins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="91572" end="91582" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="91584" end="91592" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q4957736" start="92249" end="92267" title="Branzburg v. Hayes" label="Branzburg v. Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692231" start="92421" end="92446" title="Lovell v. City of Griffin" label="Lovell v. City of Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q313252" start="92475" end="92495" title="Charles Evans Hughes" label="Charles Evans Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92615" end="92652" title="Brown v. Entertainment Merchants Association#Opinion" label="This right has been extended to media"/>
<link wikidata="Q7496158" start="92829" end="92846" title="Shield laws in the United States" label="media shield laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403472" start="93496" end="93513" title="Felix Frankfurter" label="Felix Frankfurter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6984410" start="93923" end="93940" title="Near v. Minnesota" label="Near v. Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546654" start="93991" end="94006" title="prior restraint" label="prior restraint"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014761" start="94917" end="94952" title="New York Times Co. v. United States" label="New York Times Co. v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="95008" end="95021" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9724" start="95065" end="95080" title="Pentagon Papers" label="Pentagon Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q431085" start="95169" end="95184" title="Daniel Ellsberg" label="Daniel Ellsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827322" start="95848" end="95887" title="Miami Herald Publishing Co. v. Tornillo" label="Miami Herald Publishing Co. v. Tornillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440074" start="96793" end="96849" title="Federal Communications Commission v. Pacifica Foundation" label="Federal Communications Commission v. Pacifica Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="96886" end="96919" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="Federal Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q28510" start="96966" end="96974" title="Decency" label="indecent"/>
<link wikidata="Q15147965" start="97216" end="97246" title="Grosjean v. American Press Co." label="Grosjean v. American Press Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="97619" end="97627" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4957736" start="98201" end="98219" title="Branzburg v. Hayes" label="Branzburg v. Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608642" start="98323" end="98331" title="subpoena" label="subpoena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323789" start="98339" end="98349" title="grand jury" label="grand jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q252739" start="98769" end="98784" title="Lewis F. Powell" label="Lewis F. Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q109743287" start="100073" end="100081" title="gag rule" label="gag rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118913" start="100210" end="100231" title="Espionage Act of 1917" label="Espionage Act of 1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q19019749" start="100317" end="100369" title="California Motor Transport Co. v. Trucking Unlimited" label="California Motor Transport Co. v. Trucking Unlimited"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946334" start="101609" end="101639" title="Borough of Duryea v. Guarnieri" label="Borough of Duryea v. Guarnieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661649" start="101766" end="101782" title="Individual and group rights" label="individual right"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244462" start="102042" end="102060" title="De Jonge v. Oregon" label="De Jonge v. Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="102404" end="102424" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="102458" end="102480" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution#Due Process Clause" label="its due process clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893259" start="103006" end="103033" title="United States v. Cruikshank" label="United States v. Cruikshank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349419" start="103761" end="103775" title="Morrison Waite" label="Morrison Waite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638833" start="104040" end="104086" title="Hague v. Committee for Industrial Organization" label="Hague v. Committee for Industrial Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3845375" start="104193" end="104206" title="Forum (legal)" label="public forums"/>
<link wikidata="Q16206214" start="104613" end="104638" title="Noerr-Pennington doctrine" label="Noerr-Pennington doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q326498" start="104719" end="104732" title="antitrust law" label="antitrust law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425088" start="104936" end="104947" title="Sherman Act" label="Sherman Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970589" start="105103" end="105119" title="NAACP v. Alabama" label="NAACP v. Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352062" start="105262" end="105294" title="Roberts v. United States Jaycees" label="Roberts v. United States Jaycees"/>
<link wikidata="Q5946684" start="105756" end="105823" title="Hurley v. Irish-American Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Group of Boston" label="Hurley v. Irish-American Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Group of Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q251251" start="106017" end="106046" title="Boy Scouts of America v. Dale" label="Boy Scouts of America v. Dale"/>
<link wikidata="Q608132" start="106117" end="106138" title="Boy Scouts of America" label="Boy Scouts of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q106819213" start="106268" end="106312" title="Americans for Prosperity Foundation v. Bonta" label="Americans for Prosperity Foundation v. Bonta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028541" start="106585" end="106616" title="Censorship in the United States" label="Censorship in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q60742761" start="106619" end="106641" title="First Amendment audits" label="First Amendment audits"/>
<link wikidata="Q3891499" start="106644" end="106660" title="Free speech zone" label="Free speech zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="106663" end="106680" title="Freedom of speech" label="Freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589430" start="106683" end="106700" title="Government speech" label="Government speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q230698" start="106703" end="106755" title="List of amendments to the United States Constitution" label="List of amendments to the United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602726" start="106758" end="106829" title="List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment" label="List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770949" start="106832" end="106852" title="Marketplace of ideas" label="Marketplace of ideas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6852294" start="106855" end="106874" title="Military expression" label="Military expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187796" start="106877" end="106903" title="Photography Is Not a Crime" label="Photography Is Not a Crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444576" start="106906" end="106950" title="Section 116 of the Constitution of Australia" label="Section 116 of the Constitution of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="106953" end="106981" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892497" start="106984" end="107020" title="United States free speech exceptions" label="United States free speech exceptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774996" start="107023" end="107043" title="Williamsburg Charter" label="Williamsburg Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q784786" start="107046" end="107085" title="Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms" label="Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767276" start="107236" end="107251" title="Mark David Hall" label="Mark David Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q86522184" start="107614" end="107631" title="Thomas I. Emerson" label="Thomas I. Emerson"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31654" wikidata="Q223560" url="?curid=31654" title="Third Amendment to the United States Constitution">
<text>The Third Amendment (Amendment III) to the United States Constitution places restrictions on the quartering of soldiers in private homes without the owner&#x27;s consent, forbidding the practice in peacetime. The amendment was a response to the Quartering Acts passed by the Parliament of Great Britain during the buildup to the American Revolutionary War, which had allowed the British Army to lodge soldiers in public buildings.

The Third Amendment was introduced in Congress in 1789 by James Madison as a part of the United States Bill of Rights, in response to Anti-Federalist objections to the new Constitution. Congress proposed the amendment to the states on September 28, 1789, and by December 15, 1791, the necessary three-quarters of the states had ratified it. Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson announced the adoption of the amendment on March 1, 1792.

The amendment is one of the least controversial of the Constitution and is rarely litigated, with criminal justice writer Radley Balko calling it the &quot;runt piglet&quot; of the U.S. Constitution. To date, it has never been the primary basis of a Supreme Court decision, though it was the basis of the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit case &quot;Engblom v. Carey&quot; in 1982.

== Text ==

== Background ==

In 1765, the Parliament of Great Britain enacted the first of the Quartering Acts, requiring the Thirteen Colonies to provide food to British Army troops serving in the colonies, and ordering that if their local barracks provided insufficient space, that colonial authorities lodge troops in public buildings such as alehouses, inns, and livery stables. After the Boston Tea Party, the Quartering Act of 1774 was enacted. As one of the Intolerable Acts that pushed the colonies toward revolution, it authorized British troops to be housed wherever necessary, though no troops were ever quartered in inhabited homes. The quartering of troops was cited as one of the colonists&#x27; grievances in the United States Declaration of Independence.

== Adoption ==

After several years of comparatively weak government under the Articles of Confederation, a Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia proposed a new constitution on September 17, 1787, featuring a stronger chief executive and other changes. George Mason, a Constitutional Convention delegate and the drafter of Virginia&#x27;s Declaration of Rights, proposed that a bill of rights listing and guaranteeing civil liberties be included. Other delegates—including future Bill of Rights drafter James Madison—disagreed, arguing that existing state guarantees of civil liberties were sufficient and that any attempt to enumerate individual rights risked implying that other, unnamed rights were unprotected. After a brief debate, Mason&#x27;s proposal was defeated by a unanimous vote of the state delegations.

For the constitution to be ratified, however, nine of the thirteen states were required to approve it in state conventions. Opposition to ratification (&quot;Anti-Federalism&quot;) was partly based on the Constitution&#x27;s lack of adequate guarantees for civil liberties. Supporters of the Constitution in states where popular sentiment was against ratification (including Virginia, Massachusetts, and New York) successfully proposed that their state conventions both ratify the Constitution and call for the addition of a bill of rights. Several state conventions specifically proposed a provision against the quartering of troops in private homes. At the 1788 Virginia Ratifying Convention, Patrick Henry stated, &quot;One of our first complaints, under the former government, was the quartering of troops among us. This was one of the principal reasons for dissolving the connection with Great Britain. Here we may have troops in time of peace. They may be billeted in any manner—to tyrannize, oppress, and crush us.&quot;

=== Proposal and ratification ===

In the 1st United States Congress, following the state legislatures&#x27; request, James Madison proposed twenty constitutional amendments based on state bills of rights and English sources such as the Bill of Rights 1689; one of these was a prohibition against quartering troops in private homes. Several revisions to the future Third Amendment were proposed in Congress, which chiefly differed in the way in which peace and war were distinguished (including the possibility of a situation, such as unrest, which was neither peace nor war), and whether the executive or the legislature would have the authority to authorize quartering. However, the amendment ultimately passed Congress almost unchanged and by unanimous vote. Congress reduced Madison&#x27;s proposed twenty amendments to twelve, and these were submitted to the states for ratification on September 25, 1789.

By the time the Bill of Rights was submitted to the states for ratification, opinions had shifted in both parties. Many Federalists, who had previously opposed a Bill of Rights, now supported the Bill as a means of silencing the Anti-Federalists&#x27; most effective criticism. Many Anti-Federalists, in contrast, now opposed it, realizing the Bill&#x27;s adoption would greatly lessen the chances of a second constitutional convention, which they desired. Anti-Federalists such as Richard Henry Lee also argued that the Bill left the most objectionable portions of the Constitution, such as the federal judiciary and direct taxation, intact.

On November 20, 1789, New Jersey ratified eleven of the twelve amendments, rejecting ArticleII, which regulated Congressional pay raises. On December 19 and 22, respectively, Maryland and North Carolina ratified all twelve amendments. On January 19, 25, and 28, 1790, respectively, South Carolina, New Hampshire, and Delaware ratified the Bill, though New Hampshire rejected the amendment on Congressional pay raises, and Delaware rejected ArticleI, which regulated the size of the House. This brought the total of ratifying states to six of the required ten, but the process stalled in other states: Connecticut and Georgia found a Bill of Rights unnecessary and so refused to ratify, while Massachusetts ratified most of the amendments, but failed to send official notice to the Secretary of State that it had done so.

In February through June 1790, New York, Pennsylvania, and Rhode Island ratified eleven of the amendments, though all three rejected the amendment on Congressional pay raises. Virginia initially postponed its debate, but after Vermont was admitted to the Union in 1791, the total number of states needed for ratification rose to eleven. Vermont ratified on November 3, 1791, approving all twelve amendments, and Virginia finally followed on December 15, 1791. Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson announced the adoption of the ten successfully ratified amendments on March 1, 1792.

== Judicial interpretation ==

The Third Amendment is among the least cited sections of the U.S. Constitution. In the words of &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot;, &quot;as the history of the country progressed with little conflict on American soil, the amendment has had little occasion to be invoked.&quot; To date, no major Supreme Court decision has used the amendment as its primary basis.

The legal historian Tom W. Bell argued in 1993 that the quartering of American soldiers during the War of 1812 and American Civil War violated the Third Amendment, but this argument was never presented in court during either war. Following the Civil War, the Army compensated property owners for rent and damages, which may have preempted Third Amendment claims.

The Third Amendment has been invoked in a few instances as helping establish an implicit right to privacy in the Constitution. Justice William O. Douglas used the amendment along with others in the Bill of Rights as a partial basis for the majority decision in &quot;Griswold v. Connecticut&quot; (1965), which cited the Third Amendment as implying a belief that an individual&#x27;s home should be free from agents of the state.

In one of the seven opinions in &quot;Youngstown Sheet &amp; Tube Co. v. Sawyer&quot; (1952), Justice Robert H. Jackson cited the Third Amendment as providing evidence of the Framers&#x27; intent to constrain executive power even during wartime:

[t]hat military powers of the Commander in Chief were not to supersede representative government of internal affairs seems obvious from the Constitution and from elementary American history. Time out of mind, and even now in many parts of the world, a military commander can seize private housing to shelter his troops. Not so, however, in the United States, for the Third Amendment says... [E]ven in war time, his seizure of needed military housing must be authorized by Congress.

One of the few times a federal court was asked to invalidate a law or action on Third Amendment grounds was in &quot;Engblom v. Carey&quot; (1982). In 1979, prison officials in New York organized a strike; they were evicted from their prison facility residences, which were reassigned to members of the National Guard who had temporarily taken their place as prison guards. The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit ruled: (1) that the term &quot;owner&quot; in the Third Amendment includes tenants (paralleling similar cases regarding the Fourth Amendment, governing search and seizure), (2) National Guard troops are &quot;soldiers&quot; for purposes of the Third Amendment, and (3) that the Third Amendment is incorporated (applies to the states) by virtue of the Fourteenth Amendment. The case was remanded to the district court, which dismissed it on the grounds that state officials could not have been aware of this interpretation.

In the most recent Third Amendment decision handed down by a federal court, on February 2, 2015, the United States District Court for the District of Nevada held in &quot;Mitchell v. City of Henderson&quot; that the Third Amendment does not apply to intrusions by municipal police officers as they are not soldiers. For his claims under the Third Amendment, Mitchell had alleged that the police used his house as a lookout point. 

In an earlier case, &quot;United States v. Valenzuela&quot; (1951), the defendant asked that a federal rent-control law be struck down because it was &quot;the incubator and hatchery of swarms of bureaucrats to be quartered as storm troopers upon the people in violation of AmendmentIII of the United States Constitution.&quot; The court declined his request. Later, in &quot;Jones v. United States Secretary of Defense&quot; (1972), Army reservists unsuccessfully cited the Third Amendment as justification for refusing to march in a parade. Similar arguments in a variety of contexts have been denied in other cases.

== See also ==

* Dragonnades
* List of amendments to the United States Constitution

== Notes ==
== References ==

=== Citations ===
=== Bibliography ===
* Alderman, Ellen and Caroline Kennedy (1991). &quot;In Our Defense&quot;. Avon.
* Amar, Akhil Reed (1998). &quot;The Bill of Rights&quot;. Yale University Press.
* Beeman, Richard (2009). &quot;Plain, Honest Men: The Making of the American Constitution&quot;. Random House.
* Bell, Tom W. (1993) &quot;The Third Amendment: Forgotten but Not Gone&quot;. &quot;William &amp; Mary Bill of Rights Journal&quot; 2.1: pp. 117–150.
* Labunski, Richard E. (2006). &quot;James Madison and the struggle for the Bill of Rights&quot;. Oxford University Press.
* Wood, Gordon S. (2009). &quot;Empire of Liberty: A History of the Early Republic, 1789–1815&quot;. Oxford University Press.

== External links ==

* National Constitution Center: Amendment III 
* CRS Annotated Constitution: Third Amendment</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q223560" start="4" end="19" title="Third Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Third Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q223560" start="21" end="34" title="Third Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Amendment III"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="43" end="69" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q454" start="198" end="207" title="peacetime" label="peacetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049343" start="245" end="260" title="Quartering Acts" label="Quartering Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739604" start="275" end="302" title="Parliament of Great Britain" label="Parliament of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="329" end="355" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="379" end="391" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="490" end="503" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="521" end="549" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="United States Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q257855" start="566" end="581" title="Anti-Federalist" label="Anti-Federalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="792" end="808" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281437" start="990" end="1002" title="Radley Balko" label="Radley Balko"/>
<link wikidata="Q250479" start="1173" end="1212" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit" label="Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377456" start="1224" end="1240" title="Engblom v. Carey" label="Engblom v. Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739604" start="1300" end="1327" title="Parliament of Great Britain" label="Parliament of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049343" start="1353" end="1368" title="Quartering Acts" label="Quartering Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="1384" end="1401" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="Thirteen Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="1421" end="1433" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q19024" start="1651" end="1667" title="Boston Tea Party" label="Boston Tea Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365292" start="1723" end="1739" title="Intolerable Acts" label="Intolerable Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="1986" end="2027" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="United States Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q493620" start="2109" end="2134" title="Articles of Confederation" label="Articles of Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q405475" start="2138" end="2163" title="Constitutional Convention (United States)" label="Constitutional Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q532329" start="2287" end="2299" title="George Mason" label="George Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q944717" start="2357" end="2394" title="Virginia Declaration of Rights" label="Virginia&amp;#x27;s Declaration of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q29556" start="2452" end="2467" title="civil liberties" label="civil liberties"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="2537" end="2550" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934473" start="3517" end="3546" title="Virginia Ratifying Convention" label="Virginia Ratifying Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q311885" start="3548" end="3561" title="Patrick Henry" label="Patrick Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q219447" start="4119" end="4138" title="Bill of Rights 1689" label="Bill of Rights 1689"/>
<link wikidata="Q725907" start="5276" end="5293" title="Richard Henry Lee" label="Richard Henry Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q219736" start="5523" end="5532" title="Twenty-seventh Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="ArticleII"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800908" start="5878" end="5886" title="Article the First" label="ArticleI"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="6739" end="6755" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="7337" end="7348" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="7353" end="7371" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391996" start="7737" end="7755" title="William O. Douglas" label="William O. Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053373" start="7869" end="7892" title="Griswold v. Connecticut" label="Griswold v. Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058665" start="8071" end="8112" title="Youngstown Sheet &amp;amp; Tube Co. v. Sawyer" label="Youngstown Sheet &amp;amp; Tube Co. v. Sawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q505450" start="8135" end="8152" title="Robert H. Jackson" label="Robert H. Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q186539" start="8208" end="8215" title="Founding Fathers of the United States" label="Framers"/>
<link wikidata="Q194907" start="8786" end="8799" title="United States federal courts" label="federal court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377456" start="8880" end="8896" title="Engblom v. Carey" label="Engblom v. Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q928670" start="9066" end="9080" title="United States National Guard" label="National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q250479" start="9141" end="9194" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit" label="United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q231304" start="9319" end="9335" title="Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002253" start="9492" end="9504" title="Incorporation of the Bill of Rights" label="incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="9546" end="9566" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889781" start="9820" end="9875" title="United States District Court for the District of Nevada" label="United States District Court for the District of Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254921" start="10789" end="10800" title="Dragonnades" label="Dragonnades"/>
<link wikidata="Q230698" start="10803" end="10855" title="List of amendments to the United States Constitution" label="List of amendments to the United States Constitution"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31655" wikidata="Q210645" url="?curid=31655" title="Second Amendment to the United States Constitution">
<text>The Second Amendment (Amendment II) to the United States Constitution protects the right to keep and bear arms. It was ratified on December 15, 1791, along with nine other articles of the United States Bill of Rights. In &quot;District of Columbia v. Heller&quot; (2008), the Supreme Court affirmed that the right belongs to individuals, for self-defense in the home, while also including, as &quot;dicta&quot;, that the right is not unlimited and does not preclude the existence of certain long-standing prohibitions such as those forbidding &quot;the possession of firearms by felons and the mentally ill&quot; or restrictions on &quot;the carrying of dangerous and unusual weapons&quot;. In &quot;McDonald v. City of Chicago&quot; (2010) the Supreme Court ruled that state and local governments are limited to the same extent as the federal government from infringing upon this right. &quot;New York State Rifle &amp; Pistol Association, Inc. v. Bruen&quot; (2022) assured the right to carry weapons in public spaces with reasonable exceptions.

The Second Amendment was based partially on the right to keep and bear arms in English common law and was influenced by the English Bill of Rights 1689. Sir William Blackstone described this right as an auxiliary right, supporting the natural rights of self-defense and resistance to oppression, and the civic duty to act in concert in defense of the state. While both James Monroe and John Adams supported the Constitution being ratified, its most influential framer was James Madison. In &quot;Federalist&quot; No. 46, Madison wrote how a federal army could be kept in check by the militia, &quot;a standing army... would be opposed [by] militia.&quot; He argued that State governments &quot;would be able to repel the danger&quot; of a federal army, &quot;It may well be doubted, whether a militia thus circumstanced could ever be conquered by such a proportion of regular troops.&quot; He contrasted the federal government of the United States to the European kingdoms, which he described as &quot;afraid to trust the people with arms&quot;, and assured that &quot;the existence of subordinate governments... forms a barrier against the enterprises of ambition&quot;.

By January 1788, Delaware, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Georgia and Connecticut ratified the Constitution without insisting upon amendments. Several amendments were proposed, but were not adopted at the time the Constitution was ratified. For example, the Pennsylvania convention debated fifteen amendments, one of which concerned the right of the people to be armed, another with the militia. The Massachusetts convention also ratified the Constitution with an attached list of proposed amendments. In the end, the ratification convention was so evenly divided between those for and against the Constitution that the federalists agreed to the Bill of Rights to assure ratification. 
In &quot;United States v. Cruikshank&quot; (1876), the Supreme Court ruled that, &quot;The right to bear arms is not granted by the Constitution; neither is it in any manner dependent upon that instrument for its existence. The Second Amendments means no more than that it shall not be infringed by Congress, and has no other effect than to restrict the powers of the National Government.&quot; In &quot;United States v. Miller&quot; (1939), the Supreme Court ruled that the Second Amendment did not protect weapon types not having a &quot;reasonable relationship to the preservation or efficiency of a well regulated militia&quot;.

In the 21st century, the amendment has been subjected to renewed academic inquiry and judicial interest. In &quot;District of Columbia v. Heller&quot; (2008), the Supreme Court handed down a landmark decision that held the amendment protects an individual&#x27;s right to keep a gun for self-defense. This was the first time the Court had ruled that the Second Amendment guarantees an individual&#x27;s right to own a gun. In &quot;McDonald v. Chicago&quot; (2010), the Supreme Court clarified that the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment incorporated the Second Amendment against state and local governments. In &quot;Caetano v. Massachusetts&quot; (2016), the Supreme Court reiterated its earlier rulings that &quot;the Second Amendment extends, prima facie, to all instruments that constitute bearable arms, even those that were not in existence at the time of the founding&quot; and that its protection is not limited to &quot;only those weapons useful in warfare&quot;. In addition to affirming the right to carry firearms in public, &quot;NYSRPA v. Bruen&quot; (2022) created a new test that laws seeking to limit Second Amendment rights must be based on the history and tradition of gun rights, although the test was refined to focus on similar analogues and general principles rather than strict matches from the past in &quot;United States v. Rahimi&quot; (2024). The debate between various organizations regarding gun control and gun rights continues.

==Text==
There are several versions of the text of the Second Amendment, each with capitalization or punctuation differences. Differences exist between the version passed by Congress and put on display and the versions ratified by the states. These differences have been a focus of debate regarding the meaning of the amendment, particularly regarding the importance of what the courts have called the prefatory clause.

The final, handwritten original of the Bill of Rights as passed by Congress, with the rest of the original prepared by scribe William Lambert, is preserved in the National Archives. This is the version ratified by Delaware and used by the Supreme Court in &quot;District of Columbia v. Heller&quot;:


Some state-ratified versions, such as Maryland&#x27;s, omitted the first or final commas:
The ratification acts from New York, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, and South Carolina contained only one comma, but with differences in capitalization. Pennsylvania&#x27;s act states:

The ratification act from New Jersey has no commas:

==Pre-Constitution background==

===Influence of the English Bill of Rights of 1689===
The right of Protestants to bear arms in English history is regarded in English common law as a subordinate auxiliary right of the primary rights to personal security, personal liberty, and private property. According to Sir William Blackstone, &quot;The... last auxiliary right of the subject... is that of having arms for their defence, suitable to their condition and degree, and such as are allowed by law. Which is... declared by... statute, and is indeed a public allowance, under due restrictions, of the natural right of resistance and self-preservation, when the sanctions of society and laws are found insufficient to restrain the violence of oppression.&quot;

The English Bill of Rights of 1689 emerged from a tempestuous period in English politics during which two issues were major sources of conflict: the authority of the king to govern without the consent of Parliament, and the role of Catholics in a country with a staunchly Protestant majority. Ultimately, the Catholic James II was overthrown in the Glorious Revolution, and his successors, the Protestants William III and Mary II, accepted the conditions that were codified in the bill. One of the issues the bill resolved was the authority of the king to disarm his subjects, after James II had disarmed many Protestants that were &quot;suspected or knowne&quot; of disliking the government, and had argued with Parliament over his desire to maintain a standing (or permanent) army. The bill states that it is acting to restore &quot;ancient rights&quot; trampled upon by James II, though some have argued that the English Bill of Rights created a new right to have arms, which developed out of a duty to have arms. In &quot;District of Columbia v. Heller&quot; (2008), the Supreme Court did not accept this view, remarking that the English right at the time of the passing of the English Bill of Rights was &quot;clearly an individual right, having nothing whatsoever to do with service in the militia&quot; and that it was a right not to be disarmed by the Crown and was not the granting of a new right to have arms.

The text of the English Bill of Rights of 1689 includes language protecting the right of Protestants against disarmament by the Crown, stating: &quot;That the Subjects which are Protestants may have Arms for their Defence suitable to their Conditions and as allowed by Law.&quot; It also contained text that aspired to bind future Parliaments, though under English constitutional law no Parliament can bind any later Parliament.

The statement in the English Bill of Rights concerning the right to bear arms is often quoted only in the passage where it is written as above and not in its full context. In its full context it is clear that the bill was asserting the right of Protestant citizens not to be disarmed by the king without the consent of Parliament and was merely restoring rights to Protestants that the previous King briefly and unlawfully had removed. In its full context it reads:

The historical link between the English Bill of Rights and the Second Amendment, which both codify an existing right and do not create a new one, has been acknowledged by the U.S. Supreme Court.

The English Bill of Rights includes the proviso that arms must be as &quot;allowed by law&quot;. This has been the case before and after the passage of the Bill. While it did not override earlier restrictions on the ownership of guns for hunting, it is subject to the parliamentary right to implicitly or explicitly repeal earlier enactments.

There is some difference of opinion as to how revolutionary the events of 1688–89 actually were, and several commentators make the point that the provisions of the English Bill of Rights did not represent new laws, but rather stated existing rights. Mark Thompson wrote that, apart from determining the succession, the English Bill of Rights did &quot;little more than set forth certain points of existing laws and simply secured to Englishmen the rights of which they were already .&quot; Before and after the English Bill of Rights, the government could always disarm any individual or class of individuals it considered dangerous to the peace of the realm. In 1765, Sir William Blackstone wrote the &quot;Commentaries on the Laws of England&quot; describing the right to have arms in England during the 18th century as a subordinate auxiliary right of the subject that was &quot;also declared&quot; in the English Bill of Rights.

Although there is little doubt that the writers of the Second Amendment were heavily influenced by the English Bill of Rights, it is a matter of interpretation as to whether they were intent on preserving the power to regulate arms to the states over the federal government (as the English Parliament had reserved for itself against the monarch) or whether it was intent on creating a new right akin to the right of others written into the Constitution (as the Supreme Court decided in &quot;Heller&quot;). Some in the United States have preferred the &quot;rights&quot; argument arguing that the English Bill of Rights had granted a right. The need to have arms for self-defence was not really in question. Peoples all around the world since time immemorial had armed themselves for the protection of themselves and others, and as organized nations began to appear these arrangements had been extended to the protection of the state. Without a regular army and police force, it had been the duty of certain men to keep watch and ward at night and to confront and capture suspicious persons. Every subject had an obligation to protect the king&#x27;s peace and assist in the suppression of riots.

===Influence of the British Militia Act 1757===

In 1757 Great Britain&#x27;s Parliament created the Militia Act 1757 (30 Geo. 2. c. 25), &quot;An Act for better ordering of the militia forces in the several counties of that part of Great Britain called England&quot;. This act declared that &quot;a well-ordered and well-disciplined militia is essentially necessary to the safety, peace and prosperity of this kingdom,&quot; and that the current militia laws for the regulation of the militia were defective and ineffectual. Influenced by this act, in 1775 Timothy Pickering created &quot;An Easy Plan of Discipline for a Militia&quot;. Greatly inhibited by the events surrounding Salem, Massachusetts, where the plan was printed, Pickering submitted the writing to George Washington. On May 1, 1776, the Massachusetts Bay Councell resolved that Pickering&#x27;s discipline, a modification of the 1757 act, be the discipline of their Militia. On March 29, 1779, for members of the Continental Army this was replaced by Von Steuben&#x27;s Regulations for the Order and Discipline of the Troops of the United States. With ratification of the Second Amendment, after May 8, 1792, the entire United States Militia, barring two declarations, would be regulated by Von Steuben&#x27;s Discipline.

===America before the U.S. Constitution===

King Charles I authorized the use of arms for special defense and safety, on land and at sea, against:
* destructive forces
* invasive forces
* detrimental forces
* annoying forces

The Military Company of Massachusetts had already ordered munition before the authorization was signed. Early Americans had other uses for arms, besides the uses King Charles had in mind:{{efn|name=papers.ssrn.com|Hardy, p. 1237. &quot;Early Americans wrote of the right in light of three considerations: (1) as auxiliary to a natural right of self-defense; (2) as enabling an armed people to deter undemocratic government; and (3) as enabling the people to organize a militia system.&quot;}}{{efn|Malcolm, &quot;That Every Man Be Armed&quot;, pp. 452, 466. &quot;The Second Amendment reflects traditional English attitudes toward these three distinct, but intertwined, issues: the right of the individual to protect his life, the challenge to government of an armed citizenry, and the preference for a militia over a standing army. The framers&#x27; attempt to address all three in a single declarative sentence has contributed mightily to the subsequent confusion over the proper interpretation of the Second Amendment.&quot;}}
* safeguarding against tyrannical governments
* suppressing insurrection, allegedly including slave revolts, though professor Paul Finkelman has pointed out that the claim of a specific intent to protect the ability to put down slave revolts is not supported by the historical record
* facilitating a natural right of self-defense

Which of these considerations were thought of as most important and ultimately found expression in the Second Amendment is disputed. Some of these purposes were explicitly mentioned in early state constitutions; for example, the Pennsylvania Constitution of 1776 asserted that, &quot;the people have a right to bear arms for the defence of themselves and the state.&quot;

During the 1760s pre-revolutionary period, the established colonial militia was composed of colonists, including many who were loyal to British rule. As defiance and opposition to British rule developed, a distrust of these Loyalists in the militia became widespread among the colonists known as Patriots, who favored independence from British rule. As a result, some Patriots created their own militias that excluded the Loyalists and then sought to stock independent armories for their militias. In response to this arms build-up, the British Parliament established an embargo of firearms, parts and ammunition against the American colonies which in some instance came to be referred to as Powder Alarms. King George III also began disarming individuals who were in the most rebellious areas in the 1760s and 1770s.

British and Loyalist efforts to disarm the colonial Patriot militia armories in the early phases of the American Revolution resulted in the Patriot colonists protesting by citing the Declaration of Right, Blackstone&#x27;s summary of the Declaration of Right, their own militia laws and common law rights to self-defense. While British policy in the early phases of the Revolution clearly aimed to prevent coordinated action by the Patriot militia, some have argued that there is no evidence that the British sought to restrict the traditional common law right of self-defense. Patrick J. Charles disputes these claims citing similar disarming by the patriots and challenging those scholars&#x27; interpretation of Blackstone.

The right of the colonists to arms and rebellion against oppression was asserted, for example, in a pre-revolutionary newspaper editorial in 1769 objecting to the Crown suppression of colonial opposition to the Townshend Acts:
{{blockquote |Instances of the licentious and outrageous behavior of the military conservators of the peace still multiply upon us, some of which are of such nature, and have been carried to such lengths, as must serve fully to evince that a late vote of this town, calling upon its inhabitants to provide themselves with arms for their defense, was a measure as prudent as it was legal: such violences are always to be apprehended from military troops, when quartered in the body of a populous city; but more especially so, when they are led to believe that they are become necessary to awe a spirit of rebellion, injuriously said to be existing therein. It is a natural right which the people have reserved to themselves, confirmed by the Bill of Rights, to keep arms for their own defence; and as Mr. Blackstone observes, it is to be made use of when the sanctions of society and law are found insufficient to restrain the violence of oppression.}}

The armed forces that won the American Revolution consisted of the standing Continental Army created by the Continental Congress, together with regular French army and naval forces and various state and regional militia units. In opposition, the British forces consisted of a mixture of the standing British Army, Loyalist militia and Hessian mercenaries. Following the Revolution, the United States was governed by the Articles of Confederation. Federalists argued that this government had an unworkable division of power between Congress and the states, which caused military weakness, as the standing army was reduced to as few as 80 men. They considered it to be bad that there was no effective federal military crackdown on an armed tax rebellion in western Massachusetts known as Shays&#x27; Rebellion. Anti-federalists, on the other hand, took the side of limited government and sympathized with the rebels, many of whom were former Revolutionary War soldiers. Subsequently, the Constitutional Convention proposed in 1787 to grant Congress exclusive power to raise and support a standing army and navy of unlimited size. Anti-federalists objected to the shift of power from the states to the federal government, but as adoption of the Constitution became more and more likely, they shifted their strategy to establishing a bill of rights that would put some limits on federal power.

Modern scholars Thomas B. McAffee and Michael J. Quinlan have stated that James Madison &quot;did not invent the right to keep and bear arms when he drafted the Second Amendment; the right was pre-existing at both common law and in the early state constitutions.&quot; In contrast, historian Jack Rakove suggests that Madison&#x27;s intention in framing the Second Amendment was to provide assurances to moderate Anti-Federalists that the militias would not be disarmed.

One aspect of the gun control debate is the conflict between gun control laws and the right to rebel against unjust governments. Blackstone in his &quot;Commentaries&quot; alluded to this right to rebel as the natural right of resistance and self preservation, to be used only as a last resort, exercisable when &quot;the sanctions of society and laws are found insufficient to restrain the violence of oppression&quot;. Some believe that the framers of the Bill of Rights sought to balance not just political power, but also military power, between the people, the states and the nation, as Alexander Hamilton explained in his &quot;Concerning the Militia&quot; essay published in 1788:
{{blockquote |...{{nbsp}}it will be possible to have an excellent body of well-trained militia, ready to take the field whenever the defence of the State shall require it. This will not only lessen the call for military establishments, but if circumstances should at any time oblige the Government to form an army of any magnitude, that army can never be formidable to the liberties of the People, while there is a large body of citizens, little, if at all, inferior to them in discipline and the use of arms, who stand ready to defend their own rights, and those of their fellow-citizens. This appears to me the only substitute that can be devised for a standing army, and the best possible security against it, if it should exist.}}

There was an ongoing debate beginning in 1789 about &quot;the people&quot; fighting governmental tyranny (as described by Anti-Federalists); or the risk of mob rule of &quot;the people&quot; (as described by the Federalists) related to the increasingly violent French Revolution. A widespread fear, during the debates on ratifying the Constitution, was the possibility of a military takeover of the states by the federal government, which could happen if the Congress passed laws prohibiting states from arming citizens,{{efn|Cooke, p. 100. &quot;This is another protection against a possible abuse by Congress. The right protected is really the right of a state to maintain an armed militia, or national guard, as we call it now. In the eighteenth century people feared that Congress might, by passing a law, prohibit the states from arming their citizens. Then having all the armed strength at its command, the national government could overwhelm the states. Such a circumstance has never happened, but this amendment would prevent it. The Second Amendment does not give anybody or everybody the right to possess and use firearms. The states may very properly prescribe regulations and permits governing the use of guns within their borders.&quot;}} or prohibiting citizens from arming themselves. Though it has been argued that the states lost the power to arm their citizens when the power to arm the militia was transferred from the states to the federal government by Article{{nbsp}}I, Section{{nbsp}}8 of the Constitution, the individual right to arm was retained and strengthened by the Militia Acts of 1792 and the similar act of 1795.

More recently some have advanced what has been called the insurrectionist theory of the Second Amendment whereby it is the right of any citizen to take up arms against their government should they consider it illegitimate. Such a reading has been voiced by organizations such as the National Rifle Association of America (NRA) and by various individuals including some elected officials. Congressman Jamie Raskin, however, has argued that there is no basis in constitutional law or scholarship for this view. He notes that, not only does this represent a misreading of the text of the Amendment as drafted, it stands in violation of other elements of the Constitution.

==State Constitutional Precursors to the Second Amendment==
==Drafting and adoption of the Constitution==
{{further |Constitutional Convention (United States)#The Convention |l1=Constitutional Convention}}
{{multiple image
| direction = horizontal
| footer = James Madison (left) is known as the &quot;Father of the Constitution&quot; and &quot;Father of the Bill of Rights&quot; while George Mason (right) with Madison is also known as the &quot;Father of the Bill of Rights&quot;.
| footer_align = left
| image1 = James_Madison.jpg
| width1 = 128
| image2 = George Mason portrait.jpg
| width2 = 123
{{multiple image
| direction = horizontal
| footer = Patrick Henry (left) believed that a citizenry trained in arms was the only sure guarantor of liberty while Alexander Hamilton (right) wrote in Federalist No. 29 that &quot;little more can be reasonably aimed at, with respect to the people at large, than to have them properly armed ...&quot;
| footer_align = left
| image1 = Patrick henry.JPG
| width1 = 123
| image2 = Alexander_Hamilton_portrait_by_John_Trumbull_1806.jpg
| width2 = 126

In March 1785, delegates from Virginia and Maryland assembled at the Mount Vernon Conference to fashion a remedy to the inefficiencies of the Articles of Confederation. The following year, at a meeting in Annapolis, Maryland, 12 delegates from five states (New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Delaware, and Virginia) met and drew up a list of problems with the current government model. At its conclusion, the delegates scheduled a follow-up meeting in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania for May 1787 to present solutions to these problems, such as the absence of:
* interstate arbitration processes to handle quarrels between states;
* sufficiently trained and armed intrastate security forces to suppress insurrection;
* a national militia to repel foreign invaders.

It quickly became apparent that the solution to all three of these problems required shifting control of the states&#x27; militias to the federal Congress and giving it the power to raise a standing army. Article 1, Section 8 of the Constitution codified these changes by allowing the Congress to provide for the common defense and general welfare of the United States by doing the following:
* raise and support armies, but no appropriation of money to that use shall be for a longer term than two years;
* provide and maintain a navy;
* make rules for the government and regulation of the land and naval forces;
* provide for calling forth the militia to execute the laws of the union, suppress insurrections and repel invasions;
* provide for organizing, arming, and disciplining the militia, and for governing such part of them as may be employed in the service of the United States, reserving to the states respectively, the appointment of the officers, and the authority of training the militia according to the discipline prescribed by Congress.

Some representatives mistrusted proposals to enlarge federal powers, because they were concerned about the inherent risks of centralizing power. Federalists, including James Madison, initially argued that a bill of rights was unnecessary, sufficiently confident that the federal government could never raise a standing army powerful enough to overcome a militia. Federalist Noah Webster argued that an armed populace would have no trouble resisting the potential threat to liberty of a standing army. Anti-federalists, on the other hand, advocated amending the Constitution with clearly defined and enumerated rights providing more explicit constraints on the new government. Many Anti-federalists feared the new federal government would choose to disarm state militias. Federalists countered that in listing only certain rights, unlisted rights might lose protection. The Federalists realized there was insufficient support to ratify the Constitution without a bill of rights and so they promised to support amending the Constitution to add a bill of rights following the Constitution&#x27;s adoption. This compromise persuaded enough Anti-federalists to vote for the Constitution, allowing for ratification. The Constitution was declared ratified on June 21, 1788, when nine of the original thirteen states had ratified it. The remaining four states later followed suit, although the last two states, North Carolina and Rhode Island, ratified only after Congress had passed the Bill of Rights and sent it to the states for ratification. James Madison drafted what ultimately became the Bill of Rights, which was proposed by the first Congress on June 8, 1789, and was adopted on December 15, 1791.

==Debates on amending the Constitution==
The debate surrounding the Constitution&#x27;s ratification is of practical importance, particularly to adherents of originalist and strict constructionist legal theories. In the context of such legal theories and elsewhere, it is important to understand the language of the Constitution in terms of what that language meant to the people who wrote and ratified the Constitution.

Robert Whitehill, a delegate from Pennsylvania, sought to clarify the draft Constitution with a bill of rights explicitly granting individuals the right to hunt on their own land in season, though Whitehill&#x27;s language was never debated.

===Argument for state power===
There was substantial opposition to the new Constitution because it moved the power to arm the state militias from the states to the federal government. This created a fear that the federal government, by neglecting the upkeep of the militia, could have overwhelming military force at its disposal through its power to maintain a standing army and navy, leading to a confrontation with the states, encroaching on the states&#x27; reserved powers and even engaging in a military takeover. Article VI of the Articles of Confederation states:

{{blockquote|No vessel of war shall be kept up in time of peace by any State, except such number only, as shall be deemed necessary by the united States in congress assembled, for the defense of such State, or its trade; nor shall any body of forces be kept up by any State in time of peace, except such number only, as in the judgement of the united States, in congress assembled, shall be deemed requisite to garrison the forts necessary for the defense of such State; but every State shall always keep up a well-regulated and disciplined militia, sufficiently armed and accoutered, and shall provide and constantly have ready for use, in public stores, a due number of field pieces and tents, and a proper quantity of arms, ammunition and camp equipage.}}

In contrast, Article I, Section 8, Clause 16 of the U.S. Constitution states:

{{blockquote|To provide for organizing, arming, and disciplining, the Militia, and for governing such Part of them as may be employed in the Service of the United States, reserving to the States respectively, the Appointment of the Officers, and the Authority of training the Militia according to the discipline prescribed by Congress.}}

===Government tyranny===
A foundation of American political thought during the Revolutionary period was concern about political corruption and governmental tyranny. Even the federalists, fending off their opponents who accused them of creating an oppressive regime, were careful to acknowledge the risks of tyranny. Against that backdrop, the framers saw the personal right to bear arms as a potential check against tyranny. Theodore Sedgwick of Massachusetts expressed this sentiment by declaring that it is &quot;a chimerical idea to suppose that a country like this could ever be enslaved{{nbsp}}... Is it possible{{nbsp}}... that an army could be raised for the purpose of enslaving themselves or their brethren? Or, if raised whether they could subdue a nation of freemen, who know how to prize liberty and who have arms in their hands?&quot; Noah Webster similarly argued:

{{blockquote|Before a standing army can rule the people must be disarmed; as they are in almost every kingdom in Europe. The supreme power in America cannot enforce unjust laws by the sword; because the whole body of the people are armed, and constitute a force superior to any band of regular troops that can be, on any pretence, raised in the United States.}}

George Mason also argued the importance of the militia and right to bear arms by reminding his compatriots of the British government&#x27;s efforts &quot;to disarm the people; that it was the best and most effectual way to enslave them{{nbsp}}... by totally disusing and neglecting the militia.&quot; He also clarified that under prevailing practice the militia included all people, rich and poor. &quot;Who are the militia? They consist now of the whole people, except a few public officers.&quot; Because all were members of the militia, all enjoyed the right to individually bear arms to serve therein.

Writing after the ratification of the Constitution, but before the election of the first Congress, James Monroe included &quot;the right to keep and bear arms&quot; in a list of basic &quot;human rights&quot;, which he proposed to be added to the Constitution.

Patrick Henry argued in the Virginia ratification convention on June 5, 1788, for the dual rights to arms and resistance to oppression:

{{blockquote|Guard with jealous attention the public liberty. Suspect everyone who approaches that jewel. Unfortunately, nothing will preserve it but downright force. Whenever you give up that force, you are inevitably ruined.}}

===To maintain slavery===

====Preserving slave patrols====
In the slave states, the militia was available for military operations, but its biggest function was to police the slaves. According to Dr Carl T. Bogus, Professor of Law of the Roger Williams University Law School in Rhode Island, the Second Amendment was written to assure the Southern states that Congress would not undermine the slave system by using its newly acquired constitutional authority over the militia to disarm the state militia and thereby destroy the South&#x27;s principal instrument of slave control.
In his close analysis of James Madison&#x27;s writings, Bogus describes the South&#x27;s obsession with militias during the ratification process:

{{Blockquote|The militia remained the principal means of protecting the social order and preserving white control over an enormous black population. Anything that might weaken this system presented the gravest of threats.}}

This preoccupation is clearly expressed in 1788 by the slaveholder Patrick Henry:
{{blockquote|If the country be invaded, a state may go to war, but cannot suppress insurrections [under this new Constitution]. If there should happen an insurrection of slaves, the country cannot be said to be invaded. They cannot, therefore, suppress it without the interposition of Congress ... Congress, and Congress only [under this new Constitution; addition not mentioned in source], can call forth the militia.}}

Therefore, Bogus argues, in a compromise with the slave states, and to reassure Patrick Henry, George Mason and other slaveholders that they would be able to keep their slave control militias independent of the federal government, James Madison (also slave owner) redrafted the Second Amendment into its current form &quot;for the specific purpose of assuring the Southern states, and particularly his constituents in Virginia, that the federal government would not undermine their security against slave insurrection by disarming the militia.&quot;

Legal historian Paul Finkelman argues that this scenario is implausible. Henry and Mason were political enemies of Madison&#x27;s, and neither man was in Congress at the time Madison drafted Bill of Rights; moreover, Patrick Henry argued against the ratification of both the Constitution and the Second Amendment, and it was Henry&#x27;s opposition that led Patrick&#x27;s home state of Virginia to be the last to ratify.

Most Southern white men between the ages of 18 and 45 were required to serve on &quot;slave patrols&quot; which were organized groups of white men who enforced discipline upon enslaved blacks. Bogus writes with respect to Georgia laws passed in 1755 and 1757 in this context: &quot;The Georgia statutes required patrols, under the direction of commissioned militia officers, to examine every plantation each month and authorized them to search &#x27;all Negro Houses for offensive Weapons and Ammunition&#x27; and to apprehend and give twenty lashes to any slave found outside plantation grounds.&quot;{{Unreliable source?|date=May 2021|certain=yes}}

Finkelman recognises that James Madison &quot;drafted an amendment to protect the right of the states to maintain their militias,&quot; but insists that &quot;The amendment had nothing to do with state police powers, which were the basis of slave patrols.&quot;

====To avoid arming free blacks====
Firstly, slave owners feared that enslaved blacks might be emancipated through military service. A few years earlier, there had been a precedent when Lord Dunmore offered freedom to slaves who escaped and joined his forces with &quot;Liberty to Slaves&quot; stitched onto their jacket pocket flaps. Freed slaves also served in General Washington&#x27;s army.

Secondly, they also greatly feared &quot;a ruinous slave rebellion in which their families would be slaughtered and their property destroyed.&quot; When Virginia ratified the Bill of Rights on December 15, 1791, the Haitian Revolution, a successful slave rebellion, was under way. The right to bear arms was therefore deliberately tied to membership in a militia by the slaveholder and chief drafter of the Amendment, James Madison, because only whites could join militias in the South.

In 1776, Thomas Jefferson had submitted a draft constitution for Virginia that said &quot;no freeman shall ever be debarred the use of arms within his own lands or tenements&quot;. According to Picadio, this version was rejected because &quot;it would have given to free blacks the constitutional right to have firearms&quot;.

==Conflict and compromise in Congress produce the Bill of Rights==
James Madison&#x27;s initial proposal for a bill of rights was brought to the floor of the House of Representatives on June 8, 1789, during the first session of Congress. The initial proposed passage relating to arms was:

{{blockquote |The right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed; a well armed and well regulated militia being the best security of a free country: but no person religiously scrupulous of bearing arms shall be compelled to render military service in person.}}

On July 21, Madison again raised the issue of his bill and proposed that a select committee be created to report on it. The House voted in favor of Madison&#x27;s motion, and the Bill of Rights entered committee for review. The committee returned to the House a reworded version of the Second Amendment on July 28. On August 17, that version was read into the &quot;Journal&quot;:
{{blockquote |A well regulated militia, composed of the body of the people, being the best security of a free State, the right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed; but no person religiously scrupulous shall be compelled to bear arms.}}

In late August 1789, the House debated and modified the Second Amendment. These debates revolved primarily around the risk of &quot;mal-administration of the government&quot; using the &quot;religiously scrupulous&quot; clause to destroy the militia as British forces had attempted to destroy the Patriot militia at the commencement of the American Revolution. These concerns were addressed by modifying the final clause, and on August 24, the House sent the following version to the Senate:
{{blockquote |A well regulated militia, composed of the body of the people, being the best security of a free state, the right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed; but no one religiously scrupulous of bearing arms shall be compelled to render military service in person.}}

The next day, August 25, the Senate received the amendment from the House and entered it into the Senate Journal. However, the Senate scribe added a comma before &quot;shall not be infringed&quot; and changed the semicolon separating that phrase from the religious exemption portion to a comma:
{{blockquote |A well regulated militia, composed of the body of the people, being the best security of a free state, the right of the people to keep and bear arms, shall not be infringed, but no one religiously scrupulous of bearing arms shall be compelled to render military service in person.}}

By this time, the proposed right to keep and bear arms was in a separate amendment, instead of being in a single amendment together with other proposed rights such as the due process right. As a representative explained, this change allowed each amendment to &quot;be passed upon distinctly by the States&quot;. On September 4, the Senate voted to change the language of the Second Amendment by removing the definition of militia, and striking the conscientious objector clause:
{{blockquote |A well regulated militia, being the best security of a free state, the right of the people to keep and bear arms, shall not be infringed.}}

The Senate returned to this amendment for a final time on September 9. A proposal to insert the words &quot;for the common defence&quot; next to the words &quot;bear arms&quot; was defeated. A motion passed to replace the words &quot;the best&quot;, and insert in lieu thereof &quot;necessary to the&quot; . The Senate then slightly modified the language to read as the fourth article and voted to return the Bill of Rights to the House. The final version by the Senate was amended to read as:
{{blockquote |A well regulated militia being necessary to the security of a free state, the right of the people to keep and bear arms, shall not be infringed.}}

The House voted on September 21, 1789, to accept the changes made by the Senate.

The enrolled original Joint Resolution passed by Congress on September 25, 1789, on permanent display in the Rotunda, reads as:
{{blockquote |A well regulated militia, being necessary to the security of a free State, the right of the People to keep and bear arms, shall not be infringed.}}

On December 15, 1791, the Bill of Rights (the first ten amendments to the Constitution) was adopted, having been ratified by three-fourths of the states, having been ratified as a group by all the fourteen states then in existence except Connecticut, Massachusetts, and Georgia{{snd}}which added ratifications in 1939.

==Militia following ratification==
During the first two decades following the ratification of the Second Amendment, public opposition to standing armies, among Anti-Federalists and Federalists alike, persisted and manifested itself locally as a general reluctance to create a professional armed police force, instead relying on county sheriffs, constables and night watchmen to enforce local ordinances. Though sometimes compensated, often these positions were unpaid{{snd}}held as a matter of civic duty. In these early decades, law enforcement officers were rarely armed with firearms, using billy clubs as their sole defensive weapons. In serious emergencies, a &quot;posse comitatus&quot;, militia company, or group of vigilantes assumed law enforcement duties; these individuals were more likely than the local sheriff to be armed with firearms.

On May 8, 1792, Congress passed &quot;[a]n act more effectually to provide for the National Defence, by establishing an Uniform Militia throughout the United States&quot; requiring:
{{blockquote |[E]ach and every free able-bodied white male citizen of the respective States, resident therein, who is or shall be of age of eighteen years, and under the age of forty-five years (except as is herein after excepted) shall severally and respectively be enrolled in the militia{{nbsp}}... [and] every citizen so enrolled and notified, shall, within six months thereafter, provide himself with a good musket or firelock, a sufficient bayonet and belt, two spare flints, and a knapsack, a pouch with a box therein to contain not less than twenty-four cartridges, suited to the bore of his musket or firelock, each cartridge to contain a proper quantity of powder and ball: or with a good rifle, knapsack, shot-pouch and powder-horn, twenty balls suited to the bore of his rifle, and a quarter of a pound of powder; and shall appear, so armed, accoutred and provided, when called out to exercise, or into service, except, that when called out on company days to exercise only, he may appear without a knapsack.}}

The act also gave specific instructions to domestic weapon manufacturers &quot;that from and after five years from the passing of this act, muskets for arming the militia as herein required, shall be of bores sufficient for balls of the eighteenth part of a pound.&quot; In practice, private acquisition and maintenance of rifles and muskets meeting specifications and readily available for militia duty proved problematic; estimates of compliance ranged from 10 to 65 percent. Compliance with the enrollment provisions was also poor. In addition to the exemptions granted by the law for custom-house officers and their clerks, post-officers and stage drivers employed in the care and conveyance of U.S. mail, ferrymen, export inspectors, pilots, merchant mariners and those deployed at sea in active service; state legislatures granted numerous exemptions under Section 2 of the Act, including exemptions for: clergy, conscientious objectors, teachers, students, and jurors. Though a number of able-bodied white men remained available for service, many simply did not show up for militia duty. Penalties for failure to appear were enforced sporadically and selectively. None is mentioned in the legislation.

The first test of the militia system occurred in July 1794, when a group of disaffected Pennsylvania farmers rebelled against federal tax collectors whom they viewed as illegitimate tools of tyrannical power. Attempts by the four adjoining states to raise a militia for nationalization to suppress the insurrection proved inadequate. When officials resorted to drafting men, they faced bitter resistance. Forthcoming soldiers consisted primarily of draftees or paid substitutes as well as poor enlistees lured by enlistment bonuses. The officers, however, were of a higher quality, responding out of a sense of civic duty and patriotism, and generally critical of the rank and file. Most of the 13,000 soldiers lacked the required weaponry; the war department provided nearly two-thirds of them with guns. In October, President George Washington and General Harry Lee marched on the 7,000 rebels who conceded without fighting. The episode provoked criticism of the citizen militia and inspired calls for a universal militia. Secretary of War Henry Knox and Vice President John Adams had lobbied Congress to establish federal armories to stock imported weapons and encourage domestic production. Congress did subsequently pass &quot;[a]n act for the erecting and repairing of Arsenals and Magazines&quot; on April 2, 1794, two months prior to the insurrection. Nevertheless, the militia continued to deteriorate and twenty years later, the militia&#x27;s poor condition contributed to several losses in the War of 1812, including the sacking of Washington, D.C., and the burning of the White House in 1814.

In the 20th century, Congress passed the Militia Act of 1903. The act defined the militia as every able-bodied male aged 18 to 44 who was a citizen or intended to become one. The militia was then divided by the act into the United States National Guard and the unorganized Reserve Militia.

Federal law continues to define the militia as all able-bodied males aged 17 to 44, who are citizens or intend to become one, and female citizens who are members of the National Guard. The militia is divided into the organized militia, which consists of the National Guard and Naval Militia, and the unorganized militia.

==Scholarly commentary==
===Early commentary===
{{multiple image |direction=horizontal |footer=William Rawle of Pennsylvania (left) was a lawyer and district attorney; Thomas M. Cooley of Michigan (right) was an educator and judge. |footer_align=left |image1=WilliamRawle.jpg |width1=136 |image2=Thomas M Cooley.jpg |width2=126}}
{{multiple image |direction=horizontal |footer=Joseph Story of Massachusetts (left) became a U.S. Supreme Court justice; Tench Coxe of Pennsylvania (right) was a political economist and delegate to the Continental Congress. |footer_align=left |image1=Joseph Story.jpg |width1=132 |image2=Tench Coxe.JPG |width2=121}}

====The &quot;Federal Farmer&quot;====
In May 1788, the pseudonymous author &quot;Federal Farmer&quot; (his real identity is presumed to be either Richard Henry Lee or Melancton Smith) wrote in &quot;Additional Letters From The Federal Farmer #169&quot; or &quot;Letter XVIII&quot; regarding the definition of a &quot;militia&quot;:
{{blockquote |A militia, when properly formed, are in fact the people themselves, and render regular troops in a great measure unnecessary.}}

====George Mason====
In June 1788, George Mason the Virginia Ratifying Convention regarding a &quot;militia:&quot;
{{blockquote |A worthy member has asked, who are the militia, if they be not the people, of this country, and if we are not to be protected from the fate of the Germans, Prussians, &amp;c. by our representation? I ask who are the militia? They consist now of the whole people, except a few public officers. But I cannot say who will be the militia of the future day. If that paper on the table gets no alteration, the militia of the future day may not consist of all classes, high and low, and rich and poor; but may be confined to the lower and middle classes of the people, granting exclusion to the higher classes of the people. If we should ever see that day, the most ignominious punishments and heavy fines may be expected. Under the present government all ranks of people are subject to militia duty.}}

====Tench Coxe====
In 1792, Tench Coxe made the following point in a commentary on the Second Amendment:

{{Blockquote |As civil rulers, not having their duty to the people duly before them, may attempt to tyrannize, and as the military forces which must be occasionally raised to defend our country, might pervert their power to the injury of their fellow citizens, the people are confirmed by the next article in their right to keep and bear their private arms.}}

====Tucker/Blackstone====
The earliest published commentary on the Second Amendment by a major constitutional theorist was by St. George Tucker. He annotated a five-volume edition of Sir William Blackstone&#x27;s &quot;Commentaries on the Laws of England&quot;, a critical legal reference for early American attorneys published in 1803. Tucker wrote:
{{blockquote |A well regulated militia being necessary to the security of a free state, the right of the people to keep, and bear arms, shall not be infringed. Amendments to C. U. S. Art. 4. This may be considered as the true palladium of liberty{{nbsp}}... The right of self defence is the first law of nature: In most governments it has been the study of rulers to confine this right within the narrowest limits possible. Wherever standing armies are kept up, and the right of the people to keep and bear arms is, under any colour or pretext whatsoever, prohibited, liberty, if not already annihilated, is on the brink of destruction. In England, the people have been disarmed, generally, under the specious pretext of preserving the game : a never failing lure to bring over the landed aristocracy to support any measure, under that mask, though calculated for very different purposes. True it is, their bill of rights seems at first view to counteract this policy: but the right of bearing arms is confined to protestants, and the words suitable to their condition and degree, have been interpreted to authorise the prohibition of keeping a gun or other engine for the destruction of game, to any farmer, or inferior tradesman, or other person not qualified to kill game. So that not one man in five hundred can keep a gun in his house without being subject to a penalty.}}

In footnotes 40 and 41 of the &quot;Commentaries&quot;, Tucker stated that the right to bear arms under the Second Amendment was not subject to the restrictions that were part of English law: &quot;The right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed. Amendments to C. U. S. Art. 4, and this without any qualification as to their condition or degree, as is the case in the British government&quot; and &quot;whoever examines the forest, and game laws in the British code, will readily perceive that the right of keeping arms is effectually taken away from the people of England.&quot; Blackstone himself also commented on English game laws, Vol. II, p. 412, &quot;that the prevention of popular insurrections and resistance to government by disarming the bulk of the people, is a reason oftener meant than avowed by the makers of the forest and game laws.&quot; Blackstone discussed the right of self-defense in a separate section of his treatise on the common law of crimes. Tucker&#x27;s annotations for that latter section did not mention the Second Amendment but cited the standard works of English jurists such as Hawkins.{{efn|For two radically different views of Blackstone on the Second Amendment, see Heyman, Chicago-Kent, and Volokh, &quot;Senate Testimony&quot;.}}

Further, Tucker criticized the English Bill of Rights for limiting gun ownership to the very wealthy, leaving the populace effectively disarmed, and expressed the hope that Americans &quot;never cease to regard the right of keeping and bearing arms as the surest pledge of their liberty.&quot;

====William Rawle====
Tucker&#x27;s commentary was soon followed, in 1825, by that of William Rawle in his landmark text &quot;A View of the Constitution of the United States of America&quot;. Like Tucker, Rawle condemned England&#x27;s &quot;arbitrary code for the preservation of game&quot;, portraying that country as one that &quot;boasts so much of its freedom&quot;, yet provides a right to &quot;protestant subjects only&quot; that it &quot;cautiously describ[es] to be that of bearing arms for their defence&quot; and reserves for &quot;[a] very small proportion of the people[.]&quot; In contrast, Rawle characterizes the second clause of the Second Amendment, which he calls the corollary clause, as a general prohibition against such capricious abuse of government power.

Speaking of the Second Amendment generally, Rawle wrote:
{{blockquote |The prohibition is general. No clause in the Constitution could by any rule of construction be conceived to give to congress a power to disarm the people. Such a flagitious attempt could only be made under some general pretence by a state legislature. But if in any blind pursuit of inordinate power, either should attempt it, this amendment may be appealed to as a restraint on both.}}

Rawle, long before the concept of incorporation was formally recognized by the courts, or Congress drafted the Fourteenth Amendment, contended that citizens could appeal to the Second Amendment should either the state or federal government attempt to disarm them. He did warn, however, that &quot;this right [to bear arms] ought not{{nbsp}}... be abused to the disturbance of the public peace&quot; and, paraphrasing Coke, observed: &quot;An assemblage of persons with arms, for unlawful purpose, is an indictable offence, and even the carrying of arms abroad by a single individual, attended with circumstances giving just reason to fear that he purposes to make an unlawful use of them, would be sufficient cause to require him to give surety of the peace.&quot;

====Joseph Story====
Joseph Story articulated in his influential &quot;Commentaries on the Constitution&quot; the orthodox view of the Second Amendment, which he viewed as the amendment&#x27;s clear meaning:
{{blockquote |The right of the citizens to keep and bear arms has justly been considered, as the palladium of the liberties of a republic; since it offers a strong moral check against the usurpations and arbitrary power of rulers; and it will generally, even if these are successful in the first instance, enable the people to resist and triumph over them. And yet, though this truth would seem so clear, and the importance of a well-regulated militia would seem so undeniable, it cannot be disguised, that among the American people there is a growing indifference to any system of militia discipline, and a strong disposition, from a sense of its burdens, to be rid of all regulations. How it is practicable to keep the people duly armed without some organization, it is difficult to see. There is certainly no small danger, that indifference may lead to disgust, and disgust to contempt; and thus gradually undermine all the protection intended by this clause of our National Bill of Rights.}}

Story describes a militia as the &quot;natural defence of a free country&quot;, both against foreign foes, domestic revolts and usurpation by rulers. The book regards the militia as a &quot;moral check&quot; against both usurpation and the arbitrary use of power, while expressing distress at the growing indifference of the American people to maintaining such an organized militia, which could lead to the undermining of the protection of the Second Amendment.

====Lysander Spooner====
Abolitionist Lysander Spooner, commenting on bills of rights, stated that the object of all bills of rights is to assert the rights of individuals against the government and that the Second Amendment right to keep and bear arms was in support of the right to resist government oppression, as the only security against the tyranny of government lies in forcible resistance to injustice, for injustice will certainly be executed, unless forcibly resisted. Spooner&#x27;s theory provided the intellectual foundation for John Brown and other radical abolitionists who believed that arming slaves was not only morally justified, but entirely consistent with the Second Amendment. An express connection between this right and the Second Amendment was drawn by Lysander Spooner who commented that a &quot;right of resistance&quot; is protected by both the right to trial by jury and the Second Amendment.

The congressional debate on the proposed Fourteenth Amendment concentrated on what the Southern States were doing to harm the newly freed slaves, including disarming the former slaves.

====Timothy Farrar====
In 1867, Judge Timothy Farrar published his &quot;Manual of the Constitution of the United States of America&quot;, which was written when the Fourteenth Amendment was &quot;in the process of adoption by the State legislatures&quot;:

{{blockquote |The States are recognized as governments, and, when their own constitutions permit, may do as they please; provided they do not interfere with the Constitution and laws of the United States, or with the civil or natural rights of the people recognized thereby, and held in conformity to them. The right of every person to &quot;life, liberty, and property&quot;, to &quot;keep and bear arms&quot;, to the &quot;writ of habeas corpus&quot; to &quot;trial by jury&quot;, and divers others, are recognized by, and held under, the Constitution of the United States, and cannot be infringed by individuals or even by the government itself.}}

====Judge Thomas Cooley====

Judge Thomas M. Cooley, perhaps the most widely read constitutional scholar of the nineteenth century, wrote extensively about this amendment, and he explained in 1880 how the Second Amendment protected the &quot;right of the people&quot;:

{{blockquote|It might be supposed from the phraseology of this provision that the right to keep and bear arms was only guaranteed to the militia; but this would be an interpretation not warranted by the intent. The militia, as has been elsewhere explained, consists of those persons who, under the law, are liable to the performance of military duty, and are officered and enrolled for service when called upon. But the law may make provision for the enrolment of all who are fit to perform military duty, or of a small number only, or it may wholly omit to make any provision at all; and if the right were limited to those enrolled, the purpose of this guaranty might be defeated altogether by the action or neglect to act of the government it was meant to hold in check. The meaning of the provision undoubtedly is, that the people, from whom the militia must be taken, shall have the right to keep and bear arms; and they need no permission or regulation of law for the purpose. But this enables the government to have a well-regulated militia; for to bear arms implies something more than the mere keeping; it implies the learning to handle and use them in a way that makes those who keep them ready for their efficient use; in other words, it implies the right to meet for voluntary discipline in arms, observing in doing so the laws of public order.}}

===Commentary since late 20th century===
Until the late 20th century, there was little scholarly commentary of the Second Amendment. In the latter half of the 20th century, there was considerable debate over whether the Second Amendment protected an individual right or a collective right. The debate centered on whether the prefatory clause (&quot;A well regulated militia being necessary to the security of a free State&quot;) declared the amendment&#x27;s only purpose or merely announced a purpose to introduce the operative clause (&quot;the right of the People to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed&quot;). Scholars advanced three competing theoretical models for how the prefatory clause should be interpreted.

The first, known as the &quot;states&#x27; rights&quot; or &quot;collective right&quot; model, held that the Second Amendment does not apply to individuals; rather, it recognizes the right of each state to arm its militia. Under this approach, citizens &quot;have no right to keep or bear arms, but the states have a collective right to have the National Guard&quot;. Advocates of collective rights models argued that the Second Amendment was written to prevent the federal government from disarming state militias, rather than to secure an individual right to possess firearms. Prior to 2001, every circuit court decision that interpreted the Second Amendment endorsed the &quot;collective right&quot; model. However, beginning with the Fifth Circuit&#x27;s opinion &quot;United States v. Emerson&quot; in 2001, some circuit courts recognized that the Second Amendment protects an individual right to bear arms.

The second, known as the &quot;sophisticated collective right model&quot;, held that the Second Amendment recognizes some limited individual right. However, this individual right could be exercised only by actively participating members of a functioning, organized state militia. Some scholars have argued that the &quot;sophisticated collective rights model&quot; is, in fact, the functional equivalent of the &quot;collective rights model&quot;. Other commentators have observed that prior to &quot;Emerson&quot;, five circuit courts specifically endorsed the &quot;sophisticated collective right model&quot;.

The third, known as the &quot;standard model&quot;, held that the Second Amendment recognized the personal right of individuals to keep and bear arms. Supporters of this model argued that &quot;although the first clause may describe a general purpose for the amendment, the second clause is controlling and therefore the amendment confers an individual right &#x27;of the people&#x27; to keep and bear arms&quot;. Additionally, scholars who favored this model argued the &quot;absence of founding-era militias mentioned in the Amendment&#x27;s preamble does not render it a &#x27;dead letter&#x27; because the preamble is a &#x27;philosophical declaration&#x27; safeguarding militias and is but one of multiple &#x27;civic purposes&#x27; for which the Amendment was enacted&quot;.

The question of a collective right versus an individual right was progressively resolved in favor of the individual rights model, beginning with the Fifth Circuit ruling in &quot;United States v. Emerson&quot; (2001), along with the Supreme Court&#x27;s rulings in &quot;District of Columbia v. Heller&quot; (2008), and &quot;McDonald v. Chicago&quot; (2010). In &quot;Heller&quot;, the Supreme Court resolved any remaining circuit splits by ruling that the Second Amendment protects an individual right. Although the Second Amendment is the only Constitutional amendment with a prefatory clause, such linguistic constructions were widely used elsewhere in the late eighteenth century.

Warren E. Burger, a conservative Republican appointed chief justice of the United States by President Richard Nixon, wrote in 1990 following his retirement:
{{blockquote|The Constitution of the United States, in its Second Amendment, guarantees a &quot;right of the people to keep and bear arms&quot;. However, the meaning of this clause cannot be understood except by looking to the purpose, the setting and the objectives of the draftsmen{{nbsp}}... People of that day were apprehensive about the new &quot;monster&quot; national government presented to them, and this helps explain the language and purpose of the Second Amendment{{nbsp}}... We see that the need for a state militia was the predicate of the &quot;right&quot; guaranteed; in short, it was declared &quot;necessary&quot; in order to have a state military force to protect the security of the state.}}

And in 1991, Burger stated:
{{blockquote|If I were writing the Bill of Rights now, there wouldn&#x27;t be any such thing as the Second Amendment{{nbsp}}... that a well regulated militia being necessary for the defense of the state, the peoples&#x27; rights to bear arms. This has been the subject of one of the greatest pieces of fraud{{snd}}I repeat the word &#x27;fraud&#x27;{{snd}}on the American public by special interest groups that I have ever seen in my lifetime.}}

In a 1992 opinion piece, six former American attorneys general wrote:
{{blockquote|For more than 200 years, the federal courts have unanimously determined that the Second Amendment concerns only the arming of the people in service to an organized state militia; it does not guarantee immediate access to guns for private purposes. The nation can no longer afford to let the gun lobby&#x27;s distortion of the Constitution cripple every reasonable attempt to implement an effective national policy toward guns and crime.}}

Research by Robert Spitzer found that every law journal article discussing the Second Amendment through 1959 &quot;reflected the Second Amendment affects citizens only in connection with citizen service in a government organized
and regulated militia.&quot; Only beginning in 1960 did law journal articles begin to advocate an &quot;individualist&quot; view of gun ownership rights. The opposite of this &quot;individualist&quot; view of gun ownership rights is the &quot;collective-right&quot; theory, according to which the amendment protects a collective right of states to maintain militias or an individual right to keep and bear arms in connection with service in a militia (for this view see for example the quote of Justice John Paul Stevens in the Meaning of &quot;well regulated militia&quot; section below). In his book, &quot;Six Amendments: How and Why We Should Change the Constitution&quot;, Justice John Paul Stevens for example submits the following revised Second Amendment: &quot;A well regulated militia, being necessary to the security of a free state, the right of the people to keep and bear arms when serving in the militia shall not be infringed.&quot;

===Meaning of &quot;well regulated militia&quot;===
An early use of the phrase &quot;well-regulated militia&quot; may be found in Andrew Fletcher&#x27;s 1698 &quot;A Discourse of Government with Relation to Militias&quot;, as well as the phrase &quot;ordinary and ill-regulated militia&quot;. Fletcher meant &quot;regular&quot; in the sense of regular military, and advocated the universal conscription and regular training of men of fighting age. Jefferson thought well of Fletcher, commenting that &quot;the political principles of that patriot were worthy the purest periods of the British constitution. They are those which were in vigour.&quot;

The term &quot;regulated&quot; means &quot;disciplined&quot; or &quot;trained&quot;. In &quot;Heller&quot;, the U.S. Supreme Court stated that &quot;[t]he adjective &#x27;well-regulated&#x27; implies nothing more than the imposition of proper discipline and training.&quot;

In the year before the drafting of the Second Amendment, in Federalist No. 29 (&quot;On the Militia&quot;), Alexander Hamilton wrote the following about &quot;organizing&quot;, &quot;disciplining&quot;, &quot;arming&quot;, and &quot;training&quot; of the militia as specified in the enumerated powers:

{{blockquote |If a well regulated militia be the most natural defence of a free country, it ought certainly to be under the regulation and at the disposal of that body which is constituted the guardian of the national security{{nbsp}}... confiding the regulation of the militia to the direction of the national authority{{nbsp}}... [but] reserving to the states{{nbsp}}... the authority of training the militia{{nbsp}}... A tolerable expertness in military movements is a business that requires time and practice. It is not a day, or even a week, that will suffice for the attainment of it. To oblige the great body of the yeomanry, and of the other classes of the citizens, to be under arms for the purpose of going through military exercises and evolutions, as often as might be necessary to acquire the degree of perfection which would entitle them to the character of a well-regulated militia, would be a real grievance to the people, and a serious public inconvenience and loss{{nbsp}}... Little more can reasonably be aimed at, with respect to the People at large, than to have them properly armed and equipped; and in order to see that this be not neglected, it will be necessary to assemble them once or twice in the course of a year.}}

{{anchor|scalianunn}}Justice Scalia, writing for the Court in &quot;Heller&quot;:
{{blockquote |In &quot;Nunn v. State&quot;, 1 Ga. 243, 251 (1846), the Georgia Supreme Court construed the Second Amendment as protecting the &#x27;natural right of self-defence&#x27; and therefore struck down a ban on carrying pistols openly. Its opinion perfectly captured the way in which the operative clause of the Second Amendment furthers the purpose announced in the prefatory clause, in continuity with the English right&quot;. ... Nor is the right involved in this discussion less comprehensive or valuable: &quot;The right of the people to bear arms shall not be infringed.&quot; The right of the whole people, old and young, men, women and boys, and not militia only, to keep and bear arms of every description, not such merely as are used by the militia, shall not be infringed, curtailed, or broken in upon, in the smallest degree; and all this for the important end to be attained: the rearing up and qualifying a well-regulated militia, so vitally necessary to the security of a free State. Our opinion is, that any law, State or Federal, is repugnant to the Constitution, and void, which contravenes this right, originally belonging to our forefathers, trampled under foot by Charles I. and his two wicked sons and successors, reestablished by the revolution of 1688, conveyed to this land of liberty by the colonists, and finally incorporated conspicuously in our own Magna Charta! And Lexington, Concord, Camden, River Raisin, Sandusky, and the laurel-crowned field of New Orleans, plead eloquently for this interpretation! And the acquisition of Texas may be considered the full fruits of this great constitutional right.}}

Justice Stevens in dissent:
{{blockquote |When each word in the text is given full effect, the Amendment is most naturally read to secure to the people a right to use and possess arms in conjunction with service in a well-regulated militia. So far as appears, no more than that was contemplated by its drafters or is encompassed within its terms. Even if the meaning of the text were genuinely susceptible to more than one interpretation, the burden would remain on those advocating a departure from the purpose identified in the preamble and from settled law to come forward with persuasive new arguments or evidence. The textual analysis offered by respondent and embraced by the Court falls far short of sustaining that heavy burden. And the Court&#x27;s emphatic reliance on the claim &quot;that the Second Amendment{{nbsp}} ... codified a pre-existing right,&quot; ante, at 19 [refers to p. 19 of the opinion], is of course beside the point because the right to keep and bear arms for service in a state militia was also a pre-existing right.}}

===Meaning of &quot;the right of the People&quot;===
Justice Antonin Scalia, writing for the majority in &quot;Heller&quot;, stated:

{{blockquote |Nowhere else in the Constitution does a &quot;right&quot; attributed to &quot;the people&quot; refer to anything other than an individual right. What is more, in all six other provisions of the Constitution that mention &quot;the people&quot;, the term unambiguously refers to all members of the political community, not an unspecified subset. This contrasts markedly with the phrase &quot;the militia&quot; in the prefatory clause. As we will describe below, the &quot;militia&quot; in colonial America consisted of a subset of &quot;the people&quot;{{snd}}those who were male, able bodied, and within a certain age range. Reading the Second Amendment as protecting only the right to &quot;keep and bear Arms&quot; in an organized militia therefore fits poorly with the operative clause&#x27;s description of the holder of that right as &quot;the people&quot;.}}

Scalia further specifies who holds this right:
{{blockquote |[The Second Amendment] surely elevates above all other interests the right of law-abiding, responsible citizens to use arms in defense of hearth and home.}}

An earlier case, &quot;United States v. Verdugo-Urquidez&quot; (1990), dealt with nonresident aliens and the Fourth Amendment, but led to a discussion of who are &quot;the People&quot; when referred to elsewhere in the Constitution:
{{blockquote |The Second Amendment protects &quot;the right of the people to keep and bear Arms&quot;, and the Ninth and Tenth Amendments provide that certain rights and powers are retained by and reserved to &quot;the people&quot;{{nbsp}}... While this textual exegesis is by no means conclusive, it suggests that &quot;the people&quot; protected by the Fourth Amendment, and by the First and Second Amendments, and to whom rights and powers are reserved in the Ninth and Tenth Amendments, refers to a class of persons who are part of a national community or who have otherwise developed sufficient connection with this country to be considered part of that community.}}

According to the majority in &quot;Heller&quot;, there were several different reasons for this amendment, and protecting militias was only one of them; if protecting militias had been the only reason then the amendment could have instead referred to &quot;the right of the &quot;militia&quot; to keep and bear arms&quot; instead of &quot;the right of the &quot;people&quot; to keep and bear arms&quot;.

===Meaning of &quot;keep and bear arms&quot;===
In &quot;Heller&quot; the majority rejected the view that the term &quot;to bear arms&quot; implies only the military use of arms:
{{blockquote |Before addressing the verbs &quot;keep&quot; and &quot;bear&quot;, we interpret their object: &quot;Arms&quot;. The term was applied, then as now, to weapons that were not specifically designed for military use and were not employed in a military capacity. Thus, the most natural reading of &quot;keep Arms&quot; in the Second Amendment is to &quot;have weapons&quot;. At the time of the founding, as now, to &quot;bear&quot; meant to &quot;carry&quot;. In numerous instances, &quot;bear arms&quot; was unambiguously used to refer to the carrying of weapons outside of an organized militia. Nine state constitutional provisions written in the 18th century or the first two decades of the 19th, which enshrined a right of citizens &quot;bear arms in defense of themselves and the state&quot; again, in the most analogous linguistic context{{snd}}that &quot;bear arms&quot; was not limited to the carrying of arms in a militia. The phrase &quot;bear Arms&quot; also had at the time of the founding an idiomatic meaning that was significantly different from its natural meaning: &quot;to serve as a soldier, do military service, fight&quot; or &quot;to wage war&quot;. But it unequivocally bore that idiomatic meaning only when followed by the preposition &quot;against&quot;. Every example given by petitioners&#x27; amici for the idiomatic meaning of &quot;bear arms&quot; from the founding period either includes the preposition &quot;against&quot; or is not clearly idiomatic. In any event, the meaning of &quot;bear arms&quot; that petitioners and Justice Stevens propose is not even the (sometimes) idiomatic meaning. Rather, they manufacture a hybrid definition, whereby &quot;bear arms&quot; connotes the actual carrying of arms (and therefore is not really an idiom) but only in the service of an organized militia. No dictionary has ever adopted that definition, and we have been apprised of no source that indicates that it carried that meaning at the time of the founding. Worse still, the phrase &quot;keep and bear Arms&quot; would be incoherent. The word &quot;Arms&quot; would have two different meanings at once: &quot;weapons&quot; (as the object of &quot;keep&quot;) and (as the object of &quot;bear&quot;) one-half of an idiom. It would be rather like saying &quot;He filled and kicked the bucket&quot; to mean &quot;He filled the bucket and died.&quot;}}

In a dissent, joined by justices Souter, Ginsburg, and Breyer, Justice Stevens said:
{{blockquote |The Amendment&#x27;s text does justify a different limitation: the &quot;right to keep and bear arms&quot; protects only a right to possess and use firearms in connection with service in a state-organized militia. Had the Framers wished to expand the meaning of the phrase &quot;bear arms&quot; to encompass civilian possession and use, they could have done so by the addition of phrases such as &quot;for the defense of themselves&quot;.}}

A May 2018 analysis by Dennis Baron contradicted the majority opinion:
{{blockquote|A search of Brigham Young University&#x27;s new online Corpus of Founding Era American English, with more than 95,000 texts and 138 million words, yields 281 instances of the phrase &quot;bear arms&quot;. BYU&#x27;s Corpus of Early Modern English, with 40,000 texts and close to 1.3 billion words, shows 1,572 instances of the phrase. Subtracting about 350 duplicate matches, that leaves about 1,500 separate occurrences of &quot;bear arms&quot; in the 17th and 18th centuries, and only a handful don&#x27;t refer to war, soldiering or organized, armed action. These databases confirm that the natural meaning of &quot;bear arms&quot; in the framers&#x27; day was military.}}

A paper from 2008 found that before 1820, the use of the phrase &quot;bear arms&quot; was commonly used in a civilian context, such as hunting and personal self-defense, in both American and British law. One scholar suggests that the right to &quot;keep and bear arms&quot; further includes a right to privately manufacture firearms.

== Analysis of grammar and syntax ==
The Second Amendment is viewed by scholars as divided into two clauses, a prefatory clause, and an operative clause.

The prefatory clause includes the text:

&quot;A well regulated Militia, being necessary to the security of a free State,&quot;

Followed by the operative clause:

&quot;the right of the people to keep and bear Arms, shall not be infringed.&quot;

Under the standard model, the prefatory clause is understood to be merely amplifying the operative clause. The prefatory clause was meant as a non-exclusive example{{snd}}one of many justifications for the Second Amendment. This interpretation is consistent with the position that the Second Amendment protects an individual right.

Under the collective right models, the prefatory clause was considered essential as a pre-condition for the main clause. This interpretation claimed that this was a grammar structure common during the era the Second Amendment was written and that this grammar dictated that the Second Amendment protected a collective right to firearms to the extent necessary for militia duty. Many linguistic scholars reject this interpretation of the grammar and syntax, asserting, &quot;...that the prefatory clause is neither internal nor conditional; instead, it&#x27;s temporal and external, meaning the opening words introduce its context and purpose.&quot;

The comma between the word &quot;Arms&quot; and &quot;shall&quot; also has been involved in debate centered around the meaning and interpretation of this one comma between the two words. Some argue that &quot;...long-standing British tradition minimized punctuation&#x27;s effect on laws&quot; and that therefore this comma has little significance on the real meaning of the Second Amendment.

The Second Amendment uses &quot;passive voice&quot; in its language as opposed to &quot;active voice.&quot; Only the First Amendment to the United States Constitution uses &quot;active voice&quot; (&quot;Congress shall make no law.&quot;) Debate around whom the Second Amendment applies to has also centered around this &quot;passive voice&quot; used in its wording. A &quot;Reason&quot; magazine analysis from January 2025 stated on the subject of the &quot;passive&quot; versus &quot;active&quot; voice used in the Second Amendment that:The Bill of Rights&#x27; passive voice consistently elevates one object: individual rights. As for the subject, the Framers could neither specify nor predict what or who could infringe upon said rights. Thus, the Constitution, especially following the 14th Amendment&#x27;s ratification, safeguards these rights from an exhaustive catalog of unscrupulous subjects—namely, state actors (e.g., cops, Congress, presidents, judges, city councils, etc.) that could violate these freedoms.

==Supreme Court cases==
{{See also|List of firearm court cases in the United States}}

In the century following the ratification of the Bill of Rights, the intended meaning and application of the Second Amendment drew less interest than it does in modern times.{{full citation needed|date=September 2024|reason=Two works by Saul Cornell are fully cited, with sufficient identifying information, but this one is not. Either it&#x27;s a separate work titled &quot;Gun Control&quot; or someone has confusingly abbreviated the title of one of the already-cited works, &quot;A Well-Regulated Militia – The Founding Fathers and the Origins of Gun Control in America&quot;.}} The vast majority of regulation was done by states, and the first case law on weapons regulation dealt with state interpretations of the Second Amendment. A notable exception to this general rule was &quot;Houston v. Moore&quot;, {{ussc|18|1|1820}}, where the U.S. Supreme Court mentioned the Second Amendment in an aside.{{efn|Justice Story &quot;misidentified&quot; it as the &quot;5th Amendment&quot;. Several public officials, including James Madison and Supreme Court Justice Joseph Story, retained the confusing practice of referring to each of the ten amendments in the Bill of Rights by the enumeration found in the first draft; the fifth article is the Second Amendment.}} In the &quot;Dred Scott&quot; decision (1857), the opinion of the court stated that if African Americans were considered U.S. citizens, &quot;It would give to persons of the negro race, who were recognised as citizens in any one State of the Union, the right{{nbsp}}... to keep and carry arms wherever they went.&quot;

State and federal courts historically have used two models to interpret the Second Amendment: the &quot;individual rights&quot; model, which holds that individuals hold the right to bear arms, and the &quot;collective rights&quot; model, which holds that the right is dependent on militia membership. The &quot;collective rights&quot; model has been rejected by the Supreme Court, in favor of the individual rights model, beginning with its &quot;District of Columbia v. Heller (2008)&quot; decision.

The Supreme Court&#x27;s primary Second Amendment cases include &quot;United States v. Miller&quot;, (1939); &quot;District of Columbia v. Heller&quot; (2008); and &quot;McDonald v. Chicago&quot; (2010).

&quot;Heller&quot; and &quot;McDonald&quot; supported the individual rights model, under which the Second Amendment protects the right to keep and bear arms much as the First Amendment protects the right to free speech. Under this model, the militia is composed of members who supply their own arms and ammunition. This is generally recognized as the method by which militias have historically been armed, as the Supreme Court in &quot;Miller&quot; said:
{{blockquote|The signification attributed to the term Militia appears from the debates in the Convention, the history and legislation of Colonies and States, and the writings of approved commentators. These show plainly enough that the Militia comprised all males physically capable of acting in concert for the common defense. &#x27;A body of citizens enrolled for military discipline.&#x27; And further, that ordinarily when called for service these men were expected to appear bearing arms supplied by themselves and of the kind in common use at the time.}}

Of the collective rights model that holds that the right to arms is based on militia membership, the Supreme Court in &quot;Heller&quot; said:
{{blockquote|A purposive qualifying phrase that contradicts the word or phrase it modifies is unknown this side of the looking glass (except, apparently, in some courses on Linguistics). If &quot;bear arms&quot; means, as we think, simply the carrying of arms, a modifier can limit the purpose of the carriage (&quot;for the purpose of self-defense&quot; or &quot;to make war against the King&quot;). But if &quot;bear arms&quot; means, as the petitioners and the dissent think, the carrying of arms only for military purposes, one simply cannot add &quot;for the purpose of killing game&quot;. The right &quot;to carry arms in the militia for the purpose of killing game&quot; is worthy of the mad hatter.}}

===&quot;United States v. Cruikshank&quot;===
{{Main |United States v. Cruikshank}}

In the Reconstruction Era case of &quot;United States v. Cruikshank&quot;, {{ussc|92|542|1875}}, the defendants were white men who had killed more than sixty black people in what was known as the Colfax massacre and had been charged with conspiring to prevent blacks from exercising their right to bear arms. The Court dismissed the charges, holding that the Bill of Rights restricted Congress but not private individuals. The Court concluded, &quot;[f]or their protection in its enjoyment, the people must look to the States.&quot;

The Court stated that &quot;[t]he Second Amendment{{nbsp}}... has no other effect than to restrict the powers of the national government{{nbsp}}...&quot; Likewise, the Court held that there was no state action in this case, and therefore the Fourteenth Amendment was not applicable:
{{blockquote|The fourteenth amendment prohibits a State from depriving any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; but this adds nothing to the rights of one citizen as against another.}}

Thus, the Court held a federal anti-Ku-Klux-Klan statute to be unconstitutional as applied in that case.

===&quot;Presser v. Illinois&quot;===
{{Main |Presser v. Illinois}}

In &quot;Presser v. Illinois&quot;, {{ussc|116|252|1886}}, Herman Presser headed a German-American paramilitary shooting organization and was arrested for leading a parade group of 400 men, training and drilling with military weapons with the declared intention to fight, through the streets of Chicago as a violation of Illinois law that prohibited public drilling and parading in military style without a permit from the governor.

At his trial, Presser argued that the State of Illinois had violated his Second Amendment rights. The Supreme Court reaffirmed &quot;Cruikshank&quot;, and also held that the Second Amendment prevented neither the States nor Congress from barring private militias that parade with arms; such a right &quot;cannot be claimed as a right independent of law&quot;. This decision upheld the States&#x27; authority to regulate the militia and that citizens had no right to create their own militias or to own weapons for semi-military purposes. The Court however observed with respect to the reach of the Amendment on the national government and the federal states and the role of the people therin: &quot;It is undoubtedly true that all citizens capable of bearing arms constitute the reserved military force or reserve militia of the United States as well as of the states, and, in view of this prerogative of the general government, as well as of its general powers, the states cannot, even laying the constitutional provision in question out of view, prohibit the people from keeping and bearing arms so as to deprive the United States of their rightful resource for maintaining the public security, and disable the people from performing their duty to the general government.&quot; In essence the court said: &quot;A state cannot prohibit the people therein from keeping and bearing arms to an extent that would deprive the United States of the protection afforded by them as a reserve military force.&quot;

===&quot;Miller v. Texas&quot;===
In &quot;Miller v. Texas&quot;, {{ussc|153|535|1894}}, Franklin Miller was convicted and sentenced to be executed for shooting a police officer to death with an illegally carried handgun in violation of Texas law. Miller sought to have his conviction overturned, claiming his Second Amendment rights were violated and that the Bill of Rights should be applied to state law. The Supreme Court ruled that the Second Amendment did not apply to state laws such as the Texas law, writing: &quot;As the proceedings were conducted under the ordinary forms of criminal prosecutions there certainly was no denial of due process of law.&quot;

===&quot;Robertson v. Baldwin&quot;===
In &quot;Robertson v. Baldwin&quot;, {{ussc|165|275|1897}}, the Supreme Court stated in &quot;dicta&quot; that &quot;the right of the people to keep and bear arms (Art. II) is not infringed by laws prohibiting the carrying of concealed weapons.&quot;

===&quot;United States v. Schwimmer&quot;===
{{Main|United States v. Schwimmer}}
&quot;United States v. Schwimmer&quot;, {{ussc|279|644|1929}}, concerned a pacifist applicant for naturalization who in the interview declared not to be willing to &quot;take up arms personally&quot; in defense of the United States. The Supreme Court cited the Second Amendment indirectly by declaring that the United States Constitution obliges citizens &quot;to defend our government against all enemies whenever necessity arises is a fundamental principle of the Constitution&quot; and by declaring further that the &quot;common defense was one of the purposes for which the people ordained and established the Constitution.&quot;

===&quot;United States v. Miller&quot;===
{{Main |United States v. Miller}}

In &quot;United States v. Miller&quot;, {{ussc|307|174|1939}}, the Supreme Court rejected a Second Amendment challenge to the National Firearms Act prohibiting the interstate transportation of unregistered Title II weapons:
{{blockquote|Jack Miller and Frank Layton &quot;did unlawfully{{nbsp}}... transport in interstate commerce from{{nbsp}}... Claremore{{nbsp}}... Oklahoma to{{nbsp}}... Siloam Springs{{nbsp}}... Arkansas a certain firearm{{nbsp}}... a double barrel{{nbsp}}... shotgun having a barrel less than 18 inches in length{{nbsp}}... at the time of so transporting said firearm in interstate commerce{{nbsp}}... not having registered said firearm as required by Section 1132d of Title 26, United States Code{{nbsp}}... and not having in their possession a stamp-affixed written order{{nbsp}}... as provided by Section 1132C{{nbsp}}...&quot;}}

In a unanimous opinion authored by Justice McReynolds, the Supreme Court stated &quot;the objection that the Act usurps police power reserved to the States is plainly untenable.&quot; As the Court explained:
{{blockquote|In the absence of any evidence tending to show that possession or use of a &#x27;shotgun having a barrel of less than eighteen inches in length&#x27; at this time has some reasonable relationship to any preservation or efficiency of a well regulated militia, we cannot say that the Second Amendment guarantees the right to keep and bear such an instrument. Certainly it is not within judicial notice that this weapon is any part of the ordinary military equipment or that its use could contribute to the common defense.}}

Gun rights advocates claim that the Court in &quot;Miller&quot; ruled that the Second Amendment protected the right to keep arms that are part of &quot;ordinary military equipment&quot;. They also claim that the Court did not consider the question of whether the sawed-off shotgun in the case would be an applicable weapon for personal defense, instead looking solely at the weapon&#x27;s suitability for the &quot;common defense&quot;. Law professor Andrew McClurg states, &quot;The only certainty about &quot;Miller&quot; is that it failed to give either side a clear-cut victory. Most modern scholars recognize this fact.&quot;

===&quot;District of Columbia v. Heller&quot;===
{{Main |District of Columbia v. Heller}}

====Judgment====
According to the syllabus prepared by the U.S. Supreme Court Reporter of Decisions, in &quot;District of Columbia v. Heller&quot;, {{ussc|554|570|2008}}, the Supreme Court held:

{{ordered list
|The Second Amendment protects an individual right to possess a firearm unconnected with service in a militia, and to use that arm for traditionally lawful purposes, such as self-defense within the home. pp. 2–53.
{{ordered list|type=lower-alpha
|The Amendment&#x27;s prefatory clause announces a purpose, but does not limit or expand the scope of the second part, the operative clause. The operative clause&#x27;s text and history demonstrate that it connotes an individual right to keep and bear arms. pp. 2–22.
| The prefatory clause comports with the Court&#x27;s interpretation of the operative clause. The &quot;militia&quot; comprised all males physically capable of acting in concert for the common defense. The Antifederalists feared that the Federal Government would disarm the people in order to disable this citizens&#x27; militia, enabling a politicized standing army or a select militia to rule. The response was to deny Congress power to abridge the ancient right of individuals to keep and bear arms, so that the ideal of a citizens&#x27; militia would be preserved. pp. 22–28.
| The Court&#x27;s interpretation is confirmed by analogous arms-bearing rights in state constitutions that preceded and immediately followed the Second Amendment. pp. 28–30.
| The Second Amendment&#x27;s drafting history, while of dubious interpretive worth, reveals three state Second Amendment proposals that unequivocally referred to an individual right to bear arms. pp. 30–32.
| Interpretation of the Second Amendment by scholars, courts and legislators, from immediately after its ratification through the late 19th century also supports the Court&#x27;s conclusion. pp. 32–47.
| None of the Court&#x27;s precedents forecloses the Court&#x27;s interpretation. Neither &quot;United States v. Cruikshank&quot;, 92 U.S. 542, nor &quot;Presser v. Illinois&quot;, 116 U.S. 252, refutes the individual-rights interpretation. &quot;United States v. Miller&quot;, 307 U.S. 174, does not limit the right to keep and bear arms to militia purposes, but rather limits the type of weapon to which the right applies to those used by the militia, i.e., those in common use for lawful purposes. pp. 47–54.
|Like most rights, the Second Amendment right is not unlimited. It is not a right to keep and carry any weapon whatsoever in any manner whatsoever and for whatever purpose: For example, concealed weapons prohibitions have been upheld under the Amendment or state analogues. The Court&#x27;s opinion should not be taken to cast doubt on longstanding prohibitions on the possession of firearms by felons and the mentally ill, or laws forbidding the carrying of firearms in sensitive places such as schools and government buildings, or laws imposing conditions and qualifications on the commercial sale of arms. &quot;Miller&quot;{{&#x27;}}s holding that the sorts of weapons protected are those &quot;in common use at the time&quot; finds support in the historical tradition of prohibiting the carrying of dangerous and unusual weapons. pp. 54–56.
| The handgun ban and the trigger-lock requirement (as applied to self-defense) violate the Second Amendment. The District&#x27;s total ban on handgun possession in the home amounts to a prohibition on an entire class of &quot;arms&quot; that Americans overwhelmingly choose for the lawful purpose of self-defense. Under any of the standards of scrutiny the Court has applied to enumerated constitutional rights, this prohibition{{snd}}in the place where the importance of the lawful defense of self, family, and property is most acute{{snd}}would fail constitutional muster. Similarly, the requirement that any lawful firearm in the home be disassembled or bound by a trigger lock makes it impossible for citizens to use arms for the core lawful purpose of self-defense and is hence unconstitutional. Because Heller conceded at oral argument that the D. C. licensing law is permissible if it is not enforced arbitrarily and capriciously, the Court assumes that a license will satisfy his prayer for relief and does not address the licensing requirement. Assuming he is not disqualified from exercising Second Amendment rights, the District must permit Heller to register his handgun and must issue him a license to carry it in the home. pp. 56–64.}}

The &quot;Heller&quot; court also stated (&quot;Heller&quot;, 554 U.S. 570 (2008), at 632) its analysis should not be read to suggest &quot;the invalidity of laws regulating the storage of firearms to prevent accidents.&quot;
The Supreme Court also defined the term arms used in the Second Amendment. &quot;Arms&quot; covered by the Second Amendment were defined in &quot;District of Columbia v. Heller&quot; to include &quot;any thing that a man wears for his defence, or takes into his hands, or useth in wrath to cast at or strike another&quot;. 554 U. S., at 581.&quot; The Michigan Court of Appeals 2012 relied on &quot;Heller&quot; in the case &quot;People v. Yanna&quot; to state certain limitations on the right to keep and bear arms:

{{blockquote|In some respects, these limitations are consistent with each other. However, they are not identical, and the United States Supreme Court neither fully harmonized them nor elevated one over another. First, the Court stated that &quot;the Second Amendment does not protect those weapons not typically possessed by law-abiding citizens for lawful purposes.&quot; &quot;Id.&quot; at 625, 128 S.Ct. 2783. The Court further stated that &quot;the sorts of weapons protected were those &#x27;in common use at the time.&#x27;&quot; &quot;Id.&quot; at 627, 128 S.Ct. 2783 (citation omitted). As noted, however, this included weapons that did not exist when the Second Amendment was enacted. &quot;Id.&quot; at 582, 128 S.Ct. 2783. Third, the Court referred to &quot;the historical tradition of prohibiting the carrying of &#x27;dangerous and unusual weapons.&#x27;&quot; &quot;Id.&quot; at 627, 128 S.Ct. 2783 (citation omitted).}}

There are similar legal summaries of the Supreme Court&#x27;s findings in &quot;Heller&quot; as the one quoted above. For example, the Illinois Supreme Court in &quot;People v. Aguilar&quot; (2013), summed up &quot;Heller&quot;{{&#x27;}}s findings and reasoning:
{{blockquote |In &quot;District of Columbia v. Heller&quot;, 554 U.S. 570 (2008), the Supreme Court undertook its first-ever &quot;in-depth examination&quot; of the second amendment&#x27;s meaning &quot;Id.&quot; at 635. After a lengthy historical discussion, the Court ultimately concluded that the second amendment &quot;guarantee[s] the individual right to possess and carry weapons in case of confrontation&quot; (&quot;id.&quot; at 592); that &quot;central to&quot; this right is &quot;the inherent right of self-defense&quot; (&quot;id&quot;. at 628); that &quot;the home&quot; is &quot;where the need for defense of self, family, and property is most acute&quot; (&quot;id.&quot; at 628); and that, &quot;above all other interests&quot;, the second amendment elevates &quot;the right of law-abiding, responsible citizens to use arms in defense of hearth and home&quot; (&quot;id.&quot; at 635). Based on this understanding, the Court held that a District of Columbia law banning handgun possession in the home violated the second amendment &quot;Id.&quot; at 635.}}

====Notes and analysis====
&quot;Heller&quot; has been widely described as a landmark decision because it was the first time the Court affirmed an individual&#x27;s right to own a gun. To clarify that its ruling does not invalidate a broad range of existing firearm laws, the majority opinion, written by Justice Antonin Scalia, said:
{{blockquote|Like most rights, the right secured by the Second Amendment is not unlimited{{nbsp}}... Although we do not undertake an exhaustive historical analysis today of the full scope of the Second Amendment, nothing in our opinion should be taken to cast doubt on longstanding prohibitions on the possession of firearms by felons and the mentally ill, or laws forbidding the carrying of firearms in sensitive places such as schools and government buildings, or laws imposing conditions and qualifications on the commercial sale of arms.}}

The Court&#x27;s statement that the right secured by the Second Amendment is limited has been widely discussed by lower courts and the media. According to Justice John Paul Stevens he was able to persuade Justice Anthony M. Kennedy to ask for &quot;some important changes&quot; to Justice Scalia&#x27;s opinion, so it was Justice Kennedy, who was needed to secure a fifth vote in &quot;Heller&quot;, &quot;who requested that the opinion include language stating that Heller &#x27;should not be taken to cast doubt&#x27; on many existing gun laws.&quot; The majority opinion also said that the amendment&#x27;s prefatory clause (referencing the &quot;militia&quot;) serves to clarify the operative clause (referencing &quot;the people&quot;), but does not limit the scope of the operative clause, because &quot;the &#x27;militia&#x27; in colonial America consisted of a subset of &#x27;the people&#x27;.{{nbsp}}... &quot;

Justice Stevens&#x27; dissenting opinion, which was joined by the three other dissenters, said:
{{blockquote|The question presented by this case is not whether the Second Amendment protects a &quot;collective right&quot; or an &quot;individual right&quot;. Surely it protects a right that can be enforced by individuals. But a conclusion that the Second Amendment protects an individual right does not tell us anything about the scope of that right.}}

Stevens went on to say the following:
{{blockquote|The Second Amendment was adopted to protect the right of the people of each of the several States to maintain a well-regulated militia. It was a response to concerns raised during the ratification of the Constitution that the power of Congress to disarm the state militias and create a national standing army posed an intolerable threat to the sovereignty of the several States. Neither the text of the Amendment nor the arguments advanced by its proponents evidenced the slightest interest in limiting any legislature&#x27;s authority to regulate private civilian uses of firearms. Specifically, there is no indication that the Framers of the Amendment intended to enshrine the common-law right of self-defense in the Constitution.}}

This dissent called the majority opinion &quot;strained and unpersuasive&quot; and said that the right to possess a firearm exists only in relation to the militia and that the D.C. laws constitute permissible regulation. In the majority opinion, Justice Stevens&#x27; interpretation of the phrase &quot;to keep and bear arms&quot; was referred to as a &quot;hybrid&quot; definition that Stevens purportedly chose in order to avoid an &quot;incoherent&quot; and &quot;[g]rotesque&quot; idiomatic meeting.

Justice Breyer, in his own dissent joined by Stevens, Souter, and Ginsburg, stated that the entire Court subscribes to the proposition that &quot;the amendment protects an &#x27;individual&#x27; right{{snd}}i.e., one that is separately possessed, and may be separately enforced, by each person on whom it is conferred&quot;.

Regarding the term &quot;well regulated&quot;, the majority opinion said, &quot;The adjective &#x27;well-regulated&#x27; implies nothing more than the imposition of proper discipline and training.&quot; The majority opinion quoted Spooner from &quot;The Unconstitutionality of Slavery&quot; as saying that the right to bear arms was necessary for those who wanted to take a stand against slavery. The majority opinion also stated that:
{{blockquote|A purposive qualifying phrase that contradicts the word or phrase it modifies is unknown this side of the looking glass (except, apparently, in some courses on Linguistics). If &quot;bear arms&quot; means, as we think, simply the carrying of arms, a modifier can limit the purpose of the carriage (&quot;for the purpose of self-defense&quot; or &quot;to make war against the King&quot;). But if &quot;bear arms&quot; means, as the petitioners and the dissent think, the carrying of arms only for military purposes, one simply cannot add &quot;for the purpose of killing game&quot;. The right &quot;to carry arms in the militia for the purpose of killing game&quot; is worthy of the mad hatter.}}

The dissenting justices were not persuaded by this argument.

Reaction to &quot;Heller&quot; has varied, with many sources giving focus to the ruling referring to itself as being the first in Supreme Court history to read the Second Amendment as protecting an individual right. The majority opinion, authored by Justice Scalia, gives explanation of the majority legal reasoning behind this decision. The majority opinion made clear that the recent ruling did not foreclose the Court&#x27;s prior interpretations given in &quot;United States v. Cruikshank&quot;, &quot;Presser v. Illinois&quot;, and &quot;United States v. Miller&quot; though these earlier rulings did not limit the right to keep and bear arms solely to militia purposes, but rather limits the type of weapon to which the right applies to those used by the militia (i.e., those in common use for lawful purposes).

&quot;Heller&quot; pertained to three District of Columbia ordinances involving restrictions on firearms amounting to a total ban. These three ordinances were a ban on handgun registration, a requirement that all firearms in a home be either disassembled or have a trigger lock, and licensing requirement that prohibits carrying an unlicensed firearm in the home, such as from one room to another:
{{blockquote|Under any of the standards of scrutiny the Court has applied to enumerated constitutional rights, this prohibition{{snd}}in the place where the importance of the lawful defense of self, family, and property is most acute{{snd}}would fail constitutional muster.{{nbsp}}... Because Heller conceded at oral argument that the District&#x27;s licensing law is permissible if it is not enforced arbitrarily and capriciously, the Court assumed that a license will satisfy his prayer for relief and did not address the licensing requirement. Assuming he is not disqualified from exercising Second Amendment rights, the District must permit Heller to register his handgun and must issue him a license to carry it in the home.&quot;}}

Justice Ginsburg was a vocal critic of &quot;Heller&quot;. Speaking in an interview on public radio station WNYC, she called the Second Amendment &quot;outdated&quot;, saying:
{{blockquote |When we no longer need people to keep muskets in their home, then the Second Amendment has no function{{nbsp}}... If the Court had properly interpreted the Second Amendment, the Court would have said that amendment was very important when the nation was new; it gave a qualified right to keep and bear arms, but it was for one purpose only{{snd}}and that was the purpose of having militiamen who were able to fight to preserve the nation.}}

According to adjunct professor of law at Duquesne University School of Law Anthony Picadio, who said he&#x27;s not anti-gun but rather &quot;anti-bad-judging&quot;, Justice Scalia&#x27;s reasoning in &quot;Heller&quot; is the product of an erroneous reading of colonial history and the drafting history of the Second Amendment. He argued that the Southern slave states would never have ratified the Second Amendment if it had been understood as creating an individual right to own firearms because of their fear of arming free blacks. After a lengthy historical and legal analysis Anthony Picadio concluded: &quot;If the Second Amendment had been understood to have the meaning given to it by Justice Scalia, it would not have been ratified by Virginia and the other slave states.&quot; Picadio pointed out that the right acknowledged in &quot;Heller&quot; was not originally to be an enumerated right. Instead, he argues, there would be more respect for the &quot;Heller&quot; decision, if the right acknowledged in &quot;Heller&quot; would have been forthrightly classified as an unenumerated right and if the issue in &quot;Heller&quot; would have been analysed under the Ninth Amendment to the United States Constitution.{{sfnp|Picadio|2019|p=23}} He finished with the following observation: &quot;The pre-existing right that the &quot;Heller&quot; Court incorporated into the Second Amendment is very narrow. As recognized by Justice Alito in the &quot;McDonald&quot; case, it protects only &quot;the right to possess a handgun in the house for the purposes of self-defense.&quot; This narrow right has never been extended by the Supreme Court.&quot;{{sfnp|Picadio|2019|p=23}}

===&quot;McDonald v. City of Chicago&quot;===
{{Main|McDonald v. City of Chicago}}
On June 28, 2010, the Court in &quot;McDonald v. City of Chicago&quot;, {{ussc|561|742|2010}}, held that the Second Amendment was incorporated, saying that &quot;[i]t is clear that the Framers and ratifiers of the Fourteenth Amendment counted the right to keep and bear arms among those fundamental rights necessary to our system of ordered liberty.&quot; This means that the Court ruled that the Second Amendment limits state and local governments to the same extent that it limits the federal government. It also remanded a case regarding a Chicago handgun prohibition. Four of the five justices in the majority voted to do so by way of the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, while the fifth justice, Clarence Thomas, voted to do so through the amendment&#x27;s Privileges or Immunities Clause. In &quot;United States v. Rahimi&quot; (2024) the Supreme Court stated &quot;that the right to keep and bear arms is among the “fundamental rights necessary to our system of ordered liberty.” &quot;McDonald v. Chicago&quot;, 561 U. S. 742, 778 (2010).&quot;

Justice Thomas, in his concurring opinion, noted that the Privileges or Immunities Clause refers to &quot;citizens&quot; whereas the Due Process Clause refers more broadly to any &quot;person&quot;, and therefore Thomas reserved the issue of non-citizens for later decision. After &quot;McDonald&quot;, many questions about the Second Amendment remain unsettled, such as whether non-citizens are protected through the Equal Protection Clause.

In &quot;People v. Aguilar&quot; (2013), the Illinois Supreme Court summed up the central Second Amendment findings in &quot;McDonald&quot;:
{{blockquote|Two years later, in &quot;McDonald v. City of Chicago&quot;, 561 U.S. 742, ___, 130 S. Ct. 3020, 3050 (2010), the Supreme Court held that the second amendment right recognized in &quot;Heller&quot; is applicable to the states through the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment. In so holding, the Court reiterated that &quot;the Second Amendment protects the right to keep and bear arms for the purpose of self-defense&quot; (&quot;id&quot;. at ___, 130 S. Ct. at 3026); that &quot;individual self-defense is &#x27;the &quot;central component&quot;&#x27; of the Second Amendment right&quot; (emphasis in original) (&quot;id&quot;. at ___, 130 S. Ct. at 3036 (quoting Heller, 554 U.S. at 599)); and that &quot;[s]elf-defense is a basic right, recognized by many legal systems from ancient times to the present day&quot; (&quot;id&quot;. at ___, 130 S. Ct. at 3036).}}

===&quot;Caetano v. Massachusetts&quot;===
{{Main|Caetano v. Massachusetts}}
On March 21, 2016, in a per curiam decision the Court vacated a Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court decision upholding the conviction of a woman who carried a stun gun for self-defense. The Court reiterated that the &quot;Heller&quot; and &quot;McDonald&quot; decisions saying that &quot;the Second Amendment extends, prima facie, to all instruments that constitute bearable arms, even those that were not in existence at the time of the founding&quot;, that &quot;the Second Amendment right is fully applicable to the States&quot;, and that the protection is not restricted to &quot;only those weapons useful in warfare&quot;. The term &quot;bearable arms&quot; was defined in &quot;District of Columbia v. Heller&quot;, 554 U.S. 570 (2008) and includes any &quot;[w]eapo[n] of offence&quot; or &quot;thing that a man wears for his defence, or takes into his hands&quot;, that is &quot;carr[ied]{{nbsp}}... for the purpose of offensive or defensive action&quot;. 554 U. S., at 581, 584 (internal quotation marks omitted).&quot;

===&quot;New York State Rifle &amp; Pistol Association, Inc. v. City of New York, New York&quot;===
{{main|New York State Rifle &amp; Pistol Association, Inc. v. City of New York}}
The Court heard &quot;New York State Rifle &amp; Pistol Association Inc. v. City of New York, New York&quot; on December 2, 2019, to decide whether a New York City ordinance that prevents the transport of guns, even if properly unloaded and locked in containers, from within city limits to outside of the city limits is unconstitutional. The New York Rifle &amp; Pistol Association challenged the ordinance on the basis of the Second Amendment, the Dormant Commerce Clause, and the right to travel. However, as the city had changed its rule to allow transport while the case was under consideration by the Court, the Court ruled the case moot in April 2020, though it remanded the case so the lower courts could review the new rules under the petitioners new claims.

===&quot;New York State Rifle &amp; Pistol Association, Inc. v. Bruen&quot;===
{{main|New York State Rifle &amp; Pistol Association, Inc. v. Bruen}}
New York law prohibits the concealed carry of firearms without a permit. The issuance of such permits was previously at the discretion of state authorities, and permits were not issued absent &#x27;proper cause&#x27;. The New York State Rifle &amp; Pistol Association and two individuals who had been denied permits on the grounds that they lacked proper cause, challenged the licensing regime as a violation of the Second Amendment, with the District Court and the Second Circuit Court of Appeals ruling in favor of the state. The Supreme Court ruled on June 23, 2022, in a 6–3 decision that the New York law, as a &quot;may-issue&quot; regulation, was unconstitutional, affirming that public possession of firearms was a protected right under the Second Amendment. The majority stated that states may still regulate firearms through &quot;shall-issue&quot; regulations that use objective measures such as background checks. In its June 2024 &quot;United States v. Rahimi&quot; decision, the Court refined the &quot;Bruen&quot; test, stating that in comparing modern gun control laws to historic tradition, courts should use similar analogues and general principles rather than strict matches.

==United States Courts of Appeals decisions before and after &quot;Heller&quot;==

===Before &quot;Heller&quot;===
Until &quot;District of Columbia v. Heller&quot; (2008), &quot;United States v. Miller&quot; (1939) had been the only Supreme Court decision that &quot;tested a congressional enactment against [the Second Amendment]&quot;. &quot;Miller&quot; did not directly mention either a collective or individual right, but for the 62-year period from &quot;Miller&quot; until the Fifth Circuit&#x27;s decision in &quot;United States v. Emerson&quot; (2001), federal courts recognized only the collective right, with &quot;courts increasingly referring to one another&#x27;s holdings{{nbsp}}... without engaging in any appreciably substantive legal analysis of the issue&quot;.

&quot;Emerson&quot; changed this by addressing the question in depth, with the Fifth Circuit determining that the Second Amendment protects an individual right. Subsequently, the Ninth Circuit conflicted with &quot;Emerson&quot; in &quot;Silveira v. Lockyer&quot;, and the D.C. Circuit supported &quot;Emerson&quot; in &quot;Parker v. District of Columbia&quot;. &quot;Parker&quot; evolved into &quot;District of Columbia v. Heller&quot;, in which the U.S. Supreme Court determined that the Second Amendment protects an individual right.

===After &quot;Heller&quot;===

Since &quot;Heller&quot;, the United States courts of appeals have ruled on many Second Amendment challenges to convictions and gun control laws.

====D.C. Circuit====
* &quot;Heller v. District of Columbia&quot;, Civil Action No. 08-1289 (RMU), No. 23., 25{{snd}}On March 26, 2010, the D.C. Circuit denied the follow-up appeal of Dick Heller who requested the court to overturn the new District of Columbia gun control ordinances newly enacted after the 2008 &quot;Heller&quot; ruling. The court refused to do so, stating that the firearms registration procedures, the prohibition on assault weapons, and the prohibition on large capacity ammunition feeding devices were found to not violate the Second Amendment. On September 18, 2015, the D.C. Circuit ruled that requiring gun owners to re-register a gun every three years, make a gun available for inspection or pass a test about firearms laws violated the Second Amendment, although the court upheld requirements that gun owners be fingerprinted, photographed, and complete a safety training course.
* &quot;Wrenn v. District of Columbia&quot;, No. 16-7025{{snd}}On July 25, 2017, the D.C. Circuit ruled that a District of Columbia regulation that limited conceal-carry licenses only to those individuals who could demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the chief of police, that they have a &quot;good reason&quot; to carry a handgun in public was essentially designed to prevent the exercise of the right to bear arms by most District residents and so violated the Second Amendment by amounting to a complete prohibition on firearms possession.

====First Circuit====
* &quot;United States v. Rene E.&quot;, {{West |F |583 |3 |8 |1st Cir. |2009 |}}{{snd}}On August 31, 2009, the First Circuit affirmed the conviction of a juvenile for the illegal possession of a handgun as a juvenile, under {{usc|18|922(x)(2)(A)}} and {{usc|18|5032}}, rejecting the defendant&#x27;s argument that the federal law violated his Second Amendment rights under &quot;Heller&quot;. The court cited &quot;the existence of a longstanding tradition of prohibiting juveniles from both receiving and possessing handguns&quot; and observed &quot;the federal ban on juvenile possession of handguns is part of a longstanding practice of prohibiting certain classes of individuals from possessing firearms{{snd}}those whose possession poses a particular danger to the public.&quot;

====Second Circuit====
* &quot;Kachalsky v. County of Westchester&quot;, 11-3942{{snd}}On November 28, 2012, the Second Circuit upheld New York&#x27;s may-issue concealed carry permit law, ruling that &quot;the proper cause requirement is substantially related to New York&#x27;s compelling interests in public safety and crime prevention.&quot;

====Third Circuit====
* &quot;Range v. Attorney General of the United States&quot;, Civil Action No. 21-2835{{snd}}On June 6, 2023, the Third Circuit ruled that the Second Amendment prohibited a lifetime ban on firearms possession as a result of a conviction for a nonviolent crime.

====Fourth Circuit====
* &quot;United States v. Hall&quot;, {{West |F |551 |3 |257 |4th Cir. |2009 |}}{{snd}}On August 4, 2008, the Fourth Circuit upheld as constitutional the prohibition of possession of a concealed weapon without a permit.
* &quot;United States v. Chester&quot;, 628 F.3d 673 (4th Cir. 2010){{snd}}On December 30, 2010, the Fourth Circuit vacated William Chester&#x27;s conviction for possession of a firearm after having been convicted of a misdemeanor crime of domestic violence, in violation of {{usc |18 |922(g)(9)}}. The court found that the district court erred in perfunctorily relying on &quot;Heller&#x27;s&quot; exception for &quot;presumptively lawful&quot; gun regulations made in accordance with &quot;longstanding prohibitions&quot;.
* &quot;Kolbe v. Hogan&quot;, No. 14-1945 (4th Cir. 2016){{snd}}On February 4, 2016, the Fourth Circuit vacated a U.S. District Court decision upholding a Maryland law banning high-capacity magazines and semi-automatic rifles, ruling that the District Court was wrong to have applied intermediate scrutiny. The Fourth Circuit ruled that the higher strict scrutiny standard is to be applied on remand. On March 4, 2016, the court agreed to rehear the case &quot;en banc&quot; on May 11, 2016.

====Fifth Circuit====
* &quot;United States v. Dorosan&quot;, 350 Fed. Appx. 874 (5th Cir. 2009){{snd}}On June 30, 2008, the Fifth Circuit upheld {{CodeFedReg |39|232|1|(l)}}, which bans weapons on postal property, sustaining restrictions on guns outside the home, specifically in private vehicles parked in employee parking lots of government facilities, despite Second Amendment claims that were dismissed. The employee&#x27;s Second Amendment rights were not infringed since the employee could have instead parked across the street in a public parking lot, instead of on government property.
* &quot;United States v. Bledsoe&quot;, 334 Fed. Appx. 771 (5th Cir. 2009){{snd}}The Fifth Circuit affirmed the decision of a U.S. District Court decision in Texas, upholding {{usc |18 |922(a)(6)}}, which prohibits &quot;straw purchases&quot;. A &quot;straw purchase&quot; occurs when someone eligible to purchase a firearm buys one for an ineligible person. Additionally, the court rejected the request for a strict scrutiny standard of review.
* &quot;United States v. Scroggins&quot;, {{West |F |551 |3 |257 |5th Cir. |2010 |}}{{snd}}On March 4, 2010, the Fifth Circuit affirmed the conviction of Ernie Scroggins for possession of a firearm as a convicted felon, in violation of {{usc |18 |922(g)(1)}}. The court noted that it had, prior to &quot;Heller&quot;, identified the Second Amendment as providing an individual right to bear arms, and had already, likewise, determined that restrictions on felon ownership of firearms did not violate this right. Moreover, it observed that &quot;Heller&quot; did not affect the longstanding prohibition of firearm possession by felons.

====Sixth Circuit====
* &quot;Tyler v. Hillsdale Co. Sheriff&#x27;s Dept.&quot;, {{West |F |775 |3 |308 |6th Cir. |2014 |}}{{snd}}On December 18, 2014, the Sixth Circuit ruled that strict scrutiny should be applied to firearms regulations when regulations burden &quot;conduct that falls within the scope of the Second Amendment right, as historically understood&quot;. At issue in this case was whether the Second Amendment is violated by a provision of the Gun Control Act of 1968 that prohibits possession of a firearm by a person who has been involuntarily committed to a psychiatric hospital. The court did not rule on the provision&#x27;s constitutionality, instead remanding the case to the United States district court that has earlier heard this case. On April 21, 2015, the Sixth Circuit voted to rehear the case &quot;en banc&quot;, thereby vacating the December 18 opinion.

====Seventh Circuit====
* &quot;United States v. Skoien&quot;, {{West |F |587 |3 |803 |7th Cir. |2009 |}}{{snd}}Steven Skoien, a Wisconsin man convicted of two misdemeanor domestic violence convictions, appealed his conviction based on the argument that the prohibition violated the individual rights to bear arms, as described in &quot;Heller&quot;. After initial favorable rulings in lower court based on a standard of intermediate scrutiny, on July 13, 2010, the Seventh Circuit, sitting &quot;en banc&quot;, ruled 10–1 against Skoien and reinstated his conviction for a gun violation, citing the strong relation between the law in question and the government objective. Skoien was convicted and sentenced to two years in prison for the gun violation, and will thus likely be subject to a lifetime ban on gun ownership. Editorials favoring gun rights sharply criticized this ruling as going too far with the enactment of a lifetime gun ban, while editorials favoring gun regulations praised the ruling as &quot;a bucket of cold water thrown on the &#x27;gun rights&#x27; celebration&quot;.
* &quot;Moore v. Madigan&quot; (Circuit docket 12-1269){{snd}}On December 11, 2012, the Seventh Circuit ruled that the Second Amendment protected a right to keep and bear arms in public for self-defense. This was an expansion of the Supreme Court&#x27;s decisions in &quot;Heller&quot; and &quot;McDonald&quot;, each of which referred only to such a right in the home. Based on this ruling, the court declared Illinois&#x27;s ban on the concealed carrying of firearms to be unconstitutional. The court stayed this ruling for 180 days, so Illinois could enact replacement legislation. On February 22, 2013, a petition for rehearing &quot;en banc&quot; was denied by a vote of 5–4. On July 9, 2013, the Illinois General Assembly, overriding Governor Quinn&#x27;s veto, passed a law permitting the concealed carrying of firearms.

====Ninth Circuit====
* &quot;Nordyke v. King&quot;, 2012 WL 1959239 (9th Cir. 2012){{snd}}On July 29, 2009, the Ninth Circuit vacated an April 20 panel decision and reheard the case &quot;en banc&quot; on September 24, 2009. The April 20 decision had held that the Second Amendment applies to state and local governments, while upholding an Alameda County, California ordinance that makes it a crime to bring a gun or ammunition on to, or possess either while on, county property. The &quot;en banc&quot; panel remanded the case to the three-judge panel. On May 2, 2011, that panel ruled that intermediate scrutiny was the correct standard by which to judge the ordinance&#x27;s constitutionality and remanded the case to the United States District Court for the Northern District of California. On November 28, 2011, the Ninth Circuit vacated the panel&#x27;s May{{nbsp}}2 decision and agreed to rehear the case &quot;en banc&quot;. On April 4, 2012, the panel sent the case to mediation. The panel dismissed the case on June 1, 2012, but only after Alameda County officials changed their interpretation of the challenged ordinance. Under the new interpretation, gun shows may take place on county property under the ordinance&#x27;s exception for &quot;events&quot;, subject to restrictions regarding the display and handling of firearms.
* &quot;Teixeira v. County of Alameda&quot;, (Circuit docket 13-17132){{snd}}On May 16, 2016, the Ninth Circuit ruled that the right to keep and bear arms included being able to buy and sell firearms. The court ruled that a county law prohibiting a gun store being within 500 feet of a &quot;[r]esidentially zoned district; elementary, middle or high school; pre-school or day care center; other firearms sales business; or liquor stores or establishments in which liquor is served&quot; violated the Second Amendment.
* &quot;Peruta v. San Diego&quot; No. 10-56971 (9th Cir. 2016), (Circuit docket 13-17132){{snd}}On June 9, 2016, pertaining to the legality of San Diego County&#x27;s restrictive policy regarding requiring documentation of &quot;good cause&quot; before issuing a concealed carry permit, the Ninth Circuit upheld the policy, finding that &quot;there is no Second Amendment right for members of the general public to carry concealed firearms in public.&quot;
* &quot;Young v. State of Hawaii&quot; No. 12-17808 (9th Cir. 2021){{snd}}An &quot;en banc&quot; ruling of the Ninth Circuit on March 26, 2021, upheld the validity of Hawaii&#x27;s law that barred open carry of guns outside of one&#x27;s home without a license. The Ninth Circuit ruled that there was no right to carry weapons in public spaces, and states have a compelling interest for public safety to restrict public possession of guns.

==See also==
{{cols}}
* 2nd Amendment Day
* Second Amendment sanctuary
* Gun ownership#United States gun ownership
* Gun culture in the United States
* Gun law in the United States#Second Amendment
* Gun politics in the United States
* List of amendments to the United States Constitution
* Right to keep and bear arms (worldwide)
* Second Amendment Caucus – a Congressional caucus dedicated to supporting the right to bear arms
* Uniform Firearms Act – a set of statutes in Pennsylvania that define and amplify the &quot;right to bear arms&quot; in that state&#x27;s Constitution{{colend}}

==Notes==
{{notelist}}

==References==
===Citations===
{{reflist |25em}}

===Bibliography===
{{refbegin |30em}}
====Books====
* {{cite book |last=Adams |first=Les |title=The Second Amendment Primer: A Citizen&#x27;s Guidebook to the History, Sources, and Authorities for the Constitutional Guarantee of the Right to Keep and Bear Arms |publisher=Paladium Press |location=Birmingham, Alabama |date=1996}}
* {{cite book |last=Adamson |first=Barry |title=Freedom of Religion, the First Amendment, and the Supreme Court |publisher=Pelican Publishing |isbn=978-1589805200 |date=2008}}
* {{cite book |last1=Anderson |first1=Casey |last2=Horwitz |first2=Joshua |title=Guns, Democracy, and the Insurrectionist Idea |publisher=University of Michigan Press |location=Ann Arbor, Michigan |date=2009 |isbn=978-0472033706}}
* {{cite book |last=Barnett |first=Hilaire |title=Constitutional &amp; Administrative Law |publisher=Routledge Cavendish |date=2004 |isbn=1859419275}}
* {{cite book |editor1-last=Bickford |editor1-first=Charlene |display-editors=etal |title=Documentary History of the First Federal Congress of the United States of America, March 4, 1789 – March 3, 1791: Correspondence: First Session, September–November 1789 |publisher=The Johns Hopkins University Press |volume=17 |date=2004 |isbn=978-0801871627}}
* {{cite book |last=Blackstone |first=William |editor-last=Tucker |editor-first=St. George |title=Blackstone&#x27;s Commentaries: With Notes of Reference to the Constitution and Laws, of the Federal Government of the United States, and of the Commonwealth of Virginia: In Five Volumes |publisher=Lawbook Exchange |date=1996 |isbn=978-1886363151}}
* {{cite book |last=Bogus |first=Carl T. |title=The Second Amendment in Law and History: Historians and Constitutional Scholars on the Right to Bear Arms |publisher=The New Press |location=New York |date=2001 |isbn=1565846990 |url-access=registration |url= https://archive.org/details/secondamendmenti0000unse}}
* {{cite book |last=Boynton |first=Lindsay Oliver J. |title=The Elizabethan Militia 1558–1638 |date=1971 |oclc=8605166 |isbn=071535244X |publisher=David &amp; Charles}}
* {{cite book |last=Carter |first=Gregg Lee |title=Guns in American Society |publisher=ABC-CLIO |date=2002}}
* {{cite book |last=Charles |first=Patrick J. |title=The Second Amendment: The Intent and Its Interpretation by the States and the Supreme Court |publisher=McFarland |date=2009 |isbn=978-0786442706}}
* {{cite book |last=Cooke |first=Edward Francis |title=A Detailed Analysis of the Constitution |publisher=Rowman &amp; Littlefield Publishers |location=Lanham, Maryland |date=2002 |isbn=0742522385}}
* {{cite book |last=Cornell |first=Saul |author-link=Saul Cornell |title=A Well-Regulated Militia – The Founding Fathers and the Origins of Gun Control in America |publisher=Oxford University Press |location=New York |date=2006 |isbn=978-0195147865 |url= https://archive.org/details/wellregulatedmil00corn_0}}
* {{cite book |last=Cottrol |first=Robert |title=Gun Control and the Constitution: Sources and Explorations on the Second Amendment |publisher=Taylor &amp; Francis |date=1994}}
* {{cite book |last=Crooker |first=Constance Emerson |title=Gun Control and Gun Rights |publisher=Greenwood Publishing Group |date=2003 |isbn=978-0313321740 |url-access=registration |url= https://archive.org/details/guncontrolgunrig0000croo}}
* {{cite book |last=Denson |first=John V. |title=The Costs of War: America&#x27;s Pyrrhic Victories |edition=2 |publisher=Transaction Publishers |date=1999 |isbn=978-0765804877}}
* {{cite book |last=Doherty |first=Brian |title=Gun Control on Trial: Inside the Supreme Court Battle Over the Second Amendment |publisher=Cato Institute |location=Washington, DC |date=2008 |isbn=978-1933995250 |url= https://archive.org/details/guncontrolontria0000dohe}}
* {{cite book |last=Dulaney |first=W. Marvin |title=Black Police in America |publisher=Indiana University Press |location=Bloomington |date=1996 |isbn=0253210402}}
* {{cite book |last=Dunbar-Ortiz |first=Roxanne |author-link=Roxanne Dunbar-Ortiz |date=2018 |title=Loaded: A Disarming History of the Second Amendment |url= http://www.citylights.com/book/?GCOI=87286100460830&amp;fa=description |location=San Francisco |publisher=City Lights Books |isbn=978-0872867239 |access-date=April 12, 2020 |archive-date=July 31, 2020 |archive-url= https://web.archive.org/web/20200731145531/http://www.citylights.com/book/?GCOI=87286100460830&amp;fa=description |url-status=dead}}
* {{cite book |last1=Ely |first1=James W. |last2=Bodenhamer |first2=David J. |title=The Bill of Rights in Modern America |publisher=Indiana University Press |location=Bloomington |date=2008 |isbn=978-0253219916}}
* {{cite book |last1=Foner |first1=Eric |last2=Garraty |first2=John Arthur |title=The Reader&#x27;s Companion to American History |publisher=Houghton Mifflin Harcourt |date=1991 |isbn=0395513723 |url= https://archive.org/details/readerscompanion00fone}}
* {{cite book |last1=Frey |first1=Raymond |last2=Wellman |first2=Christopher |title=A Companion to Applied Ethics |publisher=Blackwell Publishing |location=Cambridge, Massachusetts |date=2003 |isbn=1557865949}}
* {{cite book |last=Halbrook |first=Stephen P. |publisher=Greenwood Publishing Group |date=1989 |title=A Right to Bear Arms: State and Federal Bills of Rights and Constitutional Guarantees}}
* {{cite book |last=Halbrook |first=Stephen P. |title=That Every Man Be Armed: The Evolution of a Constitutional Right (Independent Studies in Political Economy) |publisher=The Independent Institute |location=Oakland, California |date=1994 |isbn=0945999380 |url-access=registration |url= https://archive.org/details/thateverymanbear0000halb}}
* {{cite book |last=Hemenway |first=David |title=Private Guns, Public Health |publisher=University of Michigan Press |date=2007 |isbn=978-0472031627}}
* {{cite book |last=Kruschke |first=Earl R. |title=Gun Control: A Reference Handbook |publisher=ABC-CLIO |location=Santa Barbara, California |date=1995 |isbn=087436695X |url= https://archive.org/details/guncontrolrefere00krus}}
* {{cite book |last=Levy |first=Leonard W. |title=Origins of the Bill of Rights |date=1999 |publisher=Yale University Press |location=New Haven, Connecticut |isbn=0300078021 |url= https://archive.org/details/originsofbillofr00levy}}
* {{cite book |last=Madison |first=James |title=The Writings of James Madison: 1787–1790 |publisher=Nabu Press |date=2010 |isbn=978-1144582737}}
* {{cite book |last=Malcolm |first=Joyce Lee |title=To Keep and Bear Arms: The Origins of an Anglo-American Right |publisher=Harvard University Press |location=Cambridge, Massachusetts |date=1996 |isbn=0674893077}}
* {{cite book |last1=Merkel |first1=William G. |last2=Uviller |first2=H. Richard |title=The Militia and the Right to Arms; Or, How the Second Amendment Fell Silent |date=2002 |publisher=Duke University Press |location=Durham, North Carolina |url= https://books.google.com/books?id=abAwWcOeFjkC&amp;q=Militia+Right+Arms |isbn=0822330172 |access-date=February 14, 2013}}
* {{cite book |last=Millis |first=Walter |title=Arms and Men |publisher=Rutgers University Press |date=1981}}
* {{cite book |last=Mulloy |first=D. |title=American Extremism |publisher=Routledge |date=2004}}
* {{cite book |last1=Pepper |first1=John |last2=Petrie |first2=Carol |last3=Wellford |first3=Charles F. |title=Firearms and Violence: A Critical Review |url= http://www.nap.edu/openbook.php?isbn=0-309-09124-1 |date=2005 |publisher=National Academies Press |location=Washington, DC |isbn=0309091241}}
* {{cite book |last1=Pole |first1=J. R. |last2=Greene |first2=Jack P. |title=A Companion to the American Revolution (Blackwell Companions to American History) |publisher=Blackwell Publishers |location=Cambridge, Massachusetts |date=2003 |isbn=1405116749}}
* {{cite book |last=Renehan |first=Edward J. |title=The Secret Six: The True Tale of the Men Who Conspired With John Brown |publisher=University of South Carolina Press |location=Columbia, South Carolina |date=1997 |isbn=1570031819}}
* {{cite book |last1=Schmidt |first1=Steffen |author1-link=Steffen Schmidt |last2=Bardes |first2=Barbara A. |last3=Shelley |first3=Mack C. |title=American Government and Politics Today: The Essentials |publisher=Wadsworth Publishing |location=Belmont, California |date=2008 |isbn=978-0495571704}}
* {{cite book |last=Shapiro |first=Ilya |title=Cato Supreme Court Review 2007–2008 |publisher=Cato Institute |location=Washington, DC |date=2008 |isbn=978-1933995175}}
* {{cite book |last=Smith |first=Rich |title=The Bill of Rights: Defining Our Freedoms |publisher=ABDO Group |date=2007 |isbn=978-1599289137}}
* {{cite book |last=Spitzer |first=Robert J. |title=The Right to Bear Arms: Rights and Liberties under the Law |publisher=ABC-CLIO |location=Santa Barbara, California |date=2001 |isbn=1576073475 |url= https://archive.org/details/righttobeararmsr0000spit}}
* {{cite book |last=Szatmary |first=David P. |title=Shays&#x27; Rebellion: the Making of an Agrarian Insurrection |url= https://archive.org/details/shaysrebellionma0000szat |url-access=registration |publisher=University of Massachusetts Press |location=Amherst |date=1980 |isbn=9780511008740}}
* {{cite book |last=Rabban |first=David |title=Free Speech in its Forgotten Years |publisher=Cambridge University Press |date=1999}}
* {{cite book |last=Rawle |first=William |title=A View of the Constitution of the United States of America |url= https://archive.org/details/aviewconstituti02rawlgoog |publisher=P.H. Nicklin |date=1829 |edition=2}}
* {{cite book |last=Spooner |first=Lysander |author-link=Lysander Spooner |title=An Essay on the Trial by Jury |url= https://archive.org/details/anessayontrialb00spoogoog |access-date=July 6, 2013 |date=1852}}
* {{cite book |last=Tushnet |first=Mark V. |title=Out of Range: Why the Constitution Can&#x27;t End the Battle Over Guns |publisher=Oxford University Press |date=2007 |page=xv |isbn=978-0195304244 |url= https://archive.org/details/outofrangewhycon00tush}}
* {{cite book |last=Vile |first=John R. |title=The Constitutional Convention of 1787: A Comprehensive Encyclopedia of America&#x27;s Founding (2 Volume Set) |publisher=ABC-CLIO |location=Santa Barbara, California |date=2005 |isbn=1851096698}}
* {{cite book |first=David H. |last=Williams |title=The Mythic Meanings of the Second Amendment: Taming Political Violence in a Constitutional Republic |publisher=Yale University Press |location=New Haven, Connecticut |date=2003 |isbn=0300095627}}
* {{cite book |last=Wills |first=Garry |editor-last=Cornell |editor-first=Saul |title=Whose Right to Bear Arms did the Second Amendment Protect? |publisher=Bedford/St. Martin&#x27;s |location=Boston |date=2000 |isbn=0312240600}}
* {{cite book |last=Wills |first=Garry |title=A Necessary Evil: A History of American Distrust of Government |publisher=Simon &amp; Schuster |location=New York |date=2002 |pages=256–257 |isbn=0684870266}}
* {{cite book |last=Winterer |first=Caroline |title=The Culture of Classicism: Ancient Greece and Rome in American Intellectual Life, 1780–1910 |location=Baltimore |publisher=Johns Hopkins University Press |date=2002}}
* {{cite book |last=Young |first=David E. |title=The Origin of the Second Amendment: A Documentary History of the Bill of Rights 1787–1792 |edition=2nd |date=2001 |publisher=Golden Oak Books |isbn=0962366439}}

====Periodicals====
* {{cite journal |last=Barnett |first=Gary E. |title=The Reasonable Regulation of the Right to Keep and Bear Arms |volume=6 |issue=2 |journal=Georgetown Journal of Law &amp; Public Policy |date=June 24, 2008 |ssrn=1152102}}
* {{cite journal |last=Bogus |first=Carl T. |title=The Hidden History of the Second Amendment |journal=U.C. Davis Law Review |date=Winter 1998 |volume=31 |issue=2 |pages=309–408 |url= http://lawreview.law.ucdavis.edu/issues/31/2/Articles/DavisVol31No2_Bogus.pdf}}
* {{Cite journal |last=Breen |first=T. H. |title=English Origins and New World Development: The Case of the Covenanted Militia in Seventeenth-Century Massachusetts |journal=Past &amp; Present |issue=57 |date=1972 |doi=10.1093/past/57.1.74 |page=74}}
* {{cite journal |last=Charles |first=Patrick J. |title=&#x27;Arms for their defence?&#x27;: An historical, legal, and textual analysis of the English right to have arms and whether the Second Amendment should be incorporated in McDonald v. City of Chicago |journal=Cleveland State Law Review |volume=57 |issue=3 |date=2009 |ssrn=1550768}}
* {{cite journal |last=Cramer |first=Clayton |title=The Racist Roots of Gun Control |date=June 15, 2007 |website=Libcom.org |url= http://libcom.org/library/racist-roots-gun-control-clayton-e-cramer |url-status=dead |archive-url= https://web.archive.org/web/20170930011716/https://libcom.org/library/racist-roots-gun-control-clayton-e-cramer |archive-date=September 30, 2017}}
* {{cite journal |last=Davies |first=Ross |title=Which is the Constitution |journal=Green Bag |series=2nd Series |volume=11 |issue=2 |pages=209–216 |url= http://www.law.gmu.edu/assets/files/publications/working_papers/08-13%20Which%20Is%20the%20Constitution.pdf |date=Winter 2008}}
* {{cite journal |last=Gunn |first=Steven H. |title=A Lawyer&#x27;s Guide to the Second Amendment |date=1998 |journal=Brigham Young University Law Review |volume=35}}
* {{cite journal |last=Hardy |first=David |title=Book Review: A Well-Regulated Militia: The Founding Fathers and the Origins of Gun Control in America |volume=15 |date=2007 |journal=William &amp; Mary Bill of Rights Journal |ssrn=947334}}
* {{cite journal |last=Henigan |first=Denis |title=Arms, Anarchy, and the Second Amendment |journal=Valparaiso University Law Review |volume=26 |issue=107 |date=1991 |url= https://scholar.valpo.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2132&amp;context=vulr}}
* {{cite journal |last=Heyman |first=Stephen |date=2000 |title=Natural Rights and the Second Amendment |journal=Chicago-Kent Law Review |volume=76 |issue=237 |url= http://works.bepress.com/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1002&amp;context=steven_heyman}}
* {{cite journal |last=Kates |first=Don B. Jr. |date=November 1983 |title=Handgun Prohibition and the Original Meaning of the Second Amendment |journal=Michigan Law Review |volume=82 |issue=2 |doi=10.2307/1288537 |pages=204–273 |jstor=1288537 |url= https://repository.law.umich.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=3437&amp;context=mlr}}
* {{cite journal |last=Konig |first=David Thomas |date=Spring 2004 |title=The Second Amendment: A Missing Transatlantic Context for the Historical Meaning of &#x27;the Right of the People to Keep and Bear Arms&#x27; |journal=Law and History Review |volume=22 |issue=1 |pages=120–159 |doi=10.2307/4141667 |jstor=4141667 |s2cid=145796178}}
* {{cite journal |last=Lund |first=Nelson |title=Heller and Second Amendment Precedent |ssrn=1235537 |journal=Lewis &amp; Clark Law Review |date=August 18, 2008}}
* {{cite journal |last=Malcolm |first=Joyce Lee |title=Book Review: That Every Man Be Armed |volume=54 |date=1986 |journal=George Washington Law Review}}
* {{cite journal |last=Malcolm |first=Joyce Lee |title=The Role of the Militia in the Development of the Englishman&#x27;s Right to be Armed – Clarifying the Legacy |journal=Journal on Firearms and Public Policy |volume=5 |date=1993 |url= http://www.constitution.org/2ll/schol/jfp5ch04.htm |url-status=dead |archive-url= https://web.archive.org/web/20100823124312/http://www.constitution.org/2ll/schol/jfp5ch04.htm |archive-date=August 23, 2010}}
* {{cite journal |last1=McAffee |first1=Thomas B. |last2=Quinlan |first2=Michael J. |title=Bringing Forward the Right to Keep and Bear Arms: Do Text, History, or Precedent Stand in the Way? |date=March 1997 |journal=North Carolina Law Review |url= http://www.saf.org/LawReviews/McAffeeAndQuinlan1.html |archive-url= https://web.archive.org/web/20000816063909/http://www.saf.org/LawReviews/McAffeeAndQuinlan1.html |url-status=dead |archive-date=August 16, 2000}}
* {{cite journal |last=McClurg |first=Andrew |title=Lotts&#x27; More Guns and Other Fallacies Infecting the Gun Control Debate |volume=11 |date=1999 |journal=J. Of Firearms &amp; Pub. Pol&#x27;y}}
* {{cite journal |last=Merkel |first=William |title=Heller and Scalia&#x27;s Originalism |journal=Lewis &amp; Clark Law Review |volume=13 |issue=2 |ssrn=1422048 |date=Summer 2009}}
* {{cite journal |last=Rakove |first=Jack |title=The Second Amendment: The Highest Stage of Originalism |journal=Chicago-Kent Law Review |volume=76 |date=2000}}
* {{cite journal |last=Reynolds |first=Glenn |author-link=Glenn Reynolds |journal=Tennessee Law Review |title=A Critical Guide to the Second Amendment |volume=62 |issue=461 |date=1995 |ssrn=960788}}
* {{cite journal |last=Schmidt |first=Christopher |journal=William &amp; Mary Bill of Rights Journal |title=An International Human Right to Keep and Bear Arms |date=February 2007 |volume=15 |issue=3 |page=983}}
* {{cite journal |last=Smith |first=Douglas |title=The Second Amendment and the Supreme Court |journal=Georgetown Journal of Law &amp; Public Policy |volume=6 |ssrn=1093751 |date=2008}}
* {{cite journal |last=Tahmassebi |first=S. B. |title=Gun Control and Racism |journal=George Mason University Civil Rights Law Journal |date=1991 |volume=2 |issue=1 |pages=67–100 |url= http://www.saf.org/LawReviews/Tahmassebi1.html |archive-url= https://web.archive.org/web/20000816062011/http://www.saf.org/LawReviews/Tahmassebi1.html |archive-date=August 16, 2000}}
* {{cite journal |last=Volokh |first=Eugene |author-link=Eugene Volokh |journal=New York University Law Review |volume=73 |issue=793 |date=1998 |url= http://www.law.ucla.edu/volokh/common.htm |title=The Commonplace Second Amendment}}
* {{cite journal |last=Volokh |first=Eugene |author-link=Eugene Volokh |title=Testimony of Eugene Volokh on the Second Amendment, Senate Subcommittee on the Constitution, September 23, 1998 |journal=California Political Review |date=November–December 1998 |url= http://www.law.ucla.edu/volokh/beararms/testimon.htm}}
* {{cite journal |last=Weisselberg |first=Charles D. |url= http://aja.ncsc.dni.us/courtrv/cr44-3/CR44-3Weisselberg.pdf |title=Selected Criminal Law Cases in the Supreme Court&#x27;s 2007–2008 Term, and a Look Ahead |journal=Court Review |volume=44 |date=2009 |access-date=February 5, 2009 |archive-date=February 6, 2009 |archive-url= https://web.archive.org/web/20090206153126/http://aja.ncsc.dni.us/courtrv/cr44-3/CR44-3Weisselberg.pdf |url-status=dead}}
* {{cite journal |last=Winkler |first=Adam |journal=Michigan Law Review |title=Scrutinizing the Second Amendment |volume=105 |date=February 2007}}
* {{cite journal |last=Winkler |first=Adam |journal=UCLA Law Review |volume=56 |date=June 2009 |title=Heller&#x27;s Catch 22 |ssrn=1359225}}

====Other publications====
* {{Cite web |last1=Maer |first1=Lucinda |last2=Gay |first2=Oonagh |title=The Bill of Rights 1689 |date=2009 |publisher=Parliament and Constitution Centre |url= http://www.bing.com/search?q=briefing-papers%2FSN00293%2Fbill-of-rights-1689&amp;pc=cosp&amp;ptag=D041015AA5DDB3CCB4&amp;form=CONBDF&amp;conlogo=CT3210127}}
{{Refend}}

==Further reading==
* {{cite encyclopedia |last=Lund |first=Nelson |chapter=Right to Bear Arms |editor-last=Hamowy |editor-first=Ronald |editor-link=Ronald Hamowy |encyclopedia=The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism |chapter-url= https://sk.sagepub.com/reference/libertarianism/n269.xml |url= https://books.google.com/books?id=yxNgXs3TkJYC |date=2008 |publisher=Sage Publishing / Cato Institute |location=Thousand Oaks, California |doi=10.4135/9781412965811.n269 |isbn=978-1412965804 |oclc=750831024 |pages=438–440}}
==External links==

{{Wikiquote |Second Amendment to the United States Constitution}}
{{Wikisource|United States Bill of Rights}}
* {{cite web |url= http://caselaw.lp.findlaw.com/scripts/getcase.pl?court=us&amp;vol=000&amp;invol=07-290 |title=District of Columbia v. Heller}}
* {{cite web |url= https://www.archives.gov/exhibits/charters/bill_of_rights.html |title=National Archives Scanned Image of the Bill of Rights, including the Second Amendment |date=October 30, 2015}}
* {{Internet Archive short film |id=gov.archives.arc.2569792 |name=Big Picture: To Keep and Bear Arms}}
* {{cite web |url= http://www2.law.ucla.edu/volokh/beararms/statecon.htm |title=State Constitutional Right to Keep and Bear Arms Provisions |editor-first=Eugene |editor-last=Volokh |publisher=UCLA School of Law |archive-url= https://web.archive.org/web/20200305164659/https://www2.law.ucla.edu/volokh/beararms/statecon.htm |archive-date=March 5, 2020 |access-date=April 3, 2020}}.

{{US2ndAmendment}}
{{US Constitution}}
{{Portal bar|Law|United States}}
{{Authority control}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:02}}</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q210645" start="4" end="20" title="Second Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Second Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q210645" start="22" end="34" title="Second Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Amendment II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="43" end="69" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932144" start="83" end="110" title="Right to keep and bear arms in the United States" label="right to keep and bear arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="188" end="216" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="United States Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229683" start="227" end="257" title="District of Columbia v. Heller" label="District of Columbia v. Heller"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="276" end="289" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q40283" start="342" end="354" title="self-defense" label="self-defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658870" start="399" end="404" title="Dictum" label="dicta"/>
<link wikidata="Q12796" start="567" end="574" title="firearm" label="firearm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360440" start="700" end="727" title="McDonald v. City of Chicago" label="McDonald v. City of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603694" start="770" end="775" title="State governments of the United States" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q516156" start="780" end="785" title="Local government in the United States" label="local"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002253" start="802" end="828" title="Incorporation of the Bill of Rights" label="limited to the same extent"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="836" end="854" title="Federal government of the United States" label="federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q106626962" start="894" end="954" title="New York State Rifle &amp;amp; Pistol Association, Inc. v. Bruen" label="New York State Rifle &amp;amp; Pistol Association, Inc. v. Bruen"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="1136" end="1146" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q219447" start="1181" end="1200" title="Bill of Rights 1689" label="Bill of Rights 1689"/>
<link wikidata="Q332449" start="1206" end="1224" title="William Blackstone" label="William Blackstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q11815" start="1418" end="1430" title="James Monroe" label="James Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="1435" end="1445" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="1521" end="1534" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440619" start="1539" end="1568" title="Federalist No. 46" label="&amp;quot;Federalist&amp;quot; No. 46"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934473" start="2735" end="2758" title="Virginia Ratifying Convention" label="ratification convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q42189" start="2837" end="2848" title="Federalist Party" label="federalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893259" start="2912" end="2939" title="United States v. Cruikshank" label="United States v. Cruikshank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893395" start="3307" end="3330" title="United States v. Miller" label="United States v. Miller"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3602" end="3618" title="#Commentary since late 20th century" label="academic inquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451683" start="3623" end="3640" title="Firearm case law in the United States" label="judicial interest"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3728" end="3745" title="List of landmark court decisions in the United States#The right of the people to keep and bear arms" label="landmark decision"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360440" start="3969" end="3988" title="McDonald v. Chicago" label="McDonald v. Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q25005148" start="4167" end="4191" title="Caetano v. Massachusetts" label="Caetano v. Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q117460957" start="4883" end="4906" title="United States v. Rahimi" label="United States v. Rahimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305384" start="4921" end="4931" title="Gun politics in the United States" label="The debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328508" start="4972" end="4983" title="gun control" label="gun control"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4988" end="4998" title="Right to keep and bear arms#United States" label="gun rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="5185" end="5193" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q916292" start="5551" end="5557" title="scribe" label="scribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014267" start="5558" end="5573" title="William Lambert (writer)" label="William Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q518155" start="5595" end="5612" title="National Archives and Records Administration" label="National Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="6160" end="6171" title="Protestantism" label="Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q11755949" start="6188" end="6203" title="History of England" label="English history"/>
<link wikidata="Q332449" start="6368" end="6390" title="William Blackstone" label="Sir William Blackstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q29677" start="6659" end="6672" title="Natural and legal rights" label="natural right"/>
<link wikidata="Q219447" start="6831" end="6853" title="Bill of Rights of 1689" label="Bill of Rights of 1689"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135773" start="7051" end="7060" title="Catholic Church in England" label="Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q126188" start="7137" end="7145" title="James II of England" label="James II"/>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="7168" end="7187" title="Glorious Revolution" label="Glorious Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="7225" end="7236" title="William III of England" label="William III"/>
<link wikidata="Q130812" start="7241" end="7248" title="Mary II of England" label="Mary II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229683" start="7845" end="7875" title="District of Columbia v. Heller" label="District of Columbia v. Heller"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="8364" end="8373" title="the Crown" label="the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="9601" end="9614" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="parliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q332449" start="10346" end="10368" title="William Blackstone" label="Sir William Blackstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986212" start="10385" end="10420" title="Commentaries on the Laws of England" label="Commentaries on the Laws of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739604" start="11866" end="11897" title="Parliament of Great Britain" label="Great Britain&amp;#x27;s Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933815" start="11910" end="11926" title="Militia Act 1757" label="Militia Act 1757"/>
<link wikidata="Q131286437" start="11928" end="11937" title="30 Geo. 2" label="30 Geo. 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q435168" start="12367" end="12384" title="Timothy Pickering" label="Timothy Pickering"/>
<link wikidata="Q54140" start="12491" end="12511" title="Salem, Massachusetts" label="Salem, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="12576" end="12593" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="12791" end="12807" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q213525" start="12829" end="12847" title="Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben" label="Von Steuben&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318883" start="12848" end="12923" title="Regulations for the Order and Discipline of the Troops of the United States" label="Regulations for the Order and Discipline of the Troops of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="13150" end="13159" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q186539" start="14164" end="14177" title="Founding Fathers of the United States" label="framers&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14451" end="14464" title="Slave rebellion#North America" label="slave revolts"/>
<link wikidata="Q16966762" start="14918" end="14951" title="Pennsylvania Constitution of 1776" label="Pennsylvania Constitution of 1776"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="15198" end="15210" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="British rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q935481" start="15286" end="15295" title="Loyalist (American Revolution)" label="Loyalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365374" start="15358" end="15366" title="Patriot (American Revolution)" label="Patriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q579159" start="15754" end="15766" title="Powder Alarm" label="Powder Alarm"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="15774" end="15784" title="George III" label="George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="15985" end="16004" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729518" start="16064" end="16084" title="Declaration of Right, 1689" label="Declaration of Right"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16168" end="16201" title="Self-defence in English law#Common law (self defence)" label="common law rights to self-defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093092" start="16820" end="16834" title="Townshend Acts" label="Townshend Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="17865" end="17881" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q26718" start="17897" end="17917" title="Continental Congress" label="Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17933" end="17969" title="France in the American Revolutionary War#French involvement" label="regular French army and naval forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565049" start="18035" end="18049" title="List of British units in the American Revolutionary War" label="British forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="18089" end="18101" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q700853" start="18124" end="18131" title="Hessian (soldiers)" label="Hessian"/>
<link wikidata="Q178197" start="18132" end="18143" title="Mercenary" label="mercenaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q493620" start="18209" end="18234" title="Articles of Confederation" label="Articles of Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365383" start="18384" end="18397" title="standing army" label="standing army"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="18552" end="18565" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q392601" start="18575" end="18596" title="Shays&amp;#x27; Rebellion" label="Shays&amp;#x27; Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q405475" start="18775" end="18800" title="Constitutional Convention (United States)" label="Constitutional Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q257855" start="18917" end="18933" title="Anti-Federalism" label="Anti-federalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="19254" end="19267" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q6114263" start="19472" end="19483" title="Jack N. Rakove" label="Jack Rakove"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="20244" end="20262" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440599" start="20286" end="20308" title="Federalist No. 29" label="Concerning the Militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191031" start="21232" end="21240" title="Ochlocracy" label="mob rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="21337" end="21354" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857906" start="22671" end="22691" title="Militia Acts of 1792" label="Militia Acts of 1792"/>
<link wikidata="Q106610319" start="22780" end="22802" title="insurrectionist theory" label="insurrectionist theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q863259" start="23005" end="23042" title="National Rifle Association of America" label="National Rifle Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q640835" start="23122" end="23134" title="Jamie Raskin" label="Jamie Raskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="23651" end="23664" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q532329" start="23778" end="23790" title="George Mason" label="George Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q311885" start="24046" end="24059" title="Patrick Henry" label="Patrick Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="24154" end="24172" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440599" start="24190" end="24207" title="Federalist No. 29" label="Federalist No. 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q6924366" start="24555" end="24578" title="Mount Vernon Conference" label="Mount Vernon Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996243" start="24678" end="24687" title="Annapolis Convention (1786)" label="a meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q28271" start="24691" end="24710" title="Annapolis, Maryland" label="Annapolis, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="24743" end="24753" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="24755" end="24763" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="24765" end="24777" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="24779" end="24787" title="Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="24793" end="24801" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="24939" end="24951" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48416" start="25453" end="25473" title="The Militia Clause, United States Constitution" label="Article 1, Section 8"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26447" end="26458" title="Federalist#United States" label="Federalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="26470" end="26483" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q241676" start="26676" end="26688" title="Noah Webster" label="Noah Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q257855" start="26803" end="26819" title="Anti-Federalism" label="Anti-federalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784229" start="27410" end="27420" title="Massachusetts Compromise" label="compromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q453503" start="28161" end="28172" title="Originalism" label="originalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623615" start="28177" end="28199" title="Strict constructionism" label="strict constructionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351019" start="28425" end="28441" title="Robert Whitehill (Pennsylvania politician)" label="Robert Whitehill"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29187" end="29230" title="Articles of Confederation#Article summaries" label="Article VI of the Articles of Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q48416" start="30013" end="30044" title="Enclave Clause" label="Article I, Section 8, Clause 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q331209" start="30843" end="30860" title="Theodore Sedgwick" label="Theodore Sedgwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q241676" start="31266" end="31278" title="Noah Webster" label="Noah Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q11815" start="32367" end="32379" title="James Monroe" label="James Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q311885" start="32530" end="32543" title="Patrick Henry" label="Patrick Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573058" start="32964" end="32976" title="Slave states and free states" label="slave states"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539196" start="32982" end="32989" title="Slave patrol" label="militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q26923498" start="33093" end="33109" title="Carl T. Bogus" label="Dr Carl T. Bogus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="33502" end="33515" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q311885" start="33916" end="33929" title="Patrick Henry" label="Patrick Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q532329" start="34448" end="34460" title="George Mason" label="George Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q15488270" start="34920" end="34934" title="Paul Finkelman" label="Paul Finkelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539196" start="35413" end="35425" title="slave patrol" label="slave patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q336639" start="36428" end="36440" title="John Murray, 4th Earl of Dunmore" label="Lord Dunmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="36605" end="36623" title="General Washington" label="General Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q689128" start="36854" end="36872" title="Haitian Revolution" label="Haitian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="37056" end="37069" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="37135" end="37151" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="37521" end="37534" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q18175356" start="38099" end="38115" title="Select or special committee (United States Congress)" label="select committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="39005" end="39024" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q916292" start="39588" end="39594" title="scribe" label="scribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q121650" start="42624" end="42635" title="Baton (law enforcement)" label="billy clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q643273" start="42701" end="42716" title="Posse comitatus (common law)" label="posse comitatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q124653834" start="42753" end="42762" title="vigilante" label="vigilante"/>
<link wikidata="Q178243" start="43477" end="43483" title="musket" label="musket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134386" start="43487" end="43495" title="Lock (firearm)" label="firelock"/>
<link wikidata="Q377542" start="45386" end="45415" title="Whiskey Rebellion" label="Pennsylvania farmers rebelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="46126" end="46143" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q450175" start="46156" end="46165" title="Henry Lee III" label="Harry Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q355680" start="46340" end="46350" title="Henry Knox" label="Henry Knox"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="46370" end="46380" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="46804" end="46815" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933820" start="46946" end="46965" title="Militia Act of 1903" label="Militia Act of 1903"/>
<link wikidata="Q928670" start="47129" end="47157" title="United States National Guard" label="United States National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q125867348" start="47473" end="47486" title="Naval Militia" label="Naval Militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017395" start="47613" end="47626" title="William Rawle" label="William Rawle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792035" start="47686" end="47702" title="Thomas M. Cooley" label="Thomas M. Cooley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368374" start="47895" end="47907" title="Joseph Story" label="Joseph Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517967" start="47969" end="47979" title="Tench Coxe" label="Tench Coxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q47555" start="48010" end="48029" title="political economy" label="political economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q26718" start="48050" end="48070" title="Continental Congress" label="Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440222" start="48248" end="48262" title="Federal Farmer" label="Federal Farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q725907" start="48313" end="48330" title="Richard Henry Lee" label="Richard Henry Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1918932" start="48334" end="48349" title="Melancton Smith" label="Melancton Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q532329" start="48677" end="48689" title="George Mason" label="George Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517967" start="49596" end="49606" title="Tench Coxe" label="Tench Coxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588229" start="50161" end="50178" title="St. George Tucker" label="St. George Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q332449" start="50218" end="50240" title="Sir William Blackstone" label="Sir William Blackstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986212" start="50254" end="50289" title="Commentaries on the Laws of England" label="Commentaries on the Laws of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q12065173" start="50612" end="50621" title="Palladium (protective image)" label="palladium"/>
<link wikidata="Q40283" start="52677" end="52689" title="self-defense" label="self-defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q42406" start="52876" end="52883" title="English people" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685106" start="52900" end="52907" title="Hawkins&amp;#x27; Treatise of Pleas of the Crown" label="Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q219447" start="53089" end="53111" title="Bill of Rights 1689" label="English Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017395" start="53439" end="53452" title="William Rawle" label="William Rawle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002253" start="54630" end="54643" title="Incorporation of the Bill of Rights" label="incorporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="54707" end="54727" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q332435" start="55013" end="55017" title="Edward Coke" label="Coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368374" start="55383" end="55395" title="Joseph Story" label="Joseph Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853205" start="57055" end="57067" title="Antislavery Movement In America" label="Abolitionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q538091" start="57068" end="57084" title="Lysander Spooner" label="Lysander Spooner"/>
<link wikidata="Q708363" start="57305" end="57320" title="right to resist" label="right to resist"/>
<link wikidata="Q189366" start="57572" end="57582" title="John Brown (abolitionist)" label="John Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q13368786" start="57913" end="57926" title="Jury trial" label="trial by jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="58041" end="58056" title="Southern United States" label="Southern States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792035" start="59085" end="59101" title="Thomas M. Cooley" label="Thomas M. Cooley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661649" start="60929" end="60967" title="Individual and group rights" label="individual right or a collective right"/>
<link wikidata="Q48527" start="61435" end="61454" title="states&amp;#x27; rights" label="states&amp;#x27; rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q250456" start="62143" end="62156" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit" label="Fifth Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q250456" start="63863" end="63876" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit" label="Fifth Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q16252031" start="63893" end="63917" title="United States v. Emerson" label="United States v. Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121623" start="64138" end="64151" title="circuit split" label="circuit split"/>
<link wikidata="Q346685" start="64401" end="64417" title="Warren E. Burger" label="Warren E. Burger"/>
<link wikidata="Q11147" start="64455" end="64489" title="Chief Justice of the United States" label="chief justice of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349962" start="66281" end="66295" title="Robert Spitzer (political scientist)" label="Robert Spitzer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66984" end="67085" title="#Meaning of &amp;quot;well regulated militia&amp;quot;" label="quote of Justice John Paul Stevens in the Meaning of &amp;quot;well regulated militia&amp;quot; section below"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846602" start="67578" end="67593" title="Andrew Fletcher (patriot)" label="Andrew Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440599" start="68434" end="68451" title="Federalist No. 29" label="Federalist No. 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773061" start="68657" end="68674" title="enumerated powers" label="enumerated powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517243" start="69300" end="69308" title="yeomanry" label="yeomanry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069852" start="70028" end="70041" title="Nunn v. Georgia" label="Nunn v. State"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644907" start="70076" end="70097" title="Supreme Court of Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q11156" start="72762" end="72776" title="Antonin Scalia" label="Antonin Scalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893509" start="73956" end="73989" title="United States v. Verdugo-Urquidez" label="United States v. Verdugo-Urquidez"/>
<link wikidata="Q472547" start="77843" end="77849" title="David Souter" label="Souter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11116" start="77851" end="77859" title="Ruth Bader Ginsburg" label="Ginsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q11124" start="77865" end="77871" title="Stephen Breyer" label="Breyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5258184" start="78374" end="78386" title="Dennis Baron" label="Dennis Baron"/>
<link wikidata="Q117364" start="79568" end="79574" title="clause" label="clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q12616" start="81344" end="81393" title="First Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="First Amendment to the United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454090" start="81602" end="81608" title="Reason (magazine)" label="Reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="82387" end="82401" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="83361" end="83374" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q690462" start="83609" end="83640" title="Dred Scott v. Sandford" label="&amp;quot;Dred Scott&amp;quot; decision"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738447" start="83653" end="83673" title="Majority opinion" label="opinion of the court"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="83689" end="83705" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q15133865" start="83723" end="83736" title="Citizenship in the United States" label="U.S. citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q864751" start="86484" end="86494" title="The Hatter" label="mad hatter"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="86591" end="86609" title="Reconstruction Era" label="Reconstruction Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q5144758" start="86780" end="86795" title="Colfax massacre" label="Colfax massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603645" start="87315" end="87327" title="State actor" label="state action"/>
<link wikidata="Q3649437" start="87647" end="87672" title="Enforcement Act of 1871 (third act)" label="anti-Ku-Klux-Klan statute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428554" start="87696" end="87706" title="Facial challenge" label="as applied"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658870" start="90533" end="90538" title="Dictum" label="dicta"/>
<link wikidata="Q58848" start="90847" end="90855" title="Pacifism" label="pacifist"/>
<link wikidata="Q841440" start="90870" end="90884" title="naturalization" label="naturalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="90990" end="91003" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972688" start="91610" end="91631" title="National Firearms Act" label="National Firearms Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810112" start="91690" end="91706" title="Any Other Weapon" label="Title II weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q724204" start="92376" end="92394" title="James Clark McReynolds" label="Justice McReynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757926" start="93536" end="93550" title="Andrew McClurg" label="Andrew McClurg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229683" start="98680" end="98710" title="District of Columbia v. Heller" label="District of Columbia v. Heller"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001109" start="100123" end="100145" title="Supreme Court of Illinois" label="Illinois Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q17108588" start="100155" end="100172" title="People v. Aguilar" label="People v. Aguilar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303850" start="101402" end="101419" title="Lists of landmark court decisions" label="landmark decision"/>
<link wikidata="Q11156" start="101638" end="101652" title="Antonin Scalia" label="Antonin Scalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11109" start="103127" end="103142" title="John Paul Stevens" label="Justice Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q11124" start="104872" end="104886" title="Stephen Breyer" label="Justice Breyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771332" start="105448" end="105482" title="The Unconstitutionality of Slavery" label="The Unconstitutionality of Slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q11116" start="108362" end="108378" title="Ruth Bader Ginsburg" label="Justice Ginsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551068" start="108470" end="108474" title="WNYC" label="WNYC"/>
<link wikidata="Q357813" start="109007" end="109024" title="adjunct professor" label="adjunct professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5316090" start="109035" end="109068" title="Duquesne University School of Law" label="Duquesne University School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055643" start="109255" end="109271" title="Colonial history of the United States" label="colonial history"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="109276" end="109288" title="#Debates on amending the Constitution" label="the drafting"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="109289" end="109320" title="#Conflict and compromise in Congress produce the Bill of Rights" label="history of the Second Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573058" start="109350" end="109362" title="Slave states and free states" label="slave states"/>
<link wikidata="Q13534615" start="109516" end="109527" title="Free Negro" label="free blacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237872" start="109876" end="109895" title="Fundamental rights in the United States" label="an enumerated right"/>
<link wikidata="Q14939585" start="110073" end="110094" title="Unenumerated rights" label="an unenumerated right"/>
<link wikidata="Q275898" start="110169" end="110218" title="Ninth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Ninth Amendment to the United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11138" start="110425" end="110438" title="Samuel Alito" label="Justice Alito"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360440" start="110446" end="110471" title="McDonald v. City of Chicago" label="&amp;quot;McDonald&amp;quot; case"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360440" start="110797" end="110824" title="McDonald v. City of Chicago" label="McDonald v. City of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002253" start="110890" end="110902" title="Incorporation of the Bill of Rights" label="incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="111403" end="111449" title="Fourteenth Amendment Due Process" label="Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11142" start="111476" end="111491" title="Clarence Thomas" label="Clarence Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246326" start="111537" end="111568" title="Privileges or Immunities Clause" label="Privileges or Immunities Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q117460957" start="111579" end="111602" title="United States v. Rahimi" label="United States v. Rahimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360440" start="111768" end="111787" title="McDonald v. City of Chicago" label="McDonald v. Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087840" start="111852" end="111870" title="concurring opinion" label="concurring opinion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137223" start="112247" end="112270" title="Equal Protection Clause" label="Equal Protection Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q17108588" start="112282" end="112299" title="People v. Aguilar" label="People v. Aguilar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001109" start="112318" end="112340" title="Supreme Court of Illinois" label="Illinois Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229683" start="112612" end="112618" title="District of Columbia v. Heller" label="Heller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070065" start="113404" end="113423" title="per curiam decision" label="per curiam decision"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002625" start="113444" end="113480" title="Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court" label="Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q870114" start="113540" end="113548" title="Electroshock weapon" label="stun gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229683" start="114065" end="114095" title="District of Columbia v. Heller" label="District of Columbia v. Heller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298070" start="115041" end="115064" title="Dormant Commerce Clause" label="Dormant Commerce Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344824" start="115074" end="115089" title="Freedom of movement" label="right to travel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="115230" end="115234" title="Mootness#U.S. federal courts" label="moot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311531" start="115260" end="115268" title="Remand (court procedure)" label="remanded"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="115509" end="115517" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091665" start="115731" end="115776" title="New York State Rifle &amp;amp; Pistol Association" label="New York State Rifle &amp;amp; Pistol Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q117460957" start="116458" end="116481" title="United States v. Rahimi" label="United States v. Rahimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q106626962" start="116520" end="116537" title="New York State Rifle &amp;amp; Pistol Association, Inc. v. Bruen" label="&amp;quot;Bruen&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q250456" start="117189" end="117209" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit" label="Fifth Circuit&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q16252031" start="117228" end="117252" title="United States v. Emerson" label="United States v. Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358778" start="117666" end="117679" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit" label="Ninth Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7515740" start="117725" end="117744" title="Silveira v. Lockyer" label="Silveira v. Lockyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918178" start="117760" end="117772" title="United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit" label="D.C. Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229683" start="117812" end="117842" title="Parker v. District of Columbia" label="Parker v. District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229683" start="117888" end="117918" title="District of Columbia v. Heller" label="District of Columbia v. Heller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641851" start="118088" end="118119" title="United States courts of appeals" label="United States courts of appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918178" start="118345" end="118357" title="United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit" label="D.C. Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q250492" start="119791" end="119804" title="United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit" label="First Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q250479" start="120578" end="120592" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit" label="Second Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144663" start="120616" end="120625" title="may-issue" label="may-issue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158280" start="120626" end="120641" title="concealed carry" label="concealed carry"/>
<link wikidata="Q250438" start="120948" end="120961" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit" label="Third Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q250463" start="121228" end="121242" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit" label="Fourth Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614849" start="121977" end="121996" title="United States district court" label="U.S. District Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6047385" start="122147" end="122168" title="intermediate scrutiny" label="intermediate scrutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623621" start="122211" end="122226" title="strict scrutiny" label="strict scrutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311531" start="122256" end="122262" title="Remand (court procedure)" label="remand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375046" start="122324" end="122331" title="en banc" label="en banc"/>
<link wikidata="Q250456" start="122481" end="122494" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit" label="Fifth Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623621" start="124214" end="124229" title="strict scrutiny" label="strict scrutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q5618296" start="124492" end="124515" title="Gun Control Act of 1968" label="Gun Control Act of 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q694381" start="124580" end="124603" title="Involuntary commitment" label="involuntarily committed"/>
<link wikidata="Q210999" start="124609" end="124629" title="psychiatric hospital" label="psychiatric hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614849" start="124731" end="124759" title="United States district court" label="United States district court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375046" start="124862" end="124869" title="en banc" label="en banc"/>
<link wikidata="Q6047385" start="125341" end="125362" title="intermediate scrutiny" label="intermediate scrutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q250451" start="125386" end="125401" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit" label="Seventh Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931244" start="126021" end="126037" title="Moore v. Madigan" label="Moore v. Madigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158280" start="126450" end="126465" title="concealed carry" label="concealed carry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605086" start="126515" end="126521" title="Stay of execution" label="stayed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437547" start="126714" end="126739" title="Illinois General Assembly" label="Illinois General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q460291" start="126752" end="126766" title="Pat Quinn (politician)" label="Governor Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907894" start="126968" end="126975" title="Vacated judgment" label="vacated"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375046" start="127030" end="127037" title="en banc" label="en banc"/>
<link wikidata="Q107146" start="127183" end="127209" title="Alameda County, California" label="Alameda County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6047385" start="127435" end="127456" title="intermediate scrutiny" label="intermediate scrutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889830" start="127568" end="127636" title="United States District Court for the Northern District of California" label="United States District Court for the Northern District of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q223871" start="127821" end="127830" title="mediation" label="mediation"/>
<link wikidata="Q21028332" start="129624" end="129641" title="2nd Amendment Day" label="2nd Amendment Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q61863888" start="129644" end="129670" title="Second Amendment sanctuary" label="Second Amendment sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="129673" end="129714" title="Gun ownership#United States gun ownership" label="Gun ownership#United States gun ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q5618354" start="129717" end="129749" title="Gun culture in the United States" label="Gun culture in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="129752" end="129797" title="Gun law in the United States#Second Amendment" label="Gun law in the United States#Second Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305384" start="129800" end="129833" title="Gun politics in the United States" label="Gun politics in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q230698" start="129836" end="129888" title="List of amendments to the United States Constitution" label="List of amendments to the United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051051" start="129891" end="129918" title="Right to keep and bear arms" label="Right to keep and bear arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q39054002" start="129933" end="129956" title="Second Amendment Caucus" label="Second Amendment Caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943071" start="129961" end="129981" title="Congressional caucus" label="Congressional caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885042" start="130031" end="130051" title="Uniform Firearms Act" label="Uniform Firearms Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q667886" start="138971" end="138979" title="ABC-CLIO" label="ABC-CLIO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895718" start="139314" end="139347" title="University of Massachusetts Press" label="University of Massachusetts Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7736189" start="145187" end="145215" title="George Washington Law Review" label="George Washington Law Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q251266" start="149641" end="149656" title="Sage Publishing" label="Sage Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051256" start="149659" end="149673" title="Cato Institute" label="Cato Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012898" start="150568" end="150586" title="UCLA School of Law" label="UCLA School of Law"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31656" wikidata="Q231304" url="?curid=31656" title="Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution">
<text>The Fourth Amendment (Amendment IV) to the United States Constitution is part of the Bill of Rights. It prohibits unreasonable searches and seizures and sets requirements for issuing warrants: warrants must be issued by a judge or magistrate, justified by probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and must particularly describe the place to be searched and the persons or things to be seized (important or not).

Fourth Amendment case law deals with three main issues: what government activities are &quot;searches&quot; and &quot;seizures&quot;, what constitutes probable cause to conduct searches and seizures, and how to address violations of Fourth Amendment rights. Early court decisions limited the amendment&#x27;s scope to physical intrusion of property or persons, but with &quot;Katz v. United States&quot; (1967), the Supreme Court held that its protections extend to intrusions on the privacy of individuals as well as to physical locations. A warrant is needed for most search and seizure activities, but the Court has carved out a series of exceptions for consent searches, motor vehicle searches, evidence in plain view, exigent circumstances, border searches, and other situations.

The exclusionary rule is one way the amendment is enforced. Established in &quot;Weeks v. United States&quot; (1914), this rule holds that evidence obtained as a result of a Fourth Amendment violation is generally inadmissible at criminal trials. Evidence discovered as a later result of an illegal search may also be inadmissible as &quot;fruit of the poisonous tree&quot;. The exception is if it inevitably would have been discovered by legal means.

The Fourth Amendment was introduced in Congress in 1789 by James Madison, along with the other amendments in the Bill of Rights, in response to Anti-Federalist objections to the new Constitution. Congress submitted the amendment to the states on September 28, 1789. By December 15, 1791, the necessary three-fourths of the states had ratified it. On March 1, 1792, Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson announced that it was officially part of the Constitution.

Because the Bill of Rights did not initially apply to state or local governments, and federal criminal investigations were less common in the first century of the nation&#x27;s history, there is little significant case law for the Fourth Amendment before the 20th century. The amendment was held to apply to state and local governments in &quot;Mapp v. Ohio&quot; (1961) via the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.

==Text==


==Background==
===English law===

Like many other areas of American law, the Fourth Amendment finds its origin in English legal doctrine. In &quot;Semayne&#x27;s case&quot; (1604), Sir Edward Coke stated: &quot;The house of every one is to him as his castle and fortress, as well for his defence against injury and violence as for his repose.&quot; &quot;Semayne&#x27;s Case&quot; acknowledged that the King did not have unbridled authority to intrude on his subjects&#x27; dwellings, but recognized that government agents were permitted to conduct searches and seizures under certain conditions when their purpose was lawful and a warrant had been obtained.

The 1760s saw a growth in the intensity of litigation against state officers, who were using general warrants, conducted raids in search of materials relating to John Wilkes&#x27;s publications. The most famous of these cases involved John Entick whose home was forcibly entered by the King&#x27;s Messenger Nathan Carrington, along with others, pursuant to a warrant issued by George Montagu-Dunk, 2nd Earl of Halifax authorizing them &quot;to make strict and diligent search for ... the author, or one concerned in the writing of several weekly very seditious papers entitled, &#x27;The Monitor or British Freeholder, No 257, 357, 358, 360, 373, 376, 378, and 380&#x27;&quot;, the search resulting in seizure of printed charts, pamphlets and other materials. Entick filed suit in &quot;Entick v Carrington&quot;, argued before the Court of King&#x27;s Bench in 1765. Charles Pratt, 1st Earl Camden ruled that both the search and the seizure were unlawful, as the warrant authorized the seizure of &quot;all&quot; of Entick&#x27;s papers—not just the criminal ones—and as the warrant lacked probable cause to even justify the search. By holding that &quot;[O]ur law holds the property of every man so sacred, that no man can set his foot upon his neighbour&#x27;s close without his leave&quot;, &quot;Entick&quot; established the English precedent that the executive is limited in intruding on private property by common law.

===Colonial America===

Homes in Colonial America, on the other hand, did not enjoy the same sanctity as their British counterparts, because legislation had been explicitly written so as to enable enforcement of British revenue-gathering policies on customs; until 1750, in fact, the only type of warrant defined in the handbooks for justices of the peace was the general warrant. During what scholar William Cuddihy called the &quot;colonial epidemic of general searches&quot;, the authorities possessed almost unlimited power to search for anything at any time, with very little oversight.
In 1756, the colony of Massachusetts barred the use of general warrants. This represented the first law in American history curtailing the use of seizure power. Its creation largely stemmed from the great public outcry over the Excise Act of 1754, which gave tax collectors unlimited powers to interrogate colonists concerning their use of goods subject to customs. The act also permitted the use of a general warrant known as a writ of assistance, allowing tax collectors to search the homes of colonists and seize &quot;prohibited and uncustomed&quot; goods.
A crisis erupted over the writs of assistance on December 27, 1760, when the news of King George II&#x27;s death on October 23 arrived in Boston. All writs automatically expired six months after the death of the King, and would have had to be re-issued by George III, the new king, to remain valid.

In mid-January 1761, a group of more than fifty merchants represented by James Otis petitioned the court to have hearings on the issue. During the five-hour hearing on February 23, 1761, Otis vehemently denounced British colonial policies, including their sanction of general warrants and writs of assistance. However, the court ruled against Otis. Future President John Adams, who was present in the courtroom when Otis spoke, viewed these events as &quot;the spark in which originated the American Revolution&quot;.

Because of the name he had made for himself in attacking the writs, Otis was elected to the Massachusetts colonial legislature and helped pass legislation requiring that special writs of assistance be &quot;granted by any judge or justice of the peace upon information under oath by any officer of the customs&quot; and barring all other writs. The governor overturned the legislation, finding it contrary to English law and parliamentary sovereignty.

Seeing the danger general warrants presented, the Virginia Declaration of Rights (1776) explicitly forbade the use of general warrants. This prohibition became a precedent for the Fourth Amendment:

Article XIV of the Massachusetts Declaration of Rights, written by John Adams and enacted in 1780 as part of the Massachusetts Constitution, added the requirement that all searches must be &quot;reasonable&quot;, and served as another basis for the language of the Fourth Amendment:

By 1784, eight state constitutions contained a provision against general warrants.

==Proposal and ratification==

After several years of comparatively weak government under the Articles of Confederation, a Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia proposed a new constitution on September 17, 1787, featuring a stronger chief executive and other changes. George Mason, a Constitutional Convention delegate and the drafter of Virginia&#x27;s Declaration of Rights, proposed that a bill of rights listing and guaranteeing civil liberties be included. Other delegates—including future Bill of Rights drafter James Madison—disagreed, arguing that existing state guarantees of civil liberties were sufficient and that any attempt to enumerate individual rights risked implying that other, unnamed rights were unprotected. After a brief debate, Mason&#x27;s proposal was defeated by a unanimous vote of the state delegations.

For the Constitution to be ratified, nine of the thirteen states were required to approve it in state conventions. Opposition to ratification (&quot;Anti-Federalism&quot;) was partly based on the Constitution&#x27;s lack of adequate guarantees for civil liberties. Supporters of the Constitution in states where popular sentiment was against ratification (including Virginia, Massachusetts, and New York) successfully proposed that their state conventions both ratify the Constitution and call for the addition of a bill of rights. Four state conventions proposed some form of restriction on the authority of the new federal government to conduct searches.
In the 1st United States Congress, following the state legislatures&#x27; request, James Madison proposed twenty constitutional amendments based on state bills of rights and English sources such as the Bill of Rights 1689, including an amendment requiring probable cause for government searches. Congress reduced Madison&#x27;s proposed twenty amendments to twelve, with modifications to Madison&#x27;s language about searches and seizures. The final language was submitted to the states for ratification on September 25, 1789.

By the time the Bill of Rights was submitted to the states for ratification, opinions had shifted in both parties. Many Federalists, who had previously opposed a Bill of Rights, now supported the Bill as a means of silencing the Anti-Federalists&#x27; most effective criticism. Many Anti-Federalists, in contrast, now opposed it, realizing the Bill&#x27;s adoption would greatly lessen the chances of a second constitutional convention, which they desired. Anti-Federalists such as Richard Henry Lee also argued that the Bill left the most objectionable portions of the Constitution, such as the federal judiciary and direct taxation, intact.

On November 20, 1789, New Jersey ratified eleven of the twelve amendments, including the Fourth. On December 19, 1789, December 22, 1789, and January 19, 1790, respectively, Maryland, North Carolina, and South Carolina ratified all twelve amendments. On January 25 and 28, 1790, respectively, New Hampshire and Delaware ratified eleven of the Bill&#x27;s twelve amendments, including the Fourth. This brought the total of ratifying states to six of the required ten, but the process stalled in other states: Connecticut and Georgia found a Bill of Rights unnecessary and so refused to ratify, while Massachusetts ratified most of the amendments, but failed to send official notice to the Secretary of State that it had done so (all three states would later ratify the Bill of Rights for sesquicentennial celebrations in 1939).

In February through June 1790, New York, Pennsylvania, and Rhode Island each ratified eleven of the amendments, including the Fourth. Virginia initially postponed its debate, but after Vermont was admitted to the Union in 1791, the total number of states needed for ratification rose to eleven. Vermont ratified on November 3, 1791, approving all twelve amendments, and Virginia finally followed on December 15, 1791. Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson announced the adoption of the ten successfully ratified amendments on March 1, 1792.

==Applicability==
The Fourth Amendment, and the personal rights which it secures, have a long history. The Bill of Rights originally restricted only the federal government, and went through a long initial phase of &quot;judicial dormancy;&quot; in the words of historian Gordon S. Wood, &quot;After ratification, most Americans promptly forgot about the first ten amendments to the Constitution.&quot; Federal jurisdiction regarding criminal law was narrow until the late 19th century when the Interstate Commerce Act and Sherman Antitrust Act were passed. As federal criminal jurisdiction expanded to include other areas such as narcotics, more questions about the Fourth Amendment came to the U.S. Supreme Court. The Supreme Court responded to these questions by stating on the one hand that the government powers to search and seizure are limited by the Fourth Amendment so that arbitrary and oppressive interference by enforcement officials with the privacy and personal security of individuals are prevented and by outlining on the other hand the fundamental purpose of the amendment as guaranteeing &quot;the privacy, dignity and security of persons against certain arbitrary and invasive acts by officers of the Government, without regard to whether the government actor is investigating crime or performing another function&quot;. To protect personal privacy and dignity against unwarranted intrusion by the State is the overriding function of the Fourth Amendment according to the Court in &quot;Schmerber v. California&quot; (1966), because &quot;[t]he security of one&#x27;s privacy against arbitrary intrusion by the police&quot; is &quot;at the core of the Fourth Amendment&quot; and &quot;basic to a free society.&quot; Pointing to historic precedents like &quot;Entick v Carrington&quot; (1765) and &quot;Boyd v. United States&quot; (1886), the Supreme Court held in &quot;Silverman v. United States&quot; (1961) that the Fourth Amendments core is the right to retreat into his own home and there be free from unreasonable governmental intrusion. The Supreme Court declared in &quot;Berger v. New York&quot; (1967) that the Fourth Amendment&#x27;s protections include &quot;conversation&quot; and is not limited to &quot;persons, houses, papers, and effects&quot;. The New York Court of Appeals observed in 1975: &quot;The basic purpose of the constitutional protections against unlawful searches and seizures is to safeguard the privacy and security of each and every person against all arbitrary intrusions by government. Therefore, any time an intrusion on the security and privacy of the individual is undertaken with intent to harass or is based upon mere whim, caprice or idle curiosity, the spirit of the Constitution has been violated and the aggrieved party may invoke the exclusionary rule or appropriate forms of civil redress.&quot; With a view to &quot;Camara v. Municipal Court&quot; (1967) the Supreme Court observed in &quot;Torres v. Madrid&quot; (2021) that the focus of the Fourth Amendment is the privacy and security of individuals, not the particular manner of arbitrary invasion by governmental officials. In &quot;Mapp v. Ohio&quot; (1961), the Supreme Court ruled that the Fourth Amendment applies to the states by way of the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.

Fourth Amendment case law deals with three central issues: what government activities constitute &quot;search&quot; and &quot;seizure;&quot; what constitutes probable cause for these actions; how violations of Fourth Amendment rights should be addressed. The text of the amendment is brief, and most of the law determining what constitutes an unlawful search and seizure is found in court rulings. The brief definitions of the terms &quot;search&quot; and &quot;seizure&quot; was concisely summarized in &quot;United States v. Jacobsen&quot;, which said that the Fourth Amendment:

&quot;The Fourth Amendment search and seizure doctrine involves a complex compromise between public safety and the constitutional right to personal liberty.&quot; The Fourth Amendment typically requires &quot;a neutral and detached authority interposed between the police and the public&quot;, and it is offended by &quot;general warrants&quot; and laws that allow searches to be conducted &quot;indiscriminately and without regard to their connection with [a] crime under investigation&quot;, for the &quot;basic purpose of the Fourth Amendment, which is enforceable against the States through the Fourteenth, through its prohibition of &#x27;unreasonable&#x27; searches and seizures is to safeguard the privacy and security of individuals against arbitrary invasions by governmental officials.&quot;

The Fourth Amendment has been held to mean that a search or an arrest generally requires a judicially sanctioned warrant, because the basic rule under the Fourth Amendment is that arrests and &quot;searches conducted outside the judicial process, without prior approval by judge or magistrate, are &quot;per se&quot; unreasonable under the Fourth Amendment—subject only to a few specifically established and well-delineated exceptions.&quot; In order for such a warrant to be considered reasonable, it must be supported by probable cause and be limited in scope according to specific information supplied by a person (usually a law enforcement officer) who has sworn by it and is therefore accountable to the issuing court. Where there was no clear practice, either approving or disapproving the type of search at issue, at the time the constitutional provision was enacted, the &quot;reasonableness&quot; of a search is judged by balancing the intrusion on the individual&#x27;s Fourth Amendment interests against the promotion of legitimate governmental interests. The Supreme Court further held in &quot;Chandler v. Miller&quot; (1997): &quot;To be reasonable under the Fourth Amendment, a search ordinarily must be based on individualized suspicion of wrongdoing. But particularized exceptions to the main rule are sometimes warranted based on &#x27;special needs, beyond the normal need for law enforcement&#x27;. ... When such &#x27;special needs&#x27; are alleged, courts must undertake a context-specific inquiry, examining closely the competing private and public interests advanced by the parties.&quot; The reasonableness of any particular search and seizure according to the Supreme Court in &quot;Terry v. Ohio&quot; (1968) must be assessed in light of the particular circumstances against the standard of whether a man of reasonable caution is warranted in believing that the action taken was appropriate. The amendment applies to governmental searches and seizures, but not those done by private citizens or organizations who are not acting on behalf of a government. In &quot;Ontario v. Quon&quot; (2010), the Court applied the amendment to a municipal government in its capacity as an employer, ruling that the City of Ontario had not violated the Fourth Amendment rights of city police officers by obtaining from the communications company and reviewing transcripts of text messages sent using government-provided pagers.

===Search===

One threshold question in the Fourth Amendment jurisprudence is whether a &quot;search&quot; has occurred. Initial Fourth Amendment case law hinged on a citizen&#x27;s property rights—that is, when the government physically intrudes on &quot;persons, houses, papers, or effects&quot; for the purpose of obtaining information, a &quot;search&quot; within the original meaning of the Fourth Amendment, has occurred. Early 20th-century Court decisions, such as &quot;Olmstead v. United States&quot; (1928), held that Fourth Amendment rights applied in cases of physical intrusion, but not to other forms of police surveillance (e.g., wiretaps). In &quot;Silverman v. United States&quot; (1961), the Court stated of the amendment that &quot;at the very core stands the right of a man to retreat into his own home and there be free from unreasonable governmental intrusion&quot;.

Fourth Amendment protections expanded significantly with &quot;Katz v. United States&quot; (1967). In &quot;Katz&quot;, the Supreme Court expanded that focus to embrace an individual&#x27;s right to privacy, and ruled that a search had occurred when the government wiretapped a telephone booth using a microphone attached to the outside of the glass. While there was no physical intrusion into the booth, the Court reasoned that: 1) Katz, by entering the booth and shutting the door behind him, had exhibited his expectation that &quot;the words he utters into the mouthpiece will not be broadcast to the world&quot;; and 2) society believes that his expectation was reasonable. Justice Potter Stewart wrote in the majority opinion that &quot;the Fourth Amendment protects people, not places&quot;. A &quot;search&quot; occurs for purposes of the Fourth Amendment when the government violates a person&#x27;s &quot;reasonable expectation of privacy&quot;. Katz&#x27;s reasonable expectation of privacy thus provided the basis to rule that the government&#x27;s intrusion, though electronic rather than physical, was a search covered by the Fourth Amendment, and thus necessitated a warrant. The Court said it was not recognizing any general right to privacy in the Fourth Amendment, and that this wiretap could have been authorized if proper procedures had been followed.

This decision in &quot;Katz&quot; was later developed into the now commonly used two-prong test, adopted in &quot;Smith v. Maryland&quot; (1979), for determining whether a search has occurred for purposes of the Fourth Amendment:
# a person &quot;has exhibited an actual (subjective) expectation of privacy&quot;; and
# society is prepared to recognize that this expectation is (objectively) reasonable.

The Supreme Court has held that the Fourth Amendment does not apply to information that is voluntarily shared with third parties. In &quot;Smith&quot;, the Court held individuals have no &quot;legitimate expectation of privacy&quot; regarding the telephone numbers they dial because they knowingly give that information to telephone companies when they dial a number. However, under &quot;Carpenter v. United States&quot; (2018), individuals have a reasonable expectation of privacy under the Fourth Amendment regarding cell phone records even though they themselves turned over that information to &quot;third parties&quot; (i.e. the cell phone companies). Prior to the Carpenter ruling, law enforcement was able to retrieve cell site location information (CSLI) that included where a cell phone user had traveled over many months and with which other cell phone users they had associated. Carpenter v. United States serves as a landmark case because it slightly narrowed the Third Party Doctrine, thus requiring law enforcement to first obtain a search warrant before receiving CSLI records. &quot;In the 5-4 [Carpenter] decision, the Court ruled &#x27;narrowly&#x27; in favor of privacy, finding the government had constitutionally violated Mr. Carpenter&#x27;s reasonable expectation of privacy by acquiring this private information without a warrant.&quot;

Following &quot;Katz&quot;, the vast majority of Fourth Amendment search cases have turned on the right to privacy, but in &quot;United States v. Jones&quot; (2012), the Court ruled that the &quot;Katz&quot; standard did not replace earlier case law, but rather, has supplemented it. In &quot;Jones&quot;, law enforcement officers had attached a GPS device on a car&#x27;s exterior without Jones&#x27; knowledge or consent. The Court concluded that Jones was a bailee to the car, and so had a property interest in the car. Therefore, since the intrusion on the vehicle—a common law trespass—was for the purpose of obtaining information, the Court ruled that it was a search under the Fourth Amendment. The Court used similar &quot;trespass&quot; reasoning in &quot;Florida v. Jardines&quot; (2013), to rule that bringing a drug detection dog to sniff at the front door of a home was a search.

In many situations, law enforcement may perform a search when they have a reasonable suspicion of criminal activity, even if it falls short of probable cause necessary for an arrest. Under &quot;Terry v. Ohio&quot; (1968), law enforcement officers are permitted to conduct a limited warrantless search on a level of suspicion less than probable cause under certain circumstances. In &quot;Terry&quot;, the Supreme Court ruled that when a police officer witnesses &quot;unusual conduct&quot; that leads the officer to reasonably believe &quot;that criminal activity may be afoot&quot;, that the suspicious person has a weapon &quot;and&quot; that the person is presently dangerous to the officer or others, the officer may conduct a pat-down search (&quot;frisk&quot; the person) to determine whether the person is carrying a weapon. This detention and search is known as a &quot;Terry&quot; stop. To conduct a frisk, officers must be able to point to specific and articulable facts which, taken together with rational inferences from those facts, reasonably warrant their actions. As established in &quot;Florida v. Royer&quot; (1983), such a search must be temporary, and questioning must be limited to the purpose of the stop (e.g., officers who stop a person because they have reasonable suspicion to believe the person was driving a stolen car, cannot, after confirming it is not stolen, compel the person to answer questions about anything else, such as contraband).

===Seizure===

The Fourth Amendment proscribes unreasonable seizure of any person, person&#x27;s home (including its curtilage) or personal property without a warrant. A seizure of property occurs when there is &quot;some meaningful interference with an individual&#x27;s possessory interests in that property,&quot; such as when police officers take personal property away from an owner to use as evidence, or when they participate in an eviction. The amendment also protects against unreasonable seizure of persons, including a brief detention.

A seizure does not occur just because the government questions an individual in a public place. The exclusionary rule would not bar voluntary answers to such questions from being offered into evidence in a subsequent criminal prosecution. The person is not being seized if his freedom of movement is not restrained. The government may not detain an individual even momentarily without reasonable, objective grounds, with few exceptions. His refusal to listen or answer does not by itself furnish such grounds.

In &quot;United States v. Mendenhall&quot; (1980), the Court held that a person is seized only when, by means of physical force &quot;or&quot; show of authority, his freedom of movement is restrained and, in the circumstances surrounding the incident, a reasonable person would believe he was not free to leave. Under &quot;Torres v. Madrid&quot; (2021), a person is considered to be seized following the use of physical force with the intent to restrain, even if the person manages to escape. In &quot;Florida v. Bostick&quot; (1991), the Court ruled that as long as the police do not convey a message that compliance with their requests is required, the police contact is a &quot;citizen encounter&quot; that falls outside the protections of the Fourth Amendment. If a person remains free to disregard questioning by the government, there has been no seizure and therefore no intrusion upon the person&#x27;s privacy under the Fourth Amendment.

When a person is arrested and taken into police custody, he has been seized (i.e., a reasonable person who is handcuffed and placed in the back of a police car would not think they were free to leave). A person subjected to a routine traffic stop on the other hand, has been seized, but is not &quot;arrested&quot; because traffic stops are a relatively brief encounter and are more analogous to a &quot;Terry&quot; stop than to a formal arrest. If a person is not under suspicion of illegal behavior, a law enforcement official is not allowed to place an individual under arrest simply because this person does not wish to state his identity, provided specific state regulations do not specify this to be the case. A search incidental to an arrest that is not permissible under state law does not violate the Fourth Amendment, so long as the arresting officer has probable cause. In &quot;Maryland v. King&quot; (2013), the Court upheld the constitutionality of police swabbing for DNA upon arrests for serious crimes, along the same reasoning that allows police to take fingerprints or photographs of those they arrest and detain.

====Exceptions====

The government may not detain an individual even momentarily without reasonable and articulable suspicion, with a few exceptions. In &quot;Delaware v. Prouse&quot; (1979), the Court ruled an officer has made an illegal seizure when he stops an automobile and detains the driver in order to check his driver&#x27;s license and the registration of the automobile, because the officer does not have articulable and reasonable suspicion that a motorist is unlicensed or that an automobile is not registered, or either the vehicle or an occupant is otherwise subject to seizure for violation of law.

Where society&#x27;s need is great, no other effective means of meeting the need is available, and intrusion on people&#x27;s privacy is minimal, certain discretionless checkpoints toward that end may briefly detain motorists. In &quot;United States v. Martinez-Fuerte&quot; (1976), the Supreme Court allowed discretionless immigration checkpoints. In &quot;Michigan Dept. of State Police v. Sitz&quot; (1990), the Supreme Court allowed discretionless sobriety checkpoints. In &quot;Illinois v. Lidster&quot; (2004), the Supreme Court allowed focused informational checkpoints. However, in &quot;City of Indianapolis v. Edmond&quot; (2000), the Supreme Court ruled that discretionary checkpoints or general crime-fighting checkpoints are not allowed.

===Warrant===

Under the Fourth Amendment, law enforcement must receive written permission from a court of law, or otherwise qualified magistrate, to lawfully search and seize evidence while investigating criminal activity. A court grants permission by issuing a writ known as a warrant. A search or seizure is generally unreasonable and unconstitutional if conducted without a valid warrant and the police must obtain a warrant whenever practicable. Searches and seizures without a warrant are not considered unreasonable if one of the specifically established and well-delineated exceptions to the warrant requirement applies. These exceptions apply &quot;[o]nly in those exceptional circumstances in which special needs, beyond the normal need for law enforcement, make the warrant and probable cause requirement impracticable.&quot;

In these situations where the warrant requirement doesn&#x27;t apply a search or seizure nonetheless must be justified by some individualized suspicion of wrongdoing. However, the U.S. Supreme Court carved out an exception to the requirement of individualized suspicion. It ruled that, &quot;In limited circumstances, where the privacy interests implicated by the search are minimal and where an important governmental interest furthered by the intrusion would be placed in jeopardy by a requirement of individualized suspicion&quot; a search [or seizure] would still be reasonable.

===Probable cause===

The Supreme Court in &quot;Berger v. New York&quot; (1967) explained that the purpose of the probable cause requirement of the Fourth Amendment is to keep the state out of constitutionally protected areas until it has reason to believe that a specific crime has been or is being committed. The standards of probable cause differ for an arrest and a search. The government has probable cause to make an arrest when &quot;the facts and circumstances within their knowledge and of which they had reasonably trustworthy information&quot; would lead a prudent person to believe the arrested person had committed or was committing a crime. Probable cause to arrest must exist before the arrest is made. Evidence obtained after the arrest may not apply retroactively to justify the arrest.

When police conduct a search, the amendment requires that the warrant establish probable cause to believe the search will uncover criminal activity or contraband. They must have legally sufficient reasons to believe a search is necessary. In &quot;Carroll v. United States&quot; (1925), the Supreme Court stated that probable cause to search is a flexible, common-sense standard. To that end, the Court ruled in &quot;Dumbra v. United States&quot; (1925) that the term probable cause means &quot;less than evidence that would justify condemnation,&quot; reiterating &quot;Carroll&quot;″s assertion that it merely requires that the facts available to the officer would &quot;warrant a man of reasonable caution&quot; in the belief that specific items may be contraband or stolen property or useful as evidence of a crime. It does not demand any showing that such a belief be correct or more likely true than false. A &quot;practical, non-technical&quot; probability that incriminating evidence is involved is all that is required. In &quot;Illinois v. Gates&quot; (1983), the Court ruled that the reliability of an informant is to be determined based on the &quot;totality of the circumstances.&quot;

==Exceptions to the warrant requirement==
===Consent===

If a party gives consent to a search, a warrant is not required. There are exceptions and complications to the rule, including the scope of the consent given, whether the consent is voluntarily given, and whether an individual has the right to consent to a search of another&#x27;s property. In &quot;Schneckloth v. Bustamonte&quot; (1973), the Court ruled that a consent search is still valid even if the police do not inform a suspect of his right to refuse the search. This contrasts with Fifth Amendment rights, which cannot be relinquished without an explicit &quot;Miranda&quot; warning from police.

The Court stated in &quot;United States v. Matlock&quot; (1974) that a third party co-occupant could give consent for a search without violating a suspect&#x27;s Fourth Amendment rights. However, in &quot;Georgia v. Randolph&quot; (2006), the Supreme Court ruled that when two co-occupants are both present, one consenting and the other rejecting the search of a shared residence, the police may not make a search of that residence within the consent exception to the warrant requirement. Per the Court&#x27;s ruling in &quot;Illinois v. Rodriguez&quot; (1990), a consent search is still considered valid if police accept in good faith the consent of an &quot;apparent authority,&quot; even if that party is later discovered to not have authority over the property in question. A telling case on this subject is &quot;Stoner v. California&quot;, in which the Court held that police officers could not rely in good faith upon the apparent authority of a hotel clerk to consent to the search of a guest&#x27;s room.

===Plain view and open fields===

According to the plain view doctrine as defined in &quot;Coolidge v. New Hampshire&quot; (1971), if an officer is lawfully present, he may seize objects that are in &quot;plain view.&quot; However, the officer must have had probable cause to believe the objects are contraband, and the criminality of the object in plain view must be obvious by its very nature. In &quot;Arizona v. Hicks&quot;, the Supreme Court held that an officer stepped beyond the plain view doctrine when he moved a turntable in order to view its serial number to confirm that the turntable was stolen. &quot;A search is a search,&quot; proclaimed the Court, &quot;even if it happens to disclose nothing but the bottom of a turntable.&quot;

Similarly, &quot;open fields&quot; such as pastures, open water, and woods may be searched without a warrant, on the ground that conduct occurring therein would have no reasonable expectation of privacy. The doctrine was first articulated by the Court in &quot;Hester v. United States&quot; (1924), which stated that &quot;the special protection accorded by the Fourth Amendment to the people in their &#x27;persons, houses, papers, and effects&#x27; is not extended to the open fields.&quot;

In &quot;Oliver v. United States&quot; (1984), the police ignored a &quot;no trespassing&quot; sign and a fence, trespassed onto the suspect&#x27;s land without a warrant, followed a path for hundreds of feet, and discovered a field of marijuana. The Supreme Court ruled that no search had taken place, because there was no privacy expectation regarding an open field:
While open fields are not protected by the Fourth Amendment, the curtilage, or outdoor area immediately surrounding the home, is protected. Courts have treated this area as an extension of the house and as such subject to all the privacy protections afforded a person&#x27;s home (unlike a person&#x27;s open fields) under the Fourth Amendment. The curtilage is &quot;intimately linked to the home, both physically and psychologically&quot;, and is where &quot;privacy expectations are most heightened.&quot; However, courts have held aerial surveillance of curtilage not to be included in the protections from unwarranted search so long as the airspace above the curtilage is generally accessible by the public. An area is curtilage if it &quot;harbors the intimate activity associated with the sanctity of a man&#x27;s home and the privacies of life.&quot; Courts make this determination by examining &quot;whether the area is included within an enclosure surrounding the home, the nature of the uses to which the area is put, and the steps taken by the resident to protect the area from observation by people passing by.&quot; The Court has acknowledged that a doorbell or knocker is typically treated as an invitation, or license, to the public to approach the front door of the home to deliver mail, sell goods, solicit for charities, etc. This license extends to the police, who have the right to try engaging a home&#x27;s occupant in a &quot;knock and talk&quot; for the purpose of gathering evidence without a warrant. However, they cannot bring a drug detection dog to sniff at the front door of a home without either a warrant or consent of the homeowner or resident.

===Exigent circumstance===

Law enforcement officers may also conduct warrantless searches in several types of exigent circumstances where obtaining a warrant is dangerous or impractical. Under &quot;Terry v. Ohio&quot; (1968) police are permitted to frisk suspects for weapons. The Court also allowed a search of arrested persons in &quot;Weeks v. United States&quot; (1914) to preserve evidence that might otherwise be destroyed and to ensure suspects were disarmed. In &quot;Carroll v. United States&quot; (1925), the Court ruled that law enforcement officers could search a vehicle that they suspected of carrying contraband without a warrant. The Court allowed blood to be drawn without a warrant from drunk-driving suspects in &quot;Schmerber v. California&quot; (1966) on the grounds that the time to obtain a warrant would allow a suspect&#x27;s blood alcohol content to reduce, although this was later modified by &quot;Missouri v. McNeely&quot; (2013). &quot;Warden v. Hayden&quot; (1967) provided an exception to the warrant requirement if officers were in &quot;hot pursuit&quot; of a suspect.

A subset of exigent circumstances is the debated community caretaking exception.

===Motor vehicle===

The Supreme Court has held that individuals in automobiles have a reduced expectation of privacy, because (1) vehicles generally do not serve as residences or repositories of personal effects, and (2) vehicles &quot;can be quickly moved out of the locality or jurisdiction in which the warrant must be sought.&quot; Vehicles may not be randomly stopped and searched; there must be probable cause or reasonable suspicion of criminal activity. Items in plain view may be seized; areas that could potentially hide weapons may also be searched. With probable cause to believe evidence is present, police officers may search any area in the vehicle. However, they may not extend the search to the vehicle&#x27;s passengers without probable cause to search those passengers or consent from the passengers. In &quot;Collins v. Virginia&quot; (2018), the Court ruled that the motor vehicle exception did not apply to searches of vehicles parked within a residence&#x27;s curtilage.

In &quot;Arizona v. Gant&quot; (2009), the Court ruled that a law enforcement officer needs a warrant before searching a motor vehicle after an arrest of an occupant of that vehicle, unless 1) at the time of the search the person being arrested is unsecured and within reaching distance of the passenger compartment of the vehicle or 2) police officers have reason to believe evidence for the crime for which the person is being arrested will be found in the vehicle.

===Searches incident to a lawful arrest===

A common law rule from Great Britain permits searches incident to an arrest without a warrant. This rule has been applied in American law, and has a lengthy common law history. The justification for such a search is to prevent the arrested individual 1.) from destroying evidence or 2.) using a weapon against the arresting officer by disarming the suspect. The U.S. Supreme Court ruled that &quot;both justifications for the search-incident-to-arrest exception are absent and the rule does not apply&quot; when &quot;there is no possibility&quot; the suspect could gain access to a weapon or destroy evidence. In &quot;Trupiano v. United States&quot; (1948), the Supreme Court held that &quot;a search or seizure without a warrant as an incident to a lawful arrest has always been considered to be a strictly limited right. It grows out of the inherent necessities of the situation at the time of the arrest. But there must be something more in the way of necessity than merely a lawful arrest.&quot; In &quot;United States v. Rabinowitz&quot; (1950), the Court reversed &quot;Trupiano&quot;, holding instead that the officers&#x27; opportunity to obtain a warrant was not germane to the reasonableness of a search incident to an arrest. &quot;Rabinowitz&quot; suggested that any area within the &quot;immediate control&quot; of the arrestee could be searched, but it did not define the term. In deciding &quot;Chimel v. California&quot; (1969), the Supreme Court elucidated its previous decisions. It held that when an arrest is made, it is reasonable for the officer to search the arrestee for weapons and evidence. However, in &quot;Riley v. California&quot; (2014), the Supreme Court ruled unanimously that police must obtain a warrant to search an arrestee&#x27;s cellular phone. The Court said that earlier Supreme Court decisions permitting searches incident to an arrest without a warrant do not apply to &quot;modern cellphones, which are now such a pervasive and insistent part of daily life that the proverbial visitor from Mars might conclude they were an important feature of human anatomy,&quot; and noted that U.S. citizens&#x27; cellphones today typically contain &quot;a digital record of nearly every aspect of their lives—from the mundane to the intimate.&quot;

===Border search exception===

Searches conducted at the United States border or the equivalent of the border (such as an international airport) may be conducted without a warrant or probable cause subject to the border search exception. Most border searches may be conducted entirely at random, without any level of suspicion, pursuant to U.S. Customs and Border Protection plenary search authority. However, searches that intrude upon a traveler&#x27;s personal dignity and privacy interests, such as strip and body cavity searches, must be supported by &quot;reasonable suspicion&quot;. The U.S. Courts of Appeals for the Fourth and Ninth circuits have ruled that information on a traveler&#x27;s electronic materials, including personal files on a laptop computer, may be searched at random, without suspicion.

===Foreign intelligence surveillance===

The Supreme Court decision in &quot;United States v. U.S. District Court&quot; (1972) left open the possibility for a foreign intelligence surveillance exception to the warrant clause. Three United States Courts of Appeals have recognized a foreign intelligence surveillance exception to the warrant clause, but tied it to certain requirements. The exception to the Fourth Amendment was formally recognized by the United States Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court of Review in its 2008 &quot;&quot; decision. The lower court held that &quot;a foreign intelligence exception to the Fourth Amendment&#x27;s warrant requirement exists when surveillance is conducted to obtain foreign intelligence for national security purposes and is directed against foreign powers or agents of foreign powers reasonably believed to be located outside the United States.&quot;

Despite the foregoing citation the Fourth Amendment prohibitions against unreasonable searches and seizures nonetheless apply to the contents of all communications, whatever the means, because, &quot;a person&#x27;s private communications are akin to personal papers.&quot; Fourth Amendment reasonableness is the point at which the United States government&#x27;s interest advanced by a particular search or seizure outweighs the loss of individual privacy or freedom of movement that attends the government&#x27;s action. The United Supreme Court said in &quot;Board of Education v. Earls&quot; (2002) when &#x27;special needs&#x27;, beyond the normal need for law enforcement, make the warrant and probable-cause requirement impracticable the reasonableness of a search is determined by balancing the nature of the intrusion on the individual&#x27;s privacy against the promotion of legitimate governmental interests. Additionally in &quot;Illinois v. Lidster&quot; (2004) the Court explained in judging reasonableness it looks to &quot;the gravity of the public concerns served by the seizure, the degree to which the seizure advances the public interest, and the severity of the interference with individual liberty&quot;. To protect the telecommunications carriers cooperating with the U.S. government from legal action, the Congress passed a bill updating the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 to permit this type of surveillance.

===Schools and prisons===

In &quot;New Jersey v. T. L. O.&quot; (1985), the Supreme Court ruled that searches in public schools do not require warrants, as long as the searching officers have reasonable grounds for believing the search will result in finding evidence of illegal activity. Similarly, in &quot;Samson v. California&quot; (2006), the Court ruled that government offices may be searched for evidence of work-related misconduct by government employees on similar grounds. Searches of prison cells are subject to no restraints relating to reasonableness or probable cause. However, in &quot;Safford Unified School District v. Redding&quot; (2009), the Court ruled that school officials violated the Fourth Amendment when they strip searched a student based only on another student&#x27;s claiming to have received drugs from her.

==Exclusionary rule==

One way courts enforce the Fourth Amendment is through the use of the exclusionary rule. The rule provides that evidence obtained through a violation of the Fourth Amendment is generally not admissible by the prosecution during the defendant&#x27;s criminal trial. The Court stated in &quot;Elkins v. United States&quot; (1960) that the rule&#x27;s function &quot;is to deter—to compel respect for the constitutional guaranty in the only effectively available way—by removing the incentive to disregard it.&quot;

The Court adopted the exclusionary rule in &quot;Weeks v. United States&quot; (1914), prior to which all evidence, no matter how seized, could be admitted in court. In &quot;Silverthorne Lumber Co. v. United States&quot; (1920) and &quot;Nardone v. United States&quot; (1939), the Court ruled that leads or other evidence resulting from illegally obtained evidence are also inadmissible in trials. Justice Felix Frankfurter described this secondary evidence in the &quot;Nardone&quot; decision as the &quot;fruit of the poisonous tree&quot;. The Supreme Court rejected incorporating the exclusionary rule by way of the Fourteenth Amendment in &quot;Wolf v. Colorado&quot; (1949), but &quot;Wolf&quot; was explicitly overruled in &quot;Mapp v. Ohio&quot; (1961), making the Fourth Amendment (including the exclusionary rule) applicable in state proceedings.

The exclusionary rule and its effectiveness have often been controversial, particularly since its 1961 application to state proceedings. Critics charge that the rule hampers police investigation and can result in freeing guilty parties convicted on reliable evidence; other critics say the rule has not been successful in deterring illegal police searches. Proponents argue that the number of criminal convictions overturned under the rule has been minimal and that no other effective mechanism exists to enforce the Fourth Amendment. In 1982, California passed a &quot;Victim&#x27;s Bill of Rights&quot; containing a provision to repeal the exclusionary rule; though the bill could not affect federally mandated rights under the Fourth Amendment, it blocked the state courts from expanding these protections further.

===Limitations===

Since 1974, the Supreme Court has repeatedly limited the exclusionary rule. In &quot;United States v. Calandra&quot; (1974), the Court ruled that grand juries may use illegally obtained evidence when questioning witnesses, because &quot;the damage to that institution from the unprecedented extension of the exclusionary rule outweighs the benefit of any possible incremental deterrent effect.&quot; Explaining the purpose of the rule, the Court said the rule &quot;is a judicially created remedy designed to safeguard Fourth Amendment rights generally through its deterrent effect, rather than a personal constitutional right of the party aggrieved.&quot;

Three cases in 1984 further restricted the exclusionary rule:
* In &quot;United States v. Leon&quot; (1984), the Court established the &quot;good faith&quot; exception to the rule, ruling that evidence seized by officers reasonably relying on a warrant was still admissible, even though the warrant was later found to be defective, unless an officer dishonestly or recklessly prepared an affidavit to seek a warrant, the issuing magistrate abandoned his neutrality, or the warrant lacked sufficient particularity.
* The Court determined in &quot;Nix v. Williams&quot; (1984) that &quot;fruit of the poisonous tree&quot; evidence could still be introduced if a prosecutor could demonstrate that it would have been an &quot;inevitable discovery&quot; of legitimate investigation.
* In &quot;Segura v. United States&quot; (1984), the Court ruled that evidence illegally found without a search warrant is admissible if the evidence is later found and legally seized based on information independent of the illegal search.

In &quot;Arizona v. Evans&quot; (1995) and &quot;Herring v. United States&quot; (2009), the Court ruled that the exclusionary rule does not apply to evidence found due to negligence regarding a government database, as long as the arresting police officer relied on that database in &quot;good faith&quot; and the negligence was not pervasive. In &quot;Davis v. United States&quot; (2011), the Court ruled that the exclusionary rule does not apply to a Fourth Amendment violation resulting from a reasonable reliance on binding appellate precedent. In &quot;Utah v. Strieff&quot; (2016), the Court ruled that evidence obtained from an unlawful police stop would not be excluded from court when the link between the stop and the evidence&#x27;s discovery was &quot;attenuated&quot; by the discovery of an outstanding warrant during the stop.

The Supreme Court has also held the exclusionary rule to not apply in the following circumstances:
* evidence illegally seized by a &quot;private actor&quot; (i.e., not a governmental employee)
* tax hearings
* evidence collected by U.S. Customs agents
* deportation hearings
* evidence seized by probation or parole officers
* probation or parole revocation hearings

==Metadata==

On December 16, 2013, in &quot;Klayman v. Obama&quot;, a United States district court ruled that the mass collection of metadata of Americans&#x27; telephone records by the National Security Agency probably violates the Fourth Amendment. The court granted a preliminary injunction, blocking the collection of phone data for two private plaintiffs and ordered the government to destroy any of their records that have been gathered. The court stayed the ruling pending a government appeal, recognizing the &quot;significant national security interests at stake in this case and the novelty of the constitutional issues.&quot;

However, in &quot;ACLU v. Clapper&quot;, a United States district court ruled that the U.S. government&#x27;s global telephone data-gathering system is needed to thwart potential terrorist attacks, and that it can work only if everyone&#x27;s calls are included. The court also ruled that Congress legally set up the program and it does not violate anyone&#x27;s constitutional rights. The court concluded that the telephone data being swept up by NSA did not belong to telephone users, but to the telephone companies. Also, the court held that when NSA obtains such data from the telephone companies, and then probes into it to find links between callers and potential terrorists, this further use of the data was not even a search under the Fourth Amendment, concluding that the controlling precedent is &quot;Smith v. Maryland&quot;, saying &quot;Smith&#x27;s bedrock holding is that an individual has no legitimate expectation of privacy in information provided to third parties.&quot; The American Civil Liberties Union declared on January 2, 2014, that it will appeal the ruling that NSA bulk phone record collection is legal. &quot;The government has a legitimate interest in tracking the associations of suspected terrorists, but tracking those associations does not require the government to subject every citizen to permanent surveillance,&quot; deputy ACLU legal director Jameel Jaffer said in a statement.

==See also==
* Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights
* Fourth Amendment Protection Act
* NSA warrantless surveillance (2001–07)#Fourth Amendment issues
* Parallel construction
* Privacy laws of the United States
* Special needs exception
* Section Eight of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
* &quot;subpoena ad testificandum&quot;
* &quot;subpoena duces tecum&quot;
==Notes==

Citations
==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==

* CRS Annotated Constitution: Fourth Amendment, Cornell University</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q231304" start="4" end="20" title="Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q231304" start="22" end="34" title="Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Amendment IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="43" end="69" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="85" end="99" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q647884" start="127" end="148" title="Search and seizure" label="searches and seizures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477326" start="183" end="191" title="Warrant (law)" label="warrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624821" start="256" end="270" title="probable cause" label="probable cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378574" start="798" end="819" title="Katz v. United States" label="Katz v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="838" end="851" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162859" start="1079" end="1093" title="consent search" label="consent search"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918213" start="1097" end="1119" title="Motor vehicle exception" label="motor vehicle searches"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200660" start="1121" end="1143" title="Plain view doctrine" label="evidence in plain view"/>
<link wikidata="Q514629" start="1145" end="1166" title="Exigent circumstance in United States law" label="exigent circumstances"/>
<link wikidata="Q4944648" start="1168" end="1183" title="Border search exception" label="border searches"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243198" start="1212" end="1229" title="exclusionary rule" label="exclusionary rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979540" start="1289" end="1311" title="Weeks v. United States" label="Weeks v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347572" start="1347" end="1355" title="evidence" label="evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q852633" start="1422" end="1434" title="Admissible evidence" label="inadmissible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192345" start="1548" end="1575" title="fruit of the poisonous tree" label="fruit of the poisonous tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q6028625" start="1606" end="1658" title="Inevitable discovery" label="inevitably would have been discovered by legal means"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="1720" end="1733" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q257855" start="1805" end="1820" title="Anti-Federalist" label="Anti-Federalist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1866" end="1875" title="Article Five of the United States Constitution#Proposing amendments" label="submitted"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1995" end="2003" title="Article Five of the United States Constitution#Ratification of amendments" label="ratified"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="2045" end="2061" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002253" start="2421" end="2457" title="Incorporation of the Bill of Rights" label="apply to state and local governments"/>
<link wikidata="Q6754149" start="2467" end="2479" title="Mapp v. Ohio" label="Mapp v. Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312127" start="2501" end="2519" title="Due Process Clause" label="Due Process Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="2527" end="2547" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449142" start="2708" end="2727" title="Semayne&amp;#x27;s case" label="Semayne&amp;#x27;s case"/>
<link wikidata="Q332435" start="2742" end="2757" title="Sir Edward Coke" label="Sir Edward Coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q333127" start="3383" end="3394" title="John Wilkes" label="John Wilkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6231825" start="3456" end="3467" title="John Entick" label="John Entick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270035" start="3507" end="3528" title="King&amp;#x27;s Messenger" label="King&amp;#x27;s Messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3760605" start="3599" end="3639" title="George Montagu-Dunk, 2nd Earl of Halifax" label="George Montagu-Dunk, 2nd Earl of Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3806" end="3839" title="The Monitor: Or, British Freeholder" label="The Monitor or British Freeholder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380529" start="4009" end="4028" title="Entick v Carrington" label="Entick v Carrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178387" start="4054" end="4080" title="Court of King&amp;#x27;s Bench (England)" label="Court of King&amp;#x27;s Bench"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376484" start="4090" end="4120" title="Charles Pratt, 1st Earl Camden" label="Charles Pratt, 1st Earl Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624821" start="4313" end="4327" title="probable cause" label="probable cause"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4636" end="4646" title="English law#Common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055643" start="4682" end="4698" title="Colonial history of the United States" label="Colonial America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3570117" start="5670" end="5688" title="writ of assistance" label="writ of assistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q131981" start="5887" end="5901" title="George II of Great Britain" label="King George II"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="6058" end="6068" title="George III of the United Kingdom" label="George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q557531" start="6175" end="6185" title="James Otis, Jr." label="James Otis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="6468" end="6478" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453540" start="6713" end="6747" title="Massachusetts General Court" label="Massachusetts colonial legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q944717" start="7124" end="7154" title="Virginia Declaration of Rights" label="Virginia Declaration of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="7340" end="7350" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q196171" start="7382" end="7412" title="Constitution of Massachusetts" label="the Massachusetts Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q493620" start="7735" end="7760" title="Articles of Confederation" label="Articles of Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q405475" start="7764" end="7789" title="Constitutional Convention (United States)" label="Constitutional Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q532329" start="7913" end="7925" title="George Mason" label="George Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q29556" start="8078" end="8093" title="civil liberties" label="civil liberties"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="8163" end="8176" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q162932" start="9143" end="9169" title="1st United States Congress" label="1st United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q219447" start="9338" end="9357" title="Bill of Rights 1689" label="Bill of Rights 1689"/>
<link wikidata="Q725907" start="10147" end="10164" title="Richard Henry Lee" label="Richard Henry Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q926871" start="10283" end="10298" title="direct taxation" label="direct taxation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="11574" end="11590" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="11830" end="11848" title="Federal government of the United States" label="federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585778" start="11948" end="11962" title="Gordon S. Wood" label="Gordon S. Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057024" start="12171" end="12194" title="Interstate Commerce Act" label="Interstate Commerce Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425088" start="12199" end="12220" title="Sherman Antitrust Act" label="Sherman Antitrust Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q940" start="12307" end="12315" title="narcotic" label="narcotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="12372" end="12390" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7431786" start="13182" end="13205" title="Schmerber v. California" label="Schmerber v. California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380529" start="13454" end="13473" title="Entick v Carrington" label="Entick v Carrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4952404" start="13497" end="13518" title="Boyd v. United States" label="Boyd v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7516733" start="13565" end="13591" title="Silverman v. United States" label="Silverman v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891622" start="13775" end="13793" title="Berger v. New York" label="Berger v. New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q11991268" start="13961" end="13986" title="New York Court of Appeals" label="New York Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q18386243" start="14558" end="14583" title="Camara v. Municipal Court of City and County of San Francisco" label="Camara v. Municipal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q97516280" start="14633" end="14649" title="Torres v. Madrid" label="Torres v. Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6754149" start="14830" end="14842" title="Mapp v. Ohio" label="Mapp v. Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002253" start="14907" end="14928" title="Incorporation of the Bill of Rights" label="applies to the states"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312127" start="14943" end="14961" title="Due Process Clause" label="Due Process Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="14969" end="14989" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624821" start="15150" end="15164" title="probable cause" label="probable cause"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15502" end="15527" title="United States v. Jacobsen" label="United States v. Jacobsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477326" start="16490" end="16497" title="Warrant (law)" label="warrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q454263" start="17038" end="17049" title="Affidavit" label="sworn by it"/>
<link wikidata="Q310229" start="17067" end="17099" title="Perjury" label="accountable to the issuing court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5071206" start="17484" end="17502" title="Chandler v. Miller" label="Chandler v. Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705195" start="18087" end="18100" title="Terry v. Ohio" label="Terry v. Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7095006" start="18469" end="18484" title="Ontario v. Quon" label="Ontario v. Quon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11917765" start="19000" end="19015" title="property rights" label="property rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7088429" start="19296" end="19321" title="Olmstead v. United States" label="Olmstead v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7516733" start="19483" end="19509" title="Silverman v. United States" label="Silverman v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378574" start="19771" end="19792" title="Katz v. United States" label="Katz v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q8354932" start="19898" end="19914" title="right to privacy" label="right to privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143785" start="19986" end="20001" title="telephone booth" label="telephone booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900682" start="20375" end="20385" title="Reasonable person" label="reasonable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359993" start="20395" end="20409" title="Potter Stewart" label="Potter Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858106" start="20687" end="20709" title="expectation of privacy" label="expectation of privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545405" start="21195" end="21212" title="Smith v. Maryland" label="Smith v. Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q19023931" start="21875" end="21901" title="Carpenter v. United States" label="Carpenter v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q15128459" start="22978" end="23000" title="United States v. Jones (2012)" label="United States v. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="23195" end="23198" title="Global Positioning System" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809028" start="23310" end="23316" title="Bailment" label="bailee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153728" start="23431" end="23439" title="trespass" label="trespass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5461763" start="23614" end="23633" title="Florida v. Jardines" label="Florida v. Jardines"/>
<link wikidata="Q38523" start="23677" end="23690" title="detection dog" label="detection dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705195" start="23938" end="23951" title="Terry v. Ohio" label="Terry v. Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q15209345" start="24616" end="24638" title="Terry stop" label="&amp;quot;Terry&amp;quot; stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5461768" start="24848" end="24864" title="Florida v. Royer" label="Florida v. Royer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195627" start="25333" end="25342" title="curtilage" label="curtilage"/>
<link wikidata="Q499094" start="25347" end="25364" title="personal property" label="personal property"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071447" start="25746" end="25761" title="Detention (imprisonment)" label="brief detention"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893393" start="26284" end="26311" title="United States v. Mendenhall" label="United States v. Mendenhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q97516280" start="26599" end="26615" title="Torres v. Madrid" label="Torres v. Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5461757" start="26778" end="26796" title="Florida v. Bostick" label="Florida v. Bostick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2516332" start="27457" end="27469" title="traffic stop" label="traffic stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q15209345" start="27621" end="27643" title="Terry stop" label="&amp;quot;Terry&amp;quot; stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q15147978" start="28113" end="28129" title="Maryland v. King" label="Maryland v. King"/>
<link wikidata="Q285223" start="28206" end="28209" title="Genetic testing" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253465" start="28516" end="28534" title="Delaware v. Prouse" label="Delaware v. Prouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893390" start="29209" end="29241" title="United States v. Martinez-Fuerte" label="United States v. Martinez-Fuerte"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837534" start="29331" end="29369" title="Michigan Dept. of State Police v. Sitz" label="Michigan Dept. of State Police v. Sitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q16847260" start="29456" end="29475" title="Illinois v. Lidster" label="Illinois v. Lidster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123726" start="29569" end="29599" title="City of Indianapolis v. Edmond" label="City of Indianapolis v. Edmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594605" start="29860" end="29870" title="magistrate" label="magistrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001059" start="29988" end="29992" title="writ" label="writ"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891622" start="31196" end="31214" title="Berger v. New York" label="Berger v. New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046639" start="32201" end="32225" title="Carroll v. United States" label="Carroll v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32371" end="32394" title="Dumbra v. United States" label="Dumbra v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5999931" start="32992" end="33009" title="Illinois v. Gates" label="Illinois v. Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245643" start="33116" end="33145" title="totality of the circumstances" label="totality of the circumstances"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686000" start="33216" end="33221" title="Party (law)" label="party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7431868" start="33512" end="33537" title="Schneckloth v. Bustamonte" label="Schneckloth v. Bustamonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q240340" start="33703" end="33725" title="Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fifth Amendment rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q312199" start="33776" end="33803" title="Miranda warning" label="&amp;quot;Miranda&amp;quot; warning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893391" start="33844" end="33868" title="United States v. Matlock" label="United States v. Matlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5547978" start="34023" end="34042" title="Georgia v. Randolph" label="Georgia v. Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q5999940" start="34344" end="34365" title="Illinois v. Rodriguez" label="Illinois v. Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167477" start="34924" end="34949" title="Coolidge v. New Hampshire" label="Coolidge v. New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791501" start="35238" end="35254" title="Arizona v. Hicks" label="Arizona v. Hicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5746345" start="35843" end="35866" title="Hester v. United States" label="Hester v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087962" start="36085" end="36108" title="Oliver v. United States" label="Oliver v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195627" start="36510" end="36519" title="curtilage" label="curtilage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6422786" start="37895" end="37909" title="knock and talk" label="knock and talk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705195" start="38325" end="38338" title="Terry v. Ohio" label="Terry v. Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7431786" start="38864" end="38887" title="Schmerber v. California" label="Schmerber v. California"/>
<link wikidata="Q886470" start="38979" end="39000" title="blood alcohol content" label="blood alcohol content"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879919" start="39054" end="39073" title="Missouri v. McNeely" label="Missouri v. McNeely"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969125" start="39094" end="39110" title="Warden v. Hayden" label="Warden v. Hayden"/>
<link wikidata="Q43082145" start="40144" end="40163" title="Collins v. Virginia" label="Collins v. Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195627" start="40298" end="40307" title="curtilage" label="curtilage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791500" start="40319" end="40334" title="Arizona v. Gant" label="Arizona v. Gant"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="40825" end="40835" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q17112666" start="41443" end="41468" title="Trupiano v. United States" label="Trupiano v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q17112776" start="41834" end="41861" title="United States v. Rabinowitz" label="United States v. Rabinowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099332" start="42235" end="42255" title="Chimel v. California" label="Chimel v. California"/>
<link wikidata="Q17107826" start="42460" end="42479" title="Riley v. California" label="Riley v. California"/>
<link wikidata="Q368804" start="43446" end="43480" title="U.S. Customs and Border Protection" label="U.S. Customs and Border Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641851" start="43700" end="43722" title="United States courts of appeals" label="U.S. Courts of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q250463" start="43731" end="43737" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit" label="Fourth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358778" start="43742" end="43747" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit" label="Ninth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2791142" start="43999" end="44035" title="United States v. U.S. District Court" label="United States v. U.S. District Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495341" start="44377" end="44440" title="United States Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court of Review" label="United States Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court of Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931325" start="45389" end="45416" title="Board of Education v. Earls" label="Board of Education v. Earls"/>
<link wikidata="Q16847260" start="45769" end="45788" title="Illinois v. Lidster" label="Illinois v. Lidster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266169" start="46069" end="46095" title="telecommunications carrier" label="telecommunications carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468266" start="46173" end="46179" title="Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 Amendments Act of 2008" label="a bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437106" start="46193" end="46230" title="Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act" label="Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856249" start="46313" end="46335" title="New Jersey v. T. L. O." label="New Jersey v. T. L. O."/>
<link wikidata="Q1080794" start="46391" end="46405" title="Public education" label="public schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q16961166" start="46587" end="46607" title="Samson v. California" label="Samson v. California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398718" start="46880" end="46922" title="Safford Unified School District v. Redding" label="Safford Unified School District v. Redding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778449" start="47015" end="47029" title="strip searched" label="strip searched"/>
<link wikidata="Q852633" start="47334" end="47344" title="Admissible evidence" label="admissible"/>
<link wikidata="Q15125256" start="47434" end="47457" title="Elkins v. United States" label="Elkins v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979540" start="47706" end="47728" title="Weeks v. United States" label="Weeks v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7516820" start="47831" end="47871" title="Silverthorne Lumber Co. v. United States" label="Silverthorne Lumber Co. v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q104876872" start="47895" end="47919" title="Nardone v. United States" label="Nardone v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403472" start="48063" end="48080" title="Felix Frankfurter" label="Felix Frankfurter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192345" start="48164" end="48191" title="fruit of the poisonous tree" label="fruit of the poisonous tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q8029958" start="48306" end="48322" title="Wolf v. Colorado" label="Wolf v. Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="49059" end="49069" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020876" start="49085" end="49113" title="California Proposition 8 (1982)" label="Victim&amp;#x27;s Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49438" end="49463" title="United States v. Calandra" label="United States v. Calandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323789" start="49499" end="49511" title="grand juries" label="grand juries"/>
<link wikidata="Q15908251" start="50084" end="50105" title="United States v. Leon" label="United States v. Leon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17111138" start="50557" end="50572" title="Nix v. Williams" label="Nix v. Williams"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50800" end="50823" title="Segura v. United States" label="Segura v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791499" start="51039" end="51055" title="Arizona v. Evans" label="Arizona v. Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744122" start="51079" end="51103" title="Herring v. United States" label="Herring v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242010" start="51382" end="51404" title="Davis v. United States (2011)" label="Davis v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q24893881" start="51587" end="51602" title="Utah v. Strieff" label="Utah v. Strieff"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156924" start="52285" end="52301" title="Klayman v. Obama" label="Klayman v. Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614849" start="52311" end="52339" title="United States district court" label="United States district court"/>
<link wikidata="Q180160" start="52374" end="52382" title="metadata" label="metadata"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010882" start="52897" end="52912" title="ACLU v. Clapper" label="ACLU v. Clapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545405" start="53691" end="53708" title="Smith v. Maryland" label="Smith v. Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q21637" start="53873" end="53903" title="American Civil Liberties Union" label="American Civil Liberties Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257640" start="54313" end="54365" title="Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights" label="Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981276" start="54368" end="54399" title="Fourth Amendment Protection Act" label="Fourth Amendment Protection Act"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54402" end="54464" title="NSA warrantless surveillance (2001–07)#Fourth Amendment issues" label="NSA warrantless surveillance (2001–07)#Fourth Amendment issues"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143689" start="54467" end="54488" title="Parallel construction" label="Parallel construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q839447" start="54491" end="54524" title="Privacy laws of the United States" label="Privacy laws of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q97359297" start="54527" end="54550" title="Special needs exception" label="Special needs exception"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865704" start="54553" end="54613" title="Section Eight of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms" label="Section Eight of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q883270" start="54622" end="54647" title="subpoena ad testificandum" label="subpoena ad testificandum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631814" start="54662" end="54682" title="subpoena duces tecum" label="subpoena duces tecum"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="54813" end="54831" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31658" wikidata="Q246624" url="?curid=31658" title="Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution">
<text>The Sixth Amendment (Amendment VI) to the United States Constitution sets forth rights related to criminal prosecutions. It was ratified in 1791 as part of the United States Bill of Rights. The Supreme Court has applied all but one of this amendment&#x27;s protections to the states through the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.

The Sixth Amendment guarantees criminal defendants nine different rights, including the right to a speedy and public trial by an impartial jury consisting of jurors from the state and district in which the crime was alleged to have been committed. Under the impartial jury requirement, jurors must be unbiased, and the jury must consist of a representative cross-section of the community. The right to a jury applies only to offenses in which the penalty is imprisonment for longer than six months. In &quot;Barker v. Wingo&quot;, the Supreme Court articulated a balancing test to determine whether a defendant&#x27;s right to a speedy trial had been violated. It has additionally held that the requirement of a public trial is not absolute and that both the government and the defendant can in some cases request a closed trial.

The Sixth Amendment requires that criminal defendants be given notice of the nature and cause of accusations against them. The amendment&#x27;s Confrontation Clause gives criminal defendants the right to confront and cross-examine witnesses, while the Compulsory Process Clause gives criminal defendants the right to call their own witnesses and, in some cases, compel witnesses to testify. The Assistance of Counsel Clause grants criminal defendants the right to be assisted by counsel. In &quot;Gideon v. Wainwright&quot; (1963) and subsequent cases, the Supreme Court held that a public defender must be provided to criminal defendants unable to afford an attorney in all trials where the defendant faces the possibility of imprisonment. The Supreme Court has incorporated (protected at the state level) all Sixth Amendment protections except one: having a jury trial in the same state and district that the crime was committed.

==Text==

==Rights secured==
===Speedy trial===

Criminal defendants have the right to a speedy trial. In &quot;Barker v. Wingo&quot;, , the Supreme Court laid down a four-part case-by-case balancing test for determining whether the defendant&#x27;s speedy trial right has been violated. The four factors are:
* &quot;Length of delay&quot;. The Court did not explicitly rule that any absolute time limit applies. However, it gave the example that the delay for &quot;ordinary street crime is considerably less than for a serious, complex conspiracy charge.&quot;
* &quot;Reason for the delay&quot;. The prosecution may not excessively delay the trial for its own advantage, but a trial may be delayed to secure the presence of an absent witness or other practical considerations (e.g., change of venue).
* &quot;Time and manner in which the defendant has asserted his right&quot;. If a defendant agrees to the delay when it works to his own benefit, he cannot later claim he has been unduly delayed.
* &quot;Degree of prejudice to the defendant which the delay has caused&quot;.

In &quot;Strunk v. United States&quot;, , the Supreme Court ruled that if the reviewing court finds that a defendant&#x27;s right to a speedy trial was violated, then the indictment must be dismissed and any conviction overturned. The Court held that, since the delayed trial is the state action which violates the defendant&#x27;s rights, no other remedy would be appropriate. Thus, a reversal or dismissal of a criminal case on speedy trial grounds means no further prosecution for the alleged offense can take place.

===Public trial===

In &quot;Sheppard v. Maxwell&quot;, , the Supreme Court ruled that the right to a public trial is not absolute. In cases where excess publicity would serve to undermine the defendant&#x27;s right to due process, limitations can be put on public access to the proceedings. According to &quot;Press-Enterprise Co. v. Superior Court&quot;, , trials can be closed at the behest of the government if there is &quot;an overriding interest based on findings that closure is essential to preserve higher values and is narrowly tailored to serve that interest&quot;. The accused may also request a closure of the trial; though, it must be demonstrated that &quot;first, there is a substantial probability that the defendant&#x27;s right to a fair trial will be prejudiced by publicity that closure would prevent, and second, reasonable alternatives to closure cannot adequately protect the defendant&#x27;s right to a fair trial.&quot;

===Impartial jury===

The right to a jury has always depended on the nature of the offense with which the defendant is charged. Petty offenses—those punishable by imprisonment for no more than six months—are not covered by the jury requirement. Even where multiple petty offenses are concerned, the total time of imprisonment possibly exceeding six months, the right to a jury trial does not exist. Also, in the United States, except for serious offenses (such as murder), minors are usually tried in a juvenile court, which lessens the sentence allowed, but forfeits the right to a jury.

Originally, the Supreme Court held that the Sixth Amendment right to a jury trial indicated a right to &quot;a trial by jury as understood and applied at common law, and includes all the essential elements as they were recognized in this country and England when the Constitution was adopted.&quot; Therefore, it was held that federal criminal juries had to be composed of twelve persons and that verdicts had to be unanimous, as was customary in England.

When, under the Fourteenth Amendment, the Supreme Court extended the right to a trial by jury to defendants in state courts, it re-examined some of the standards. It has been held that twelve came to be the number of jurors by &quot;historical accident&quot;, and that a jury of six would be sufficient, but anything less would deprive the defendant of a right to trial by jury. In &quot;Ramos v. Louisiana&quot; (2020), the Court ruled that the Sixth Amendment mandates unanimity in all federal and state criminal jury trials.

====Impartiality====

The Sixth Amendment requires juries to be impartial. Impartiality has been interpreted as requiring individual jurors to be unbiased. At &quot;voir dire&quot;, each side may question potential jurors to determine any bias, and challenge them if the same is found; the court determines the validity of these challenges for cause. Defendants may not challenge a conviction because a challenge for cause was denied incorrectly if they had the opportunity to use peremptory challenges.

In &quot;Peña-Rodriguez v. Colorado&quot; (2017), the Supreme Court ruled that the Sixth Amendment requires a court in a criminal trial to investigate whether a jury&#x27;s guilty verdict was based on racial bias. For a guilty verdict to be set aside based on the racial bias of a juror, the defendant must prove that the racial bias &quot;was a significant motivating factor in the juror&#x27;s vote to convict&quot;.

====Venire of juries====

Another factor in determining the impartiality of the jury is the nature of the panel, or venire, from which the jurors are selected. Venires must represent a fair cross-section of the community; the defendant might establish that the requirement was violated by showing that the allegedly excluded group is a &quot;distinctive&quot; one in the community, that the representation of such a group in venires is unreasonable and unfair in regard to the number of persons belonging to such a group, and that the under-representation is caused by a systematic exclusion in the selection process. Thus, in &quot;Taylor v. Louisiana&quot;, , the Supreme Court invalidated a state law that exempted women who had not made a declaration of willingness to serve from jury service, while not doing the same for men.

====Sentencing====

In &quot;Apprendi v. New Jersey&quot;, , and &quot;Blakely v. Washington&quot;, , the Supreme Court ruled that a criminal defendant has a right to a jury trial not only on the question of guilt or innocence, but also regarding any fact used to increase the defendant&#x27;s sentence beyond the maximum otherwise allowed by statutes or sentencing guidelines. In &quot;Alleyne v. United States&quot;, , the Court expanded on &quot;Apprendi&quot; and &quot;Blakely&quot; by ruling that a defendant&#x27;s right to a jury applies to any fact that would increase a defendant&#x27;s sentence beyond the minimum otherwise required by statute. In &quot;United States v. Haymond&quot;, 588 U.S. ___ (2019), the Court decided a jury is required if a federal supervised release revocation would carry a mandatory minimum prison sentence.

===Vicinage===

Article III, Section 2 of the Constitution requires defendants be tried by juries and in the state in which the crime was committed. The Sixth Amendment requires the jury to be selected from judicial districts ascertained by statute. In &quot;Beavers v. Henkel&quot;, , the Supreme Court ruled that the place where the offense is charged to have occurred determines a trial&#x27;s location. Where multiple districts are alleged to have been locations of the crime, any of them may be chosen for the trial. In cases of offenses not committed in any state (for example, offenses committed at sea), the place of trial may be determined by the Congress. Unlike other Sixth Amendment guarantees, the Court has not incorporated the vicinage right.

===Notice of accusation===

A criminal defendant has the right to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation against them. Therefore, an indictment must allege all the ingredients of the crime to such a degree of precision that it would allow the accused to assert double jeopardy if the same charges are brought up in subsequent prosecution. The Supreme Court held in &quot;United States v. Carll&quot;, , that &quot;in an indictment... it is not sufficient to set forth the offense in the words of the statute, unless those words of themselves fully, directly, and expressly, without any uncertainty or ambiguity, set forth all the elements necessary to constitute the offense intended to be punished.&quot; Vague wording, even if taken directly from a statute, does not suffice. However, the government is not required to hand over written copies of the indictment free of charge.

===Confrontation===

The Confrontation Clause relates to the common law rule preventing the admission of hearsay, that is to say, testimony by one witness as to the statements and observations of another person to prove that the statement or observation was true. The rationale was that the defendant had no opportunity to challenge the credibility of and cross-examine the person making the statements. Certain exceptions to the hearsay rule have been permitted; for instance, admissions by the defendant are admissible, as are dying declarations. Nevertheless, in &quot;California v. Green&quot;, , the Supreme Court has held that the hearsay rule is not the same as the Confrontation Clause. Hearsay is admissible under certain circumstances. For example, in &quot;Bruton v. United States&quot;, , the Supreme Court ruled that while a defendant&#x27;s out of court statements were admissible in proving the defendant&#x27;s guilt, they were inadmissible hearsay against another defendant. Hearsay may, in some circumstances, be admitted though it is not covered by one of the long-recognized exceptions. For example, prior testimony may sometimes be admitted if the witness is unavailable. However, in &quot;Crawford v. Washington&quot;, , the Supreme Court increased the scope of the Confrontation Clause by ruling that &quot;testimonial&quot; out-of-court statements are inadmissible if the accused did not have the opportunity to cross-examine that accuser and that accuser is unavailable at trial. In &quot;Davis v. Washington&quot; , the Court ruled that &quot;testimonial&quot; refers to any statement that an objectively reasonable person in the declarant&#x27;s situation would believe likely to be used in court. In &quot;Melendez-Diaz v. Massachusetts&quot;, , and &quot;Bullcoming v. New Mexico&quot;, , the Court ruled that admitting a lab chemist&#x27;s analysis into evidence, without having him testify, violated the Confrontation Clause. In &quot;Michigan v. Bryant&quot;, , the Court ruled that the &quot;primary purpose&quot; of a shooting victim&#x27;s statement as to who shot him, and the police&#x27;s reason for questioning him, each had to be objectively determined. If the &quot;primary purpose&quot; was for dealing with an &quot;ongoing emergency&quot;, then any such statement was not testimonial and so the Confrontation Clause would not require the person making that statement to testify in order for that statement to be admitted into evidence. The right to confront and cross-examine witnesses also applies to physical evidence; the prosecution must present physical evidence to the jury, providing the defense ample opportunity to cross-examine its validity and meaning. Prosecution generally may not refer to evidence without first presenting it. In &quot;Hemphill v. New York&quot;, , the Court ruled the accused had to be given an opportunity to cross-examine a witness called to rebut the accused&#x27;s defense, even if the trial judge rules that defense to be misleading.

In the late 20th and early 21st century this clause became an issue in the use of the silent witness rule.

===Compulsory process===

The Compulsory Process Clause gives any criminal defendant the right to call witnesses in his favor. If any such witness refuses to testify, that witness may be compelled to do so by the court at the request of the defendant. However, in some cases the court may refuse to permit a defense witness to testify. For example, if a defense lawyer fails to notify the prosecution of the identity of a witness to gain a tactical advantage, that witness may be precluded from testifying.

===Assistance of counsel===

A criminal defendant has the right to be assisted by counsel.

In &quot;Powell v. Alabama&quot;, , the Supreme Court ruled that &quot;in a capital case, where the defendant is unable to employ counsel, and is incapable adequately of making his own defense because of ignorance, feeble mindedness, illiteracy, or the like, it is the duty of the court, whether requested or not, to assign counsel for him.&quot; In &quot;Johnson v. Zerbst&quot;, , the Supreme Court ruled that in all federal cases, counsel would have to be appointed for defendants who were too poor to hire their own.

In 1961, the Court extended the rule that applied in federal courts to state courts. It held in &quot;Hamilton v. Alabama&quot;, , that counsel had to be provided at no expense to defendants in capital cases when they so requested, even if there was no &quot;ignorance, feeble mindedness, illiteracy, or the like&quot;. &quot;Gideon v. Wainwright&quot;, , ruled that counsel must be provided to indigent defendants in all felony cases, overruling &quot;Betts v. Brady&quot;, , in which the Court ruled that state courts had to appoint counsel only when the defendant demonstrated &quot;special circumstances&quot; requiring the assistance of counsel. Under &quot;Argersinger v. Hamlin&quot;, , counsel must be appointed in any case resulting in a sentence of actual imprisonment. Regarding sentences not immediately leading to imprisonment, the Court in &quot;Scott v. Illinois&quot;, , ruled that counsel did not need to be appointed, but in &quot;Alabama v. Shelton&quot;, , the Court held that a suspended sentence that may result in incarceration cannot be imposed if the defendant did not have counsel at trial.

As stated in &quot;Brewer v. Williams&quot;, , the right to counsel &quot;[means] at least that a person is entitled to the help of a lawyer at or after the time that judicial proceedings have been initiated against him, whether by formal charge, preliminary hearing, indictment, information, or arraignment.&quot; &quot;Brewer&quot; goes on to conclude that once adversary proceedings have begun against a defendant, he has a right to legal assistance when the government interrogates him and that when a defendant is arrested, &quot;arraigned on [an arrest] warrant before a judge&quot;, and &quot;committed by the court to confinement&quot;, &quot;[t]here can be no doubt that judicial proceedings ha[ve] been initiated.&quot;

====Self-representation====

A criminal defendant may represent himself, unless a court deems the defendant to be incompetent to waive the right to counsel.

In &quot;Faretta v. California&quot;, , the Supreme Court recognized a defendant&#x27;s right to &quot;pro se&quot; representation. However, under &quot;Godinez v. Moran&quot;, , a court that believes the defendant is less than fully competent to represent himself can require that defendant to be assisted by counsel. In &quot;Martinez v. Court of Appeal of California&quot;, , the Supreme Court ruled the right to &quot;pro se&quot; representation did not apply to appellate courts. In &quot;Indiana v. Edwards&quot;, 554 U.S. 164 (2008), the Court ruled that a criminal defendant could be simultaneously competent to stand trial, but not competent to represent himself.

In &quot;Bounds v. Smith&quot;, , the Supreme Court held that the constitutional right of &quot;meaningful access to the courts&quot; can be satisfied by counsel or access to legal materials. &quot;Bounds&quot; has been interpreted by several United States courts of appeals to mean a &quot;pro se&quot; defendant does not have a constitutional right to access a prison law library to research his defense when access to the courts has been provided through appointed counsel.

==See also==
* Trial &quot;in absentia&quot;
* United States constitutional criminal procedure
* Zone of Death (Yellowstone)

==References==

==External links==
* Kilman, Johnny and George Costello (Eds.). (2000). &quot;The Constitution of the United States of America: Analysis and Interpretation&quot;.
* CRS Annotated Constitution: Sixth Amendment
* Chin, Gabriel and Scott Wells. (1998). &quot;Can a Reasonable Doubt have an Unreasonable Price? Limitations on Attorneys Fees in Criminal Cases&quot;, 41 &quot;Boston College Law Review&quot; 1.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q246624" start="4" end="19" title="Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Sixth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q246624" start="21" end="33" title="Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Amendment VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="42" end="68" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="160" end="188" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="United States Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="194" end="207" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002253" start="212" end="219" title="Incorporation of the Bill of Rights" label="applied"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="295" end="341" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution#Due Process Clause" label="Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258032" start="454" end="466" title="public trial" label="public trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q6315147" start="483" end="487" title="Juries in the United States" label="jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q4860977" start="852" end="867" title="Barker v. Wingo" label="Barker v. Wingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4850012" start="907" end="921" title="balancing test" label="balancing test"/>
<link wikidata="Q7063001" start="1238" end="1244" title="notice" label="notice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160294" start="1319" end="1339" title="Confrontation Clause" label="Confrontation Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157242" start="1427" end="1452" title="Compulsory Process Clause" label="Compulsory Process Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q16243182" start="1570" end="1598" title="Assistance of Counsel Clause" label="Assistance of Counsel Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559684" start="1672" end="1692" title="Gideon v. Wainwright" label="Gideon v. Wainwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q21016051" start="1758" end="1773" title="Public defender (United States)" label="public defender"/>
<link wikidata="Q4860977" start="2220" end="2235" title="Barker v. Wingo" label="Barker v. Wingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="2249" end="2262" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q4850012" start="2298" end="2312" title="balancing test" label="balancing test"/>
<link wikidata="Q10669784" start="2894" end="2909" title="change of venue" label="change of venue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494539" start="3738" end="3757" title="Sheppard v. Maxwell" label="Sheppard v. Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q132821" start="5121" end="5127" title="murder" label="murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q170079" start="5130" end="5136" title="Minor (law)" label="minors"/>
<link wikidata="Q468501" start="5160" end="5174" title="juvenile court" label="juvenile court"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="5401" end="5411" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="5497" end="5504" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="5720" end="5740" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q96401202" start="6092" end="6110" title="Ramos v. Louisiana" label="Ramos v. Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322999" start="6398" end="6407" title="voir dire" label="voir dire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167841" start="6714" end="6734" title="peremptory challenge" label="peremptory challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q29098018" start="6747" end="6773" title="Peña-Rodriguez v. Colorado" label="Peña-Rodriguez v. Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q7690204" start="7791" end="7810" title="Taylor v. Louisiana" label="Taylor v. Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781695" start="8020" end="8042" title="Apprendi v. New Jersey" label="Apprendi v. New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16827558" start="8062" end="8083" title="Blakely v. Washington" label="Blakely v. Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="8097" end="8110" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q16827432" start="8378" end="8402" title="Alleyne v. United States" label="Alleyne v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q65069867" start="8656" end="8680" title="United States v. Haymond" label="United States v. Haymond"/>
<link wikidata="Q13966" start="8751" end="8777" title="United States federal probation and supervised release" label="federal supervised release"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8855" end="8877" title="Article Three of the United States Constitution#Section 2: Judicial power, jurisdiction, and trial by jury" label="Article III, Section 2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9098" end="9115" title="Beavers v. Henkel" label="Beavers v. Henkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17310301" start="9746" end="9756" title="indictment" label="indictment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253920" start="9874" end="9889" title="double jeopardy" label="double jeopardy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9984" end="10006" title="United States v. Carll" label="United States v. Carll"/>
<link wikidata="Q17164755" start="10599" end="10606" title="Hearsay in United States law" label="hearsay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11066" end="11085" title="California v. Green" label="California v. Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q19091886" start="11262" end="11285" title="Bruton v. United States" label="Bruton v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182934" start="11705" end="11727" title="Crawford v. Washington" label="Crawford v. Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242011" start="12008" end="12027" title="Davis v. Washington" label="Davis v. Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6812174" start="12228" end="12258" title="Melendez-Diaz v. Massachusetts" label="Melendez-Diaz v. Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996700" start="12278" end="12302" title="Bullcoming v. New Mexico" label="Bullcoming v. New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q593644" start="12345" end="12363" title="Chemist" label="lab chemist&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837845" start="12460" end="12478" title="Michigan v. Bryant" label="Michigan v. Bryant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900682" start="12664" end="12675" title="Reasonable person" label="objectively"/>
<link wikidata="Q117459828" start="13288" end="13308" title="Hemphill v. New York" label="Hemphill v. New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7514775" start="13596" end="13615" title="silent witness rule" label="silent witness rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236102" start="14227" end="14244" title="Powell v. Alabama" label="Powell v. Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q6268507" start="14574" end="14591" title="Johnson v. Zerbst" label="Johnson v. Zerbst"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645283" start="14842" end="14861" title="Hamilton v. Alabama (1961)" label="Hamilton v. Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559684" start="15066" end="15086" title="Gideon v. Wainwright" label="Gideon v. Wainwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898664" start="15193" end="15207" title="Betts v. Brady" label="Betts v. Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789525" start="15403" end="15424" title="Argersinger v. Hamlin" label="Argersinger v. Hamlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437575" start="15600" end="15617" title="Scott v. Illinois" label="Scott v. Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705390" start="15689" end="15707" title="Alabama v. Shelton" label="Alabama v. Shelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4737759" start="15739" end="15757" title="suspended sentence" label="suspended sentence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4962671" start="15877" end="15895" title="Brewer v. Williams" label="Brewer v. Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434995" start="16756" end="16777" title="Faretta v. California" label="Faretta v. California"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105810" start="16900" end="16916" title="Godinez v. Moran" label="Godinez v. Moran"/>
<link wikidata="Q6777126" start="17075" end="17116" title="Martinez v. Court of Appeal of California" label="Martinez v. Court of Appeal of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q16848272" start="17241" end="17259" title="Indiana v. Edwards" label="Indiana v. Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950008" start="17430" end="17445" title="Bounds v. Smith" label="Bounds v. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641851" start="17664" end="17695" title="United States courts of appeals" label="United States courts of appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q336289" start="17914" end="17943" title="Trial in absentia" label="Trial &amp;quot;in absentia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892396" start="17946" end="17993" title="United States constitutional criminal procedure" label="United States constitutional criminal procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q60745558" start="17996" end="18023" title="Zone of Death (Yellowstone)" label="Zone of Death (Yellowstone)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31659" wikidata="Q261204" url="?curid=31659" title="Seventh Amendment to the United States Constitution">
<text>The Seventh Amendment (Amendment VII) to the United States Constitution is part of the Bill of Rights. This amendment codifies the right to a jury trial in certain civil cases and inhibits courts from overturning a jury&#x27;s findings of fact.

An early version of the Seventh Amendment was introduced in Congress in 1789 by James Madison, along with the other amendments, in response to Anti-Federalist objections to the new Constitution. Congress proposed a revised version of the Seventh Amendment to the states on September 28, 1789, and by December 15, 1791, the necessary three-quarters of the states had ratified it.

The Seventh Amendment is generally considered one of the more straightforward amendments of the Bill of Rights. While the Seventh Amendment&#x27;s provision for jury trials in civil cases has never been incorporated (applied to the states), almost every state has a provision for jury trials in civil cases in its constitution. The prohibition of overturning a jury&#x27;s findings of fact applies to federal cases, state cases involving federal law, and to review of state cases by federal courts. &quot;United States v. Wonson&quot; (1812) established the &quot;historical test&quot;, which interpreted the amendment as relying on English common law to determine whether a jury trial was necessary in a civil suit. The amendment thus does not guarantee trial by jury in cases under maritime law, in lawsuits against the government itself, and for many parts of patent claims. In all other cases, the jury can be waived by consent of the parties.

The amendment additionally guarantees a minimum of six members for a jury in a civil trial. The amendment&#x27;s twenty-dollar threshold has not been the subject of much scholarly or judicial writing and still remains applicable despite the inflation that has occurred since the late 18th century ($20 in 1791 is ; $20 in 1800 was convertible to a Troy ounce of gold).

== Text ==

== Background ==

After several years of comparatively weak government under the Articles of Confederation, a Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia proposed a new constitution on September 17, 1787, featuring a stronger chief executive and other changes. George Mason, a Constitutional Convention delegate and the drafter of Virginia&#x27;s Declaration of Rights, proposed that a bill of rights listing and guaranteeing civil liberties be included. Other delegates—including future Bill of Rights drafter James Madison—disagreed, arguing that existing state guarantees of civil liberties were sufficient and any attempt to enumerate individual rights risked implying the federal government had power to violate every other right (this concern eventually led to the Ninth and Tenth Amendments). After a brief debate, Mason&#x27;s proposal was defeated by a unanimous vote of the state delegations. In the final days of the convention, North Carolina delegate Hugh Williamson proposed a guarantee of trial by jury in federal civil cases, but a motion to add this guarantee was also defeated.

However, adoption of the Constitution required that nine of the thirteen states ratify it in state conventions. Opposition to ratification (&quot;Anti-Federalism&quot;) was partly based on the Constitution&#x27;s lack of adequate guarantees for civil liberties. Supporters of the Constitution in states where popular sentiment was against ratification (including Virginia, Massachusetts, and New York) successfully proposed that their state conventions both ratify the Constitution and call for the addition of a bill of rights.

One charge of the Anti-Federalists was that giving the U.S. Supreme Court jurisdiction &quot;both as to law and fact&quot; would allow it to deny the findings of jury trials in civil cases. Responding to these concerns, five state ratification conventions recommended a constitutional amendment guaranteeing the right to jury trial in civil cases.

== Proposal and ratification ==


In the 1st United States Congress, following the state legislatures&#x27; request, James Madison proposed twenty constitutional amendments based on state bills of rights and English sources such as the Bill of Rights 1689. Among them was an amendment protecting findings of fact in civil cases exceeding a certain dollar value from judicial review. Madison proposed that this amendment should be added directly to Article III, though Congress later determined to add the proposed Bill of Rights to the end of the Constitution, leaving the original text intact. Congress also reduced Madison&#x27;s proposed twenty amendments to twelve, and these were proposed to the states for ratification on September 25, 1789.

By the time the Bill of Rights was submitted to the states for ratification, opinions had shifted in both parties. Many Federalists, who had previously opposed a Bill of Rights, now supported the Bill as a means of silencing the Anti-Federalists&#x27; most effective criticism. Many Anti-Federalists, in contrast, now opposed it, realizing the Bill&#x27;s adoption would greatly lessen the chances of a second constitutional convention, which they desired. Anti-Federalists such as Richard Henry Lee also argued that the Bill left the most objectionable portions of the Constitution, such as the federal judiciary and direct taxation, intact.

On November 20, 1789, New Jersey ratified eleven of the twelve amendments, rejecting an amendment to regulate congressional pay raises. On December 19 and 22, respectively, Maryland and North Carolina ratified all twelve amendments. On January 19, 25, and 28, 1790, respectively, South Carolina, New Hampshire, and Delaware ratified the Bill, though New Hampshire rejected the amendment on Congressional pay raises, and Delaware rejected the Congressional Apportionment Amendment. This brought the total of ratifying states to six of the required ten, but the process stalled in other states: Connecticut and Georgia found a Bill of Rights unnecessary and so refused to ratify, while Massachusetts ratified most of the amendments, but failed to send official notice to the Secretary of State that it had done so.

In February through June 1790, New York, Pennsylvania, and Rhode Island ratified eleven of the amendments, though all three rejected the amendment on Congressional pay raises. Virginia initially postponed its debate, but after Vermont was admitted to the Union in 1791, the total number of states needed for ratification rose to eleven. Vermont ratified on November 3, 1791, approving all twelve amendments, and Virginia finally followed on December 15, 1791. Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson announced the adoption of the ten successfully ratified amendments on March 1, 1792.

== Judicial interpretation ==
The Seventh Amendment encompasses two clauses. The Preservation Clause (&quot;In Suits at common law, where the value in controversy shall exceed twenty dollars, the right of trial by jury shall be preserved&quot;) sets out the types of cases juries are required to decide, while the Re-examination Clause (&quot;[N]o fact tried by a jury, shall be otherwise re-examined in any Court of the United States, than according to the rules of the common law&quot;) prevents federal judges from overturning jury verdicts in certain ways. The Legal Information Institute stated with respect to the Preservation Clause: &quot;Sir William Blackstone, in his influential treatise on English common law, called the right &#x27;the glory of the English law&#x27; and necessary for &#x27;[t]he impartial administration of justice&#x27;, which, if &#x27;entirely entrusted to the magistracy, a select body of men&#x27;, would be subject &#x27;frequently [to] an involuntary bias towards those of their own rank and dignity&#x27;.&quot; The amendment is generally considered one of the more straightforward amendments of the Bill of Rights. Scholar Charles W. Wolfram states that it has usually &quot;been interpreted as if it were virtually a self-explanatory provision&quot;. According to the National Constitution Center, both times the term &quot;common law&quot; is used in the Seventh Amendment refers to &quot;the law and procedure of the courts that used juries, as opposed to Equity and other courts that did not use juries&quot;.

Unlike most of the provisions of the Bill of Rights, the Seventh Amendment has never been applied to the states. The Supreme Court stated in &quot;Walker v. Sauvinet&quot; (1875), &quot;Minneapolis &amp; St. Louis Railroad v. Bombolis&quot; (1916) and &quot;Hardware Dealers&#x27; Mut. Fire Ins. Co. of Wisconsin v. Glidden Co.&quot; (1931) that states were not required to provide jury trials in civil cases. Nonetheless, most states voluntarily guarantee the right to a civil jury trial, and they must do so in certain state court cases that are decided under federal law.

=== Historical test ===

The first judicial opinion issued on the amendment came in &quot;United States v. Wonson&quot; (1812), in which the federal government wished to retry the facts of a civil case it had lost against Samuel Wonson. Supreme Court Justice Joseph Story, acting as a circuit court judge, ruled for Wonson, stating that to retry the facts of the case would violate the Seventh Amendment. Regarding the amendment&#x27;s phrase &quot;the rules of common law&quot;, Story wrote:

&quot;Wonson&quot;&#x27;s ruling established the &quot;historical test&quot;, which interpreted the amendment as relying on English common law to determine whether a jury trial was necessary in a civil suit. Applying the historical test in &quot;Parsons v. Bedford&quot; (1830), for example, the Supreme Court found that jury trials were not constitutionally guaranteed for cases under maritime law, an area in which English common law did not require juries. The Court further clarified this rule as a &quot;fixed historical test&quot; in &quot;Thompson v. Utah&quot; (1898), which established that the relevant guide was English common law of 1791, rather than that of the present day. In &quot;Dimick v. Schiedt&quot; (1935), the Supreme Court declared that the Seventh Amendment was to be interpreted according to the common law of England at the time of the amendment&#x27;s adoption in 1791. The Supreme Court in &quot;Baltimore &amp; Carolina Line, Inc. v. Redman&quot; (1935) declared that the right of trial by jury thus preserved by the Preservation Clause is the right which existed under the English common law when the amendment was adopted. &quot;The amendment not only preserves that right, but discloses a studied purpose to protect it from indirect impairment through possible enlargements of the power of reexamination existing under the common law, and, to that end, declares that &#x27;no fact tried by a jury shall be otherwise reexamined in any Court of the United States, than according to the rules of the common law&#x27;.&quot; In &quot;Baltimore &amp; Carolina Line, Inc. v. Redman&quot; (1935), the Supreme Court held that the amendment does not include &quot;mere matters of form or procedure&quot;, but instead preserves the &quot;substance&quot; of the right to jury trial. The aim of the amendment is particularly to retain the common law distinction between the province of the court and that of the jury whereby, in the absence of express or implied consent to the contrary, issues of law are to be resolved by the court and issues of fact are to be determined by the jury under appropriate instructions by the court. In &quot;Chauffeurs, Teamsters, and Helpers Local No. 391 v. Terry&quot; (1990), the Court explained that the right to a jury trial provided by the Seventh Amendment encompasses more than the common law forms of action recognized in 1791 (when the Bill of Rights was ratified), but rather any lawsuit in which parties&#x27; legal rights were to be determined, as opposed to suits that involve only equitable rights and remedies. This echoes a statement for the Supreme Court in &quot;Curtis v. Leother&quot;, 415 U.S. 189 (1974) where it stated:

In &quot;SEC v. Jarkesy&quot; (2024) the Supreme Court stated the following:

In &quot;Galloway v. United States&quot; (1943), the Court permitted a directed verdict (a verdict ordered by a judge on the basis of overwhelming lack of evidence) in a civil suit, finding that it did not violate the Seventh Amendment under the fixed historical test. The Court extended the amendment&#x27;s guarantees in &quot;Beacon Theatres v. Westover&quot; (1959) and &quot;Dairy Queen, Inc. v. Wood&quot; (1962), ruling in each case that all issues that required trial by jury under English common law also required trial by jury under the Seventh Amendment. This guarantee was also further extended to shareholder suits in &quot;Ross v. Bernhard&quot; (1970) and to copyright infringement lawsuits in &quot;Feltner v. Columbia Pictures TV&quot; (1998).

In &quot;Markman v. Westview Instruments, Inc.&quot; (1996), the Court ruled that many parts of patent claims are questions of law rather than of fact, and that the Seventh Amendment guarantee of a jury trial therefore does not necessarily apply.

Lawsuits against the federal government itself do not receive Seventh Amendment protections due to the doctrine of sovereign immunity. In &quot;Lehman v. Nakshian&quot; (1981), the Court ruled that &quot;the plaintiff in an action against the United States has a right to trial by jury only where Congress has affirmatively and unambiguously granted that right by statute&quot;.

=== Jury size ===

The Supreme Court has held that the Seventh Amendment&#x27;s guarantee of a jury trial also guarantees a jury of sufficient size. The Court found a six-member jury sufficient to meet the amendment&#x27;s requirements in &quot;Colgrove v. Battin&quot; (1973).

=== Twenty-dollar requirement ===

Little historical evidence exists to interpret the amendment&#x27;s reference to &quot;twenty dollars&quot;, which was added in a closed session of the Senate and is often omitted in judicial and scholarly discussion of the amendment. A &quot;Harvard Law Review&quot; article described it as &quot;mysterious... of shrouded origin and neglected for two centuries&quot;, stating that &quot;no one believes that the Clause bears on the right protected by the Seventh Amendment&quot;. According to law professor Philip Hamburger, the twenty-dollar requirement was intended to become obsolete by inflation, so that its application to more cases would be phased out gradually. $20 in 1791 is .

Congress has never extended federal diversity jurisdiction to amounts that small. Under federal law (28 U.S.C. §1332), the amount in dispute must exceed $75,000 for a case to be heard in federal court based on diversity of the parties&#x27; citizenship (the parties are from different states or different countries). However, civil cases may arise in federal court that are not diversity cases (e.g., in places like the District of Columbia that are federal jurisdictions), in which case the Twenty Dollars Clause may apply.

=== Re-examination of facts ===
The Re-Examination Clause of the Seventh Amendment states: &quot;In suits at common law... no fact tried by jury, shall be otherwise reexamined in any Court of the United States, than according to the rules of the common law.&quot; This clause forbids any court from re-examining or overturning any factual determinations made by a jury guaranteeing that facts decided by that jury cannot be reexamined at a later date. Exceptions to this prohibition are possible if it is later determined that legal errors were made or evidence submitted was insufficient in some way. In such cases the re-examination is conducted by another jury so the decision is still left in the hands of the people. The clause applies only to cases where private rights—i.e., rights that exist between private citizens—have been violated. The Re-Examination Clause applies not only to federal courts, but also to &quot;a case tried before a jury in a state court and brought to the Supreme Court on appeal&quot;.

In &quot;The Justices v. Murray&quot;, 76 U.S. 9 Wall. 274 (1869), the Supreme Court quoted Justice Joseph Story to explain the modes to reexamine facts tried by juries according to common law: &quot;Mr. Justice Story ... referring to this part of the amendment, observed ... that it was &#x27;a prohibition to the courts of the United States to re-examine any facts tried by a jury in any other manner [than according to Common Law]&#x27;. ... He further observed that &#x27;the only modes known to the common law to re-examine such facts was the granting of a new trial by the court where the issue was tried, or the award of a , by the appellate court, for some error of law that had intervened in the proceedings.

As common law provided, the judge could set aside (or nullify) a jury verdict when the judge decided the verdict was contrary to the evidence or the law. Common law precluded the judge from himself entering a verdict; a new trial, with a new jury, was the only course permissible. In &quot;Slocum v. New York Insurance Co.&quot; (1913), the Supreme Court upheld this rule. Later cases have undermined &quot;Slocum&quot;, but generally only when the evidence is overwhelming, or if a specific law provides narrow guidelines by which there can be no reasonable question as to the required outcome, may the court enter &quot;judgment as a matter of law&quot; or otherwise set aside the jury&#x27;s findings.

== Notes ==

== References ==

=== Bibliography ===
* Baicker-McKee, Steven; William M. Janssen; and John B. Corr (2008) [1997]. &quot;A Student&#x27;s Guide to the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure&quot;. Thomson West.
* Beeman, Richard (2009). &quot;Plain, Honest Men: The Making of the American Constitution.&quot; Random House.
* Labunski, Richard E. (2006). &quot;James Madison and the struggle for the Bill of Rights&quot;. Oxford University Press.
* Levy, Leonard Williams (1995). &quot;Seasoned Judgments: The American Constitution, Rights, and History&quot;. Transaction Publishers.
* Maier, Pauline (2010). &quot;Ratification: The People Debate the Constitution, 1787–1788&quot;. Simon and Schuster.
* Wolfram, Charles W. (1973). &quot;The Constitutional History of the Seventh Amendment&quot;, 57 &quot;Minnesota Law Review&quot; 639, 670-71.

== External links ==
* Kilman, Johnny and George Costello (Eds). (2000). &quot;The Constitution of the United States of America: Analysis and Interpretation.&quot; 
* CRS Annotated Constitution: Seventh Amendment</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q261204" start="4" end="21" title="Seventh Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Seventh Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q261204" start="23" end="36" title="Seventh Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Amendment VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="45" end="71" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="87" end="101" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q13368786" start="142" end="152" title="jury trial" label="jury trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q222249" start="164" end="169" title="Civil law (common law)" label="civil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271542" start="227" end="243" title="Question of fact" label="findings of fact"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="326" end="339" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q257855" start="389" end="404" title="Anti-Federalism" label="Anti-Federalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q193170" start="612" end="620" title="ratification" label="ratified"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002253" start="829" end="841" title="Incorporation of the Bill of Rights" label="incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q194907" start="1027" end="1040" title="Federal judiciary of the United States" label="federal cases"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308934" start="1042" end="1053" title="State court (United States)" label="state cases"/>
<link wikidata="Q692218" start="1064" end="1075" title="Law of the United States" label="federal law"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1131" end="1154" title="United States v. Wonson" label="United States v. Wonson"/>
<link wikidata="Q382113" start="1410" end="1422" title="maritime law" label="maritime law"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="1489" end="1495" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="1816" end="1825" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="1890" end="1901" title="United_States_dollar" label="$20 in 1800"/>
<link wikidata="Q173509" start="1906" end="1917" title="gold standard" label="convertible"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1923" end="1933" title="Troy_weight#Troy_ounce_(oz_t)" label="Troy ounce"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1937" end="1941" title="Gold#Monetary_use" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q493620" start="2038" end="2063" title="Articles of Confederation" label="Articles of Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q405475" start="2067" end="2092" title="Constitutional Convention (United States)" label="Constitutional Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q532329" start="2216" end="2228" title="George Mason" label="George Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q29556" start="2381" end="2396" title="civil liberties" label="civil liberties"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="2466" end="2479" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q275898" start="2726" end="2731" title="Ninth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Ninth"/>
<link wikidata="Q164665" start="2736" end="2741" title="Tenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Tenth"/>
<link wikidata="Q663151" start="2919" end="2934" title="Hugh Williamson" label="Hugh Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q257855" start="3198" end="3213" title="Anti-Federalism" label="Anti-Federalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="3637" end="3655" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q162932" start="3972" end="3998" title="1st United States Congress" label="1st United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q219447" start="4167" end="4186" title="Bill of Rights 1689" label="Bill of Rights 1689"/>
<link wikidata="Q48429" start="4379" end="4390" title="Article Three of the United States Constitution" label="Article III"/>
<link wikidata="Q725907" start="5162" end="5179" title="Richard Henry Lee" label="Richard Henry Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q219736" start="5409" end="5458" title="Twenty-seventh Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="an amendment to regulate congressional pay raises"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800908" start="5766" end="5803" title="Congressional Apportionment Amendment" label="Congressional Apportionment Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="6617" end="6633" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517400" start="7285" end="7312" title="Legal Information Institute" label="Legal Information Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q332449" start="7367" end="7389" title="William Blackstone" label="Sir William Blackstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986212" start="7394" end="7440" title="Commentaries on the Laws of England" label="his influential treatise on English common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q538275" start="8029" end="8057" title="National Constitution Center" label="National Constitution Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578557" start="8219" end="8225" title="Equity (law)" label="Equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368374" start="9110" end="9122" title="Joseph Story" label="Joseph Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q382113" start="9731" end="9743" title="maritime law" label="maritime law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271542" start="11354" end="11399" title="Question of law" label="issues of law are to be resolved by the court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3188085" start="11404" end="11495" title="Trier of fact" label="issues of fact are to be determined by the jury under appropriate instructions by the court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5088127" start="11506" end="11563" title="Chauffeurs, Teamsters, and Helpers Local No. 391 v. Terry" label="Chauffeurs, Teamsters, and Helpers Local No. 391 v. Terry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469934" start="11700" end="11715" title="forms of action" label="forms of action"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="11790" end="11797" title="lawsuit" label="lawsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578557" start="11895" end="11904" title="Equity (law)" label="equitable"/>
<link wikidata="Q43899484" start="11916" end="11924" title="Equitable remedy" label="remedies"/>
<link wikidata="Q112083131" start="12053" end="12067" title="Securities and Exchange Commission v. Jarkesy" label="SEC v. Jarkesy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519188" start="12131" end="12156" title="Galloway v. United States" label="Galloway v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q13370881" start="12193" end="12209" title="directed verdict" label="directed verdict"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875994" start="12451" end="12478" title="Beacon Theatres v. Westover" label="Beacon Theatres v. Westover"/>
<link wikidata="Q381136" start="12732" end="12743" title="shareholder" label="shareholder"/>
<link wikidata="Q647578" start="12796" end="12818" title="copyright infringement" label="copyright infringement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6771109" start="12893" end="12930" title="Markman v. Westview Instruments, Inc." label="Markman v. Westview Instruments, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="12980" end="12986" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457196" start="13247" end="13265" title="sovereign immunity" label="sovereign immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5144794" start="13757" end="13775" title="Colgrove v. Battin" label="Colgrove v. Battin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365125" start="14069" end="14087" title="Harvard Law Review" label="Harvard Law Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183683" start="14335" end="14351" title="Philip Hamburger" label="Philip Hamburger"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="14418" end="14427" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4388685" start="14552" end="14574" title="diversity jurisdiction" label="diversity jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="14936" end="14956" title="Washington, D.C." label="District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13370881" start="16851" end="16858" title="verdict" label="verdict"/>
<link wikidata="Q4254798" start="17403" end="17430" title="judgment as a matter of law" label="judgment as a matter of law"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31660" wikidata="Q270938" url="?curid=31660" title="Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution">
<text>The Eighth Amendment (Amendment VIII) to the United States Constitution protects against imposing excessive bail, excessive fines, or cruel and unusual punishments. This amendment was adopted on December 15, 1791, along with the rest of the United States Bill of Rights. The amendment serves as a limitation upon the state or federal government to impose unduly harsh penalties on criminal defendants before and after a conviction. This limitation applies equally to the price for obtaining pretrial release and the punishment for crime after conviction. The phrases in this amendment originated in the English Bill of Rights of 1689.

The prohibition against cruel and unusual punishments has led courts to hold that the Constitution totally prohibits certain kinds of punishment, such as drawing and quartering. Under the Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause, the Supreme Court has struck down the application of capital punishment in some instances, but capital punishment is still permitted in some cases where the defendant is convicted of murder.

The Supreme Court has held that the Excessive Fines Clause prohibits fines that are &quot;so grossly excessive as to amount to a deprivation of property without due process of law&quot;. The Court struck down a fine as excessive for the first time in &quot;United States v. Bajakajian&quot; (1998). Under the Excessive Bail Clause, the Supreme Court has held that the federal government cannot set bail at &quot;a figure higher than is reasonably calculated&quot; to ensure the defendant&#x27;s appearance at trial. The Supreme Court has ruled that the Excessive Fines Clause and the Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause apply to the states, but has not done this regarding the Excessive Bail Clause.

==Text==


==Background and general aspects==
===Background===
The Eighth Amendment was adopted, as part of the Bill of Rights, in 1791. It is almost identical to a provision in the English Bill of Rights of 1689, in which Parliament declared, &quot;as their ancestors in like cases have usually done... that excessive bail ought not to be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted.&quot;

The provision was largely inspired by the case in England of Titus Oates who, after the accession of King James II in 1685, was tried for multiple acts of perjury that had led to executions of many people Oates had wrongly accused. Oates was sentenced to imprisonment, including an annual ordeal of being taken out for two days&#x27; pillory plus one day of whipping while tied to a moving cart. The Oates case eventually became a topic of the U.S. Supreme Court&#x27;s Eighth Amendment jurisprudence. The punishment of Oates involved ordinary penalties collectively imposed in a barbaric, excessive and bizarre manner. The reason why the judges in Oates&#x27; perjury case were not allowed to impose the death penalty (unlike in the cases of those whom Oates had falsely accused) may be because such a punishment would have deterred even honest witnesses from testifying in later cases.

England&#x27;s declaration against &quot;cruel and unusual punishments&quot; was approved by Parliament in February 1689, and was read to King William III and his wife Queen Mary II as the Declaration of Right on the following day. Members of Parliament then explained in August 1689 that &quot;the Commons had a particular regard... when that Declaration was first made&quot; to punishments like the one that had been inflicted by the King&#x27;s Bench against Titus Oates. Parliament then enacted the English Bill of Rights into law in December 1689. Members of parliament characterized the punishment in the Oates case as not just &quot;barbarous&quot; and &quot;inhuman&quot; but also &quot;extravagant&quot; and &quot;exorbitant&quot;.

There is some scholarly dispute about whom the clause intended to limit. In England, the &quot;cruel and unusual punishments&quot; clause may have been a limitation on the discretion of judges, requiring them to adhere to precedent. According to the great treatise of the 1760s by William Blackstone entitled &quot;Commentaries on the Laws of England&quot;:
Virginia adopted this provision of the English Bill of Rights in the Virginia Declaration of Rights of 1776, and the Virginia convention that ratified the U.S. Constitution recommended in 1788 that this language also be included in the Constitution. Virginians such as George Mason and Patrick Henry wanted to ensure this restriction would also be applied as a limitation on Congress. Mason warned that, otherwise, Congress may &quot;inflict unusual and severe punishments&quot;. Henry emphasized that Congress should not be allowed to depart from precedent:
Ultimately, Henry and Mason prevailed, and the Eighth Amendment was adopted. James Madison changed &quot;ought&quot; to &quot;shall&quot;, when he proposed the amendment to Congress in 1789.

===General aspects===

In &quot;Coker v. Georgia&quot; (1977) it was decided that &quot;Eighth Amendment judgments should not be, or appear to be, merely the subjective views of individual Justices; judgment should be informed by objective factors to the maximum possible extent.&quot; In &quot;Timbs v. Indiana&quot; (2019) the Supreme Court stated that the Excessive Bail Clause, the Excessive Fines Clause and the Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause together form a shield against abuses stemming from the government&#x27;s or criminal-law-enforcement authority.

==Excessive bail==

In England, sheriffs originally determined whether to grant bail to criminal suspects. Since they tended to abuse their power, Parliament passed a statute in 1275 whereby bailable and non-bailable offenses were defined. The King&#x27;s judges often subverted the provisions of the law. It was held that an individual may be held without bail upon the Sovereign&#x27;s command. Eventually, the Petition of Right of 1628 argued that the King did not have such authority. Later, technicalities in the law were exploited to keep the accused imprisoned without bail even where the offenses were bailable; such loopholes were for the most part closed by the Habeas Corpus Act 1679. Thereafter, judges were compelled to set bail, but they often required impracticable amounts. Finally, the English Bill of Rights (1689) held that &quot;excessive bail ought not to be required.&quot;

However, the English Bill of Rights did not determine the distinction between bailable and non-bailable offenses. Thus, the Eighth Amendment has been interpreted to mean that bail may be denied if the charges are sufficiently serious.

The Supreme Court has also permitted &quot;preventive&quot; detention without bail. In &quot;United States v. Salerno&quot;, , the Supreme Court held that the only limitation imposed by the Excessive Bail Clause is that &quot;the government&#x27;s proposed conditions of release or detention not be &#x27;excessive&#x27; in light of the perceived evil&quot;. In &quot;Stack v. Boyle&quot;, , the Supreme Court declared that a bail amount is &quot;excessive&quot; under the Eighth Amendment if it were &quot;a figure higher than is reasonably calculated&quot; to ensure the defendant&#x27;s appearance at trial.

The incorporation status of the Excessive Bail Clause is unclear. In &quot;Schilb v. Kuebel&quot;, 404 U.S. 357 (1971), the Court stated in &quot;dicta&quot;: &quot;Bail, of course, is basic to our system of law, and the Eighth Amendment&#x27;s proscription of excessive bail has been assumed to have application to the States through the Fourteenth Amendment.&quot; In &quot;McDonald v. City of Chicago&quot; (2010), the right against excessive bail was included in a footnote listing incorporated rights.

==Excessive fines==
===&quot;Waters-Pierce Oil Co. v. Texas&quot;===

In &quot;Waters-Pierce Oil Co. v. Texas&quot;, , the Supreme Court held that excessive fines are those that are &quot;so grossly excessive as to amount to a deprivation of property without due process of law&quot;. The Court wrote in its syllabus:
The Court further stated in its opinion:
In essence, the government must not be able to confiscate such a large amount of property without following an established set of rules created by the legislature.

===&quot;Browning-Ferris v. Kelco&quot;===

In &quot;Browning-Ferris Industries of Vermont, Inc. v. Kelco Disposal, Inc.&quot;, , the Supreme Court ruled that the Excessive Fines Clause does not apply &quot;when the government neither has prosecuted the action nor has any right to receive a share of the damages awarded&quot;. While punitive damages in civil cases are not covered by the Excessive Fines Clause, such damages were held to be covered by the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, notably in &quot;State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co. v. Campbell&quot;, .

===&quot;Austin v. United States&quot;===

In &quot;Austin v. United States&quot; , the Supreme Court ruled that the Excessive Fines Clause does apply to civil asset forfeiture actions taken by the federal government, in the specific case, the government&#x27;s seizure of the petitioner&#x27;s auto body shop on the basis of one charge of drug possession for which he had served seven years in prison.

===&quot;United States v. Bajakajian&quot;===

In &quot;United States v. Bajakajian&quot;, , the Supreme Court ruled that it was unconstitutional to confiscate $357,144 from Hosep Bajakajian, who had failed to report possession of over $10,000 while leaving the United States. In what was the first case in which the Supreme Court ruled that a fine violated the Excessive Fines Clause, the Court held that it was &quot;grossly disproportional&quot; to take all the money Bajakajian had attempted to take out of the United States in violation of a federal law that required that he report an amount in excess of $10,000. In describing what constituted &quot;gross disproportionality&quot;, the Court could not find any guidance from the history of the Excessive Fines Clause, and so relied on Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause case law:
Thus the Court declared that, within the context of judicial deference to the legislature&#x27;s power to set punishments, a fine would not offend the Eighth Amendment unless it were &quot;grossly disproportional to the gravity of a defendant&#x27;s offense&quot;.

===&quot;Timbs v. Indiana&quot;===

In &quot;Timbs v. Indiana&quot; the Supreme Court ruled that the Excessive Fines Clause applies to state and local governments under the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. The case involves the use of civil asset forfeiture to seize a $42,000 vehicle under state law in addition to the imposition of a $1,200 fine for drug trafficking charges, house arrest, and probation.

==Cruel and unusual punishments==
=== General aspects ===
The Constitution was amended to prohibit cruel and unusual punishments as part of the United States Bill of Rights as a result of objections raised by people such as Abraham Holmes and Patrick Henry. While Holmes feared the establishment of the Inquisition in the United States, Henry was concerned with the application of torture as a way of extracting confessions. They also feared that the federal government would misuse its powers to create federal crimes as well as to punish those who committed them under the new Constitution and thus use these powers as a way to oppress the people. Abraham Holmes, a member of the Massachusetts Ratifying Convention for the federal constitution, for example noted in a letter from January 30, 1788, that the new Constitution would give the U.S. Congress the power &quot;to ascertain, point out, and determine, what kind of punishments shall be inflicted on persons convicted of crimes.&quot; He added with respect those who would belong to the new government under the new Constitution: &quot;They are nowhere restrained from inventing the most cruel and unheard-of punishments, and annexing them to crimes; and there is no constitutional check on them, but that racks and gibbets may be amongst the most mild instruments of their discipline.&quot;

Relying on the history of the Eighth Amendment and its own caselaw the Supreme Court stated in &quot;Ingraham v. Wright&quot; (1977) that the Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause was designed to protect those convicted of crimes. The Supreme Court consequently determined in &quot;Ingraham&quot; that the Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause limits the criminal process in three ways: &quot;[F]irst, it limits the kinds of punishment that can be imposed on those convicted of crimes, &quot;e.g., Estelle v. Gamble, supra; Trop v. Dulles, supra;&quot; second, it proscribes punishment grossly disproportionate to the severity of the crime, &quot;e.g., Weems v. United States, supra&quot;; and third, it imposes substantive limits on what can be made criminal and punished as such, &quot;e.g., Robinson v. California, supra&quot;.&quot; The Supreme court observed in &quot;Weems v. United States&quot; (1910) that the clause of the Constitution prohibitung the infliction of cruel and unusual punishment is &quot;progressive, and is not fastened to the obsolete, but may acquire meaning as public opinion becomes enlightened by a humane justice.&quot;

In &quot;Louisiana ex rel. Francis v. Resweber&quot;, , the Supreme Court assumed &quot;arguendo&quot; that the Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause applied to the states through the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. In &quot;Robinson v. California&quot;, , the Court ruled that it did apply to the states through the Fourteenth Amendment. &quot;Robinson&quot; was the first case in which the Supreme Court applied the Eighth Amendment against the state governments through the Fourteenth Amendment. Before &quot;Robinson&quot;, the Eighth Amendment had been applied previously only in cases against the federal government.

Justice Potter Stewart&#x27;s opinion for the &quot;Robinson&quot; Court held that &quot;infliction of cruel and unusual punishment is in violation of the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments.&quot; The framers of the Fourteenth Amendment, such as John Bingham, had discussed this subject:
In &quot;Furman v. Georgia&quot;, , Justice Brennan wrote, &quot;There are, then, four principles by which we may determine whether a particular punishment is &#x27;cruel and unusual&#x27;.&quot;
* The &quot;essential predicate&quot; is &quot;that a punishment must not by its severity be degrading to human dignity,&quot; especially torture.
* &quot;A severe punishment that is obviously inflicted in wholly arbitrary fashion.&quot;
* &quot;A severe punishment that is clearly and totally rejected throughout society.&quot;
* &quot;A severe punishment that is patently unnecessary.&quot;

Justice Brennan added: &quot;The function of these principles, after all, is simply to provide [the] means by which a court can determine whether [the] challenged punishment comports with human dignity. They are, therefore, interrelated, and, in most cases, it will be their convergence that will justify the conclusion that a punishment is &#x27;cruel and unusual&#x27;. The test, then, will ordinarily be a cumulative one: if a punishment is unusually severe, if there is a strong probability that it is inflicted arbitrarily, if it is substantially rejected by contemporary society, and if there is no reason to believe that it serves any penal purpose more effectively than some less severe punishment, then the continued infliction of that punishment violates the command of the Clause that the State may not inflict inhuman and uncivilized punishments upon those convicted of crimes.&quot;

Justice Brennan also wrote that he expected no state would pass a law obviously violating any one of these principles, so court decisions regarding the Eighth Amendment would involve a &quot;cumulative&quot; analysis of the implication of each of the four principles. In this way, the United States Supreme Court &quot;set the standard that a punishment would be cruel and unusual [if] it was too severe for the crime, [if] it was arbitrary, if it offended society&#x27;s sense of justice, or if it was not more effective than a less severe penalty.&quot;

The plurality of the Supreme Court in &quot;Furman v. Georgia&quot; stated that the Eighth Amendment is not static, but that its meaning is interpreted in a flexible and dynamic manner to accord with, in the words of &quot;Trop v. Dulles&quot;, , at page 101, &quot;the evolving standards of decency that mark the progress of a maturing society.&quot; Punishments including capital punishment must therefore not be &quot;excessive&quot;. The &quot;excessiveness&quot; of a punishment can be measured by two different aspects, which are independent of each other. The first aspect is whether the punishment involves the unnecessary and wanton infliction of pain. The second aspect is that the punishment must not be grossly out of proportion to the severity of the crime. In &quot;Miller v. Alabama&quot;, 567 U.S. 460 (2012), the Court explained that the Eighth Amendment &quot;guarantees individuals the right not to be subjected to excessive sanctions&quot;, and that &quot;punishment for crime should be graduated and proportioned to both the offender and the offense.&quot; The Supreme Court has also looked to &quot;the evolving standards of decency that mark the progress of a maturing society&quot; when addressing the prohibition on cruel and unusual punishments.

Justice Antonin Scalia noted in a concurring opinion in &quot;Callins v. Collins&quot; (1994): &quot;The Fifth Amendment provides that &quot;[n]o person shall be held to answer for a capital . . . crime, unless on a presentment or indictment of a Grand Jury, . . . nor be deprived of life . . . without due process of law.&quot; This clearly permits the death penalty to be imposed, and establishes beyond doubt that the death penalty is not one of the &quot;cruel and unusual punishments&quot; prohibited by the Eighth Amendment.&quot; A similar observation was made by the Supreme Court in 2019. The Supreme Court held in &quot;Bucklew v. Precythe&quot; (2019) that the Due Process Clause expressly allows the death penalty in the United States because &quot;the Fifth Amendment, added to the Constitution at the same time as the Eighth, expressly contemplates that a defendant may be tried for a &#x27;capital&#x27; crime and &#x27;deprived of life&#x27; as a penalty, so long as proper procedures are followed&quot;. The Court also explicitly said: &quot;The Constitution allows capital punishment. [...] Nor did the later addition of the Eighth Amendment outlaw the practice. [...] The same Constitution that permits States to authorize capital punishment also allows them to outlaw it. [...] While the Eighth Amendment doesn&#x27;t forbid capital punishment, it does speak to how States may carry out that punishment, prohibiting methods that are &#x27;cruel and unusual&#x27;.&quot; The Court also explained in &quot;Bucklew&quot; that “what unites the punishments the Eighth Amendment was understood to forbid, and distinguishes them from those it was understood to allow, is that the former were long disused (unusual) forms of punishment that intensified the sentence of death with a (cruel) superadd[ition] of terror, pain, or disgrace.&quot;

=== Specific aspects ===
According to the Supreme Court, the Eighth Amendment forbids some punishments entirely, and forbids some other punishments that are excessive when compared to the crime, or compared to the competence of the perpetrator. This will be discussed in the sections below.

====Punishments forbidden regardless of the crime====

In &quot;Wilkerson v. Utah&quot;, , the Supreme Court commented that drawing and quartering, public dissection, burning alive, or disembowelment constituted cruel and unusual punishment. Relying on Eighth Amendment case law Justice William O. Douglas stated in his &quot;Robinson v. California&quot;, concurrence opinion that &quot;historic punishments that were cruel and unusual included &quot;burning at the stake, crucifixion, breaking on the wheel&quot; (&quot;In re Kemmler&quot;, 136 U. S. 436, 136 U. S. 446), quartering, the rack and thumbscrew (see &quot;Chambers v. Florida&quot;, 309 U. S. 227, 309 U. S. 237), and, in some circumstances, even solitary confinement (see In re Medley, 134 U. S. 160, 134 U. S. 167-168).&quot; In &quot;Thompson v. Oklahoma&quot;, , the Supreme Court ruled that the death penalty constituted cruel and unusual punishment if the defendant is under age 16 when the crime was committed. Furthermore, in &quot;Roper v. Simmons&quot;, , the Court barred the executing of people who were under age 18 when the crime was committed. In &quot;Atkins v. Virginia&quot;, , the Court declared that executing people who are mentally handicapped constituted cruel and unusual punishment.

====Punishments forbidden for certain crimes====

The case of &quot;Weems v. United States&quot;, , marked the first time the Supreme Court exercised judicial review to overturn a criminal sentence as cruel and unusual. The Court overturned a punishment called cadena temporal, which mandated &quot;hard and painful labor&quot;, shackling for the duration of incarceration, and permanent civil disabilities. This case is often viewed as establishing a principle of proportionality under the Eighth Amendment. However, others have written that &quot;it is hard to view &quot;Weems&quot; as announcing a constitutional requirement of proportionality.&quot;

In &quot;Trop v. Dulles&quot;, , the Supreme Court held that punishing a natural-born citizen for a crime by revoking his citizenship is unconstitutional, being &quot;more primitive than torture&quot; because it involved the &quot;total destruction of the individual&#x27;s status in organized society&quot;.

In &quot;Robinson v. California&quot;, , the Court decided a California law authorizing a 90-day jail sentence for &quot;be[ing] addicted to the use of narcotics&quot; violated the Eighth Amendment, as narcotics addiction &quot;is apparently an illness&quot;, and California was attempting to punish people based on the state of this illness, rather than for any specific act. The Court wrote:
However, in &quot;Powell v. Texas&quot;, , the Court upheld a statute barring public intoxication by distinguishing &quot;Robinson&quot; on the basis that &quot;Powell&quot; dealt with a person who was drunk &quot;in public&quot;, not merely for being addicted to alcohol.

Traditionally, the length of a prison sentence was not subject to scrutiny under the Eighth Amendment, regardless of the crime for which the sentence was imposed. It was not until the case of &quot;Solem v. Helm&quot;, , that the Supreme Court held that incarceration, standing alone, could constitute cruel and unusual punishment if it were &quot;disproportionate&quot; in duration to the offense. The Court outlined three factors that were to be considered in determining if a sentence is excessive: &quot;(i) the gravity of the offense and the harshness of the penalty; (ii) the sentences imposed on other criminals in the same jurisdiction; and (iii) the sentences imposed for commission of the same crime in other jurisdictions.&quot; The Court held that in the circumstances of the case before it and the factors to consider, a sentence of life imprisonment without parole for cashing a $100 check on a closed account was cruel and unusual.

However, in &quot;Harmelin v. Michigan&quot;, , a fractured Court retreated from the &quot;Solem&quot; test and held that for non-capital sentences, the Eighth Amendment constrains only the length of prison terms by a &quot;gross disproportionality principle&quot;. Under this principle, the Court sustained a mandatory sentence of life without parole imposed for possession of 672 grams (1.5 pounds) or more of cocaine. The Court acknowledged that a punishment could be cruel but not unusual, and therefore not prohibited by the Constitution. Additionally, in &quot;Harmelin&quot;, Justice Scalia, joined by Chief Justice Rehnquist, said &quot;the Eighth Amendment contains no proportionality guarantee,&quot; and that &quot;what was &#x27;cruel and unusual&#x27; under the Eighth Amendment was to be determined without reference to the particular offense.&quot; Scalia wrote &quot;If &#x27;cruel and unusual punishments&#x27; included disproportionate punishments, the separate prohibition of disproportionate fines (which are certainly punishments) would have been entirely superfluous.&quot; Moreover, &quot;There is little doubt that those who framed, proposed, and ratified the Bill of Rights were aware of such provisions [outlawing disproportional punishments], yet chose not to replicate them.&quot;

In &quot;Graham v. Florida&quot;, 560 U.S. 48 (2010), the Supreme Court declared that a life sentence without any chance of parole, for a crime other than murder, is cruel and unusual punishment for a minor. Two years later, in &quot;Miller v. Alabama&quot;, , the Court went further, holding that mandatory life sentences without parole cannot be imposed on minors, even for homicide.

=====Death penalty for rape=====

In &quot;Coker v. Georgia&quot;, , the Court declared that the death penalty was unconstitutionally excessive for rape of a woman and, by implication, for any crime where a death does not occur. The majority in &quot;Coker&quot; stated that &quot;death is indeed a disproportionate penalty for the crime of raping an adult woman.&quot; The dissent countered that the majority &quot;takes too little account of the profound suffering the crime imposes upon the victims and their loved ones&quot;. The dissent also characterized the majority as &quot;myopic&quot; for considering legal history of only &quot;the past five years&quot;.

In &quot;Kennedy v. Louisiana&quot;, , the Court extended the reasoning of &quot;Coker&quot; by ruling that the death penalty was excessive for child rape &quot;where the victim&#x27;s life was not taken&quot;. The Supreme Court failed to note a federal law, which applies to military court-martial proceedings, providing for the death penalty in cases of child rape. On October 1, 2008, the Court declined to reconsider its opinion in this case, but did amend the majority and dissenting opinions to acknowledge that federal law. Justice Scalia (joined by Chief Justice Roberts) wrote in dissent that &quot;the proposed Eighth Amendment would have been laughed to scorn if it had read &#x27;no criminal penalty shall be imposed which the Supreme Court deems unacceptable&#x27;.&quot;

====Special procedures for death penalty cases====

Justice Antonin Scalia noted in a concurring opinion in &quot;Callins v. Collins&quot; (1994): &quot;The Fifth Amendment provides that &quot;[n]o person shall be held to answer for a capital . . . crime, unless on a presentment or indictment of a Grand Jury, . . . nor be deprived of life . . . without due process of law.&quot; This clearly permits the death penalty to be imposed, and establishes beyond doubt that the death penalty is not one of the &quot;cruel and unusual punishments&quot; prohibited by the Eighth Amendment.&quot; A similar observation was made by the Supreme Court in 2019. The Supreme Court in &quot;Bucklew v. Precythe&quot; (2019) explicitly said: &quot;The Constitution allows capital punishment. [...] Nor did the later addition of the Eighth Amendment outlaw the practice. [...] While the Eighth Amendment doesn’t forbid capital punishment, it does speak to how States may carry out that punishment, prohibiting methods that are &#x27;cruel and unusual&#x27;.&quot; The Supreme Court also held in &quot;Bucklew&quot; that the Due Process Clause expressly allows the death penalty in the United States because &quot;the Fifth Amendment, added to the Constitution at the same time as the Eighth, expressly contemplates that a defendant may be tried for a &#x27;capital&#x27; crime and &#x27;deprived of life&#x27; as a penalty, so long as proper procedures are followed&quot;.

The first significant general challenge to capital punishment that reached the Supreme Court was the case of &quot;Furman v. Georgia&quot;, . The Supreme Court overturned the death sentences of Furman for murder, as well as two other defendants for rape. Of the five justices voting to overturn the death penalty, two found that capital punishment was unconstitutionally cruel and unusual, while three found that the statutes at issue were implemented in a random and capricious fashion, discriminating against blacks and the poor. &quot;Furman v. Georgia&quot; did not hold—even though it is sometimes claimed that it did—that capital punishment is &quot;&quot; unconstitutional.

States with capital punishment rewrote their laws to address the Supreme Court&#x27;s decision, and the Court then revisited the issue in a murder case: &quot;Gregg v. Georgia&quot;, . In &quot;Gregg&quot;, the Court ruled that Georgia&#x27;s revised death penalty laws passed Eighth Amendment scrutiny: the statutes provided a bifurcated trial in which guilt and sentence were determined separately; and, the statutes provided for &quot;specific jury findings&quot; followed by state supreme court review comparing each death sentence &quot;with the sentences imposed on similarly situated defendants to ensure that the sentence of death in a particular case is not disproportionate.&quot; Because of the &quot;Gregg&quot; decision, executions resumed in 1977.

Some states have passed laws imposing mandatory death penalties in certain cases. The Supreme Court found these laws unconstitutional under the Eighth Amendment, in the murder case of &quot;Woodson v. North Carolina&quot;, , because these laws remove discretion from the trial judge to make an individualized determination in each case. Other statutes specifying factors for courts to use in making their decisions have been upheld. Some have not: in &quot;Godfrey v. Georgia&quot;, , the Supreme Court overturned a sentence based upon a finding that a murder was &quot;outrageously or wantonly vile, horrible, and inhuman&quot;, as it deemed that any murder may be reasonably characterized in this manner. Similarly, in &quot;Maynard v. Cartwright&quot;, , the Court found that an &quot;especially heinous, atrocious or cruel&quot; standard in a homicide case was too vague. However, the meaning of this language depends on how lower courts interpret it. In &quot;Walton v. Arizona&quot;, , the Court found that the phrase &quot;especially heinous, cruel, or depraved&quot; was not vague in a murder case, because the state supreme court had expounded on its meaning.

The Court has generally held that death penalty cases require extra procedural protections. As the Court said in &quot;Herrera v. Collins&quot;, , which involved the murder of a police officer, &quot;the Eighth Amendment requires increased reliability of the process...&quot;

====Punishments specifically allowed====

In &quot;Wilkerson v. Utah&quot;, the Court stated that death by firing squad is not cruel and unusual punishment under the Eighth Amendment.

In &quot;Rummel v. Estelle&quot;, , the Court upheld a life sentence with the possibility of parole imposed per Texas&#x27;s three strikes law for fraud crimes totaling $230. A few months later, Rummel challenged his sentence for ineffective assistance of counsel, his appeal was upheld, and as part of a plea bargain Rummel pled guilty to theft and was released for time served.

In &quot;Harmelin v. Michigan&quot;, , the Court upheld a life sentence without the possibility of parole for possession of 672 grams (1.5 pounds) of cocaine.

In &quot;Lockyer v. Andrade&quot;, , the Court upheld a 50 years to life sentence with the possibility of parole imposed under California&#x27;s three strikes law when the defendant was convicted of shoplifting videotapes worth a total of about $150.

In &quot;Baze v. Rees&quot;, the Court upheld Kentucky&#x27;s execution protocol using a three-drug cocktail.

In &quot;Glossip v. Gross&quot; the Court upheld the use of lethal injections using the drug midazolam.

Justice Antonin Scalia noted in a concurring opinion in &quot;Callins v. Collins&quot; (1994): &quot;The Fifth Amendment provides that &quot;[n]o person shall be held to answer for a capital . . . crime, unless on a presentment or indictment of a Grand Jury, . . . nor be deprived of life . . . without due process of law.&quot; This clearly permits the death penalty to be imposed, and establishes beyond doubt that the death penalty is not one of the &quot;cruel and unusual punishments&quot; prohibited by the Eighth Amendment.&quot; A similar observation was made by the Supreme Court in 2019. In &quot;Bucklew v. Precythe&quot;, the Court ruled that when a convict sentenced to death challenges the State&#x27;s method of execution due to claims of excessive pain, the convict must show that other alternative methods of execution exist and clearly demonstrate they would cause less pain than the state-determined one. The Supreme Court also held in &quot;Bucklew&quot; that the Due Process Clause expressly allows the death penalty in the United States because &quot;the Fifth Amendment, added to the Constitution at the same time as the Eighth, expressly contemplates that a defendant may be tried for a &#x27;capital&#x27; crime and &#x27;deprived of life&#x27; as a penalty, so long as proper procedures are followed&quot;. The Court also explicitly said: &quot;The Constitution allows capital punishment. [...] Nor did the later addition of the Eighth Amendment outlaw the practice. [...] Of course, that doesn&#x27;t mean the American people must continue to use the death penalty. The same Constitution that permits States to authorize capital punishment also allows them to outlaw it. But it does mean that the judiciary bears no license to end a debate reserved for the people and their representatives. While the Eighth Amendment doesn’t forbid capital punishment, it does speak to how States may carry out that punishment, prohibiting methods that are &#x27;cruel and unusual&#x27;.&quot;

====Evolving standards of decency====

In &quot;Trop v. Dulles&quot;, , Chief Justice Earl Warren said: &quot;The [Eighth] Amendment must draw its meaning from the evolving standards of decency that mark the progress of a maturing society.&quot; Subsequently, the Court has looked to societal developments, as well as looking to its own independent judgment, in determining what are those &quot;evolving standards of decency&quot;. In &quot;Kennedy v. Louisiana&quot; (2008) the Supreme Court stated: &quot;Evolving standards of decency must embrace and express respect for the dignity of the person, and the punishment of criminals must conform to that rule.&quot;

Originalists, like Justice Antonin Scalia, argue that societies may rot instead of maturing and may decrease in virtue or wisdom instead of increasing. Thus, they say, the framers wanted the amendment understood as it was written and ratified, instead of morphing as times change, and in any event legislators are more competent than judges to take the pulse of the public as to changing standards of decency.

The &quot;evolving standards&quot; test has been subject to scholarly criticism. For example, law professor John Stinneford asserts that the &quot;evolving standards&quot; test misinterprets the Eighth Amendment:
On the other hand, law professor Dennis Baker defends the evolving standards of decency test as advancing the moral purpose of the Eighth Amendment to ban the inflicting of unjust, oppressive, or disproportional punishments by a state on its citizens.

====Proportionality====
The Supreme Court has applied evolving standards not only to say what punishments are inherently cruel, but also to say what punishments that are not inherently cruel are nevertheless &quot;grossly disproportionate&quot; to the offense in question. An example can be seen in &quot;Jackson v. Bishop&quot; an Eighth Circuit decision outlawing corporal punishment in the Arkansas prison system: &quot;The scope of the Amendment is not static...[D]isproportion, both among punishments and between punishment and crime, is a factor to be considered...&quot; The Supreme court observed in &quot;Weems v. United States&quot; (1910) that &quot;it is a precept of justice that punishment for crime should be graduated and proportioned to offense.&quot; Relying on and citing its early cases &quot;O″Neil v. Vermont&quot;, and &quot;Weems v. United States&quot; the Supreme Court concluded in &quot;Enmund v. Florida&quot; that the Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause is partly a prohibition of all punishments which, by their excessive length or severity, are greatly disproportioned to the offenses charged.

Law professor John Stinneford asserts that the Eighth Amendment forbids punishments that are very disproportionate to the offense, even if the punishment by itself is not intrinsically barbaric, but he argues that &quot;proportionality is to be measured primarily in terms of prior practice&quot; according to the word &quot;unusual&quot; in the amendment, instead of being measured according to shifting and nebulous evolving standards. Stinneford argues that the word &quot;unusual&quot; in the Eighth Amendment has a very different meaning in comparison to those who use originalism to interpret the U.S. Constitution. He writes: &quot;But in reality, the word &#x27;unusual&#x27; in the Eighth Amendment did not originally mean &#x27;rare&#x27;– it meant &#x27;contrary to long usage&#x27;, or &#x27;new&#x27;. A punishment is cruel and unusual if it is &#x27;cruel in light of long usage&#x27; – that is, cruel in comparison to longstanding prior practice or tradition.&quot; Similarly, law professor John Bessler points to &quot;An Essay on Crimes and Punishments&quot;, written by Cesare Beccaria in the 1760s, which advocated proportionate punishments; many of the Founding Fathers, including Thomas Jefferson and James Madison, read Beccaria&#x27;s treatise and were influenced by it.

Thus, Stinneford and Bessler disagree with the view of Justice Scalia, joined by Chief Justice Rehnquist, in &quot;Harmelin v. Michigan&quot; where they denied that the Punishments Clause contains any proportionality principle. With Scalia and Rehnquist, Richard Epstein argues that the amendment does not refer broadly to the imposition of penalties, but rather refers more narrowly to the penalties themselves; Epstein says judges who favor the broad view tend to omit the letter &quot;s&quot; at the end of the word &quot;punishments&quot;.

==See also==

* United States constitutional criminal procedure
* Capital punishment in the United States
* Crimes against humanity
* Medical care and safety of inmates
** Healthcare in American women&#x27;s prisons
** Michelle Kosilek
** &quot;Estelle v. Gamble&quot; (1976)
** &quot;Helling v. McKinney&quot; (1993)
** &quot;Farmer v. Brennan&quot; (1994)
** Prisoner abuse in the United States
** Infectious diseases within American prisons

==References==

Notes
Citations
==External links==
* &quot;Original Meaning: Cruel and Unusual Punishments&quot; —LOC Historian PA Madison</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q270938" start="4" end="20" title="Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Eighth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q270938" start="22" end="36" title="Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Amendment VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="45" end="71" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419536" start="98" end="112" title="Excessive Bail Clause" label="excessive bail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374304" start="134" end="162" title="cruel and unusual punishment" label="cruel and unusual punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="241" end="269" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="United States Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q219447" start="603" end="633" title="Bill of Rights 1689" label="English Bill of Rights of 1689"/>
<link wikidata="Q877524" start="790" end="812" title="Hanged, drawn and quartered" label="drawing and quartering"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="865" end="878" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435124" start="914" end="932" title="Capital punishment in the United States" label="capital punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882179" start="1044" end="1050" title="Murder (United States law)" label="murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q17112716" start="1310" end="1337" title="United States v. Bajakajian" label="United States v. Bajakajian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002253" start="1674" end="1693" title="Incorporation of the Bill of Rights" label="apply to the states"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="1867" end="1881" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q219447" start="1945" end="1967" title="Bill of Rights 1689" label="Bill of Rights of 1689"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="1978" end="1988" title="Parliament of England" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q734446" start="2247" end="2258" title="Titus Oates" label="Titus Oates"/>
<link wikidata="Q126188" start="2287" end="2300" title="James II of England" label="King James II"/>
<link wikidata="Q310229" start="2341" end="2348" title="perjury" label="perjury"/>
<link wikidata="Q10682443" start="2520" end="2527" title="pillory" label="pillory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932206" start="2673" end="2686" title="jurisprudence" label="jurisprudence"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="2891" end="2904" title="death penalty" label="death penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="3213" end="3229" title="William III of England" label="King William III"/>
<link wikidata="Q130812" start="3243" end="3256" title="Mary II of England" label="Queen Mary II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729518" start="3264" end="3284" title="Declaration of Right, 1689" label="Declaration of Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178387" start="3511" end="3528" title="Court of Queen&amp;#x27;s Bench (England)" label="King&amp;#x27;s Bench"/>
<link wikidata="Q332449" start="4098" end="4116" title="William Blackstone" label="William Blackstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986212" start="4132" end="4167" title="Commentaries on the Laws of England" label="Commentaries on the Laws of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q944717" start="4244" end="4274" title="Virginia Declaration of Rights" label="Virginia Declaration of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934473" start="4292" end="4347" title="Virginia Ratifying Convention" label="Virginia convention that ratified the U.S. Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q532329" start="4444" end="4456" title="George Mason" label="George Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q311885" start="4461" end="4474" title="Patrick Henry" label="Patrick Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="4811" end="4824" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141729" start="4958" end="4974" title="Coker v. Georgia" label="Coker v. Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60754683" start="5221" end="5237" title="Timbs v. Indiana" label="Timbs v. Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365622" start="5456" end="5490" title="Law enforcement in the United States" label="criminal-law-enforcement authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q578478" start="5525" end="5532" title="sheriff" label="sheriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887914" start="5640" end="5650" title="List of Parliaments of England" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q584063" start="5906" end="5923" title="Petition of Right" label="Petition of Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q492004" start="6165" end="6187" title="Habeas Corpus Act 1679" label="Habeas Corpus Act 1679"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893462" start="6719" end="6743" title="United States v. Salerno" label="United States v. Salerno"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595961" start="6994" end="7008" title="Stack v. Boyle" label="Stack v. Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q265638" start="7378" end="7395" title="Obiter dictum" label="&amp;quot;dicta&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360440" start="7614" end="7641" title="McDonald v. City of Chicago" label="McDonald v. City of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7825" end="7855" title="Waters-Pierce Oil Co. v. Texas" label="Waters-Pierce Oil Co. v. Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312127" start="8005" end="8023" title="Due Process Clause" label="due process of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4976549" start="8323" end="8390" title="Browning-Ferris Industries of Vermont, Inc. v. Kelco Disposal, Inc." label="Browning-Ferris Industries of Vermont, Inc. v. Kelco Disposal, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q7603220" start="8792" end="8846" title="State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co. v. Campbell" label="State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co. v. Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q19053309" start="8909" end="8932" title="Austin v. United States" label="Austin v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q536118" start="9017" end="9033" title="asset forfeiture" label="asset forfeiture"/>
<link wikidata="Q17112716" start="9317" end="9344" title="United States v. Bajakajian" label="United States v. Bajakajian"/>
<link wikidata="Q60754683" start="10410" end="10426" title="Timbs v. Indiana" label="Timbs v. Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002253" start="10489" end="10527" title="Incorporation of the Bill of Rights" label="applies to state and local governments"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312127" start="10538" end="10556" title="Due Process Clause" label="Due Process Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="10932" end="10960" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="United States Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q311885" start="11031" end="11044" title="Patrick Henry" label="Patrick Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q43173" start="11091" end="11102" title="Inquisition" label="Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="11239" end="11257" title="Federal government of the United States" label="federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351382" start="12052" end="12057" title="Rack (torture)" label="racks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198167" start="12062" end="12069" title="Gibbeting" label="gibbets"/>
<link wikidata="Q6033002" start="12240" end="12258" title="Ingraham v. Wright" label="Ingraham v. Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q5400947" start="12635" end="12652" title="Estelle v. Gamble" label="Estelle v. Gamble"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845585" start="12661" end="12675" title="Trop v. Dulles" label="Trop v. Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979566" start="12790" end="12812" title="Weems v. United States" label="Weems v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353090" start="12931" end="12953" title="Robinson v. California" label="Robinson v. California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979566" start="13010" end="13032" title="Weems v. United States" label="Weems v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q646493" start="13299" end="13336" title="Louisiana ex rel. Francis v. Resweber" label="Louisiana ex rel. Francis v. Resweber"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789728" start="13378" end="13386" title="arguendo" label="arguendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002253" start="13439" end="13460" title="Incorporation of the Bill of Rights" label="applied to the states"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13473" end="13519" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution#Due Process Clause" label="Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353090" start="13530" end="13552" title="Robinson v. California" label="Robinson v. California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359993" start="13937" end="13951" title="Potter Stewart" label="Potter Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699336" start="14173" end="14185" title="John Bingham" label="John Bingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559328" start="14224" end="14241" title="Furman v. Georgia" label="Furman v. Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q717401" start="14251" end="14266" title="William J. Brennan Jr." label="Justice Brennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q132781" start="14549" end="14556" title="torture" label="torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845585" start="16482" end="16496" title="Trop v. Dulles" label="Trop v. Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859301" start="17039" end="17056" title="Miller v. Alabama" label="Miller v. Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q11156" start="17540" end="17554" title="Antonin Scalia" label="Antonin Scalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087840" start="17566" end="17584" title="concurring opinion" label="concurring opinion"/>
<link wikidata="Q240340" start="17637" end="17652" title="Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fifth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q65062236" start="18162" end="18181" title="Bucklew v. Precythe" label="Bucklew v. Precythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312127" start="18204" end="18222" title="Due Process Clause" label="Due Process Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435124" start="18244" end="18278" title="death penalty in the United States" label="death penalty in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="19429" end="19442" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q584804" start="19601" end="19611" title="Competence (law)" label="competence"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002441" start="19743" end="19760" title="Wilkerson v. Utah" label="Wilkerson v. Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q877524" start="19803" end="19825" title="Hanged, drawn and quartered" label="drawing and quartering"/>
<link wikidata="Q116646" start="19834" end="19844" title="dissection" label="dissection"/>
<link wikidata="Q468455" start="19846" end="19859" title="Death by burning" label="burning alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q778417" start="19864" end="19878" title="disembowelment" label="disembowelment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391996" start="19966" end="19984" title="William O. Douglas" label="William O. Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353090" start="20005" end="20027" title="Robinson v. California" label="Robinson v. California"/>
<link wikidata="Q468455" start="20130" end="20150" title="Death by burning" label="burning at the stake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235597" start="20152" end="20163" title="crucifixion" label="crucifixion"/>
<link wikidata="Q692003" start="20165" end="20186" title="Breaking wheel" label="breaking on the wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q661297" start="20252" end="20262" title="Dismemberment" label="quartering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351382" start="20264" end="20272" title="Rack (torture)" label="the rack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172972" start="20277" end="20287" title="Thumbscrew (torture)" label="thumbscrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q5069667" start="20299" end="20318" title="Chambers v. Florida" label="Chambers v. Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q132627" start="20390" end="20410" title="solitary confinement" label="solitary confinement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795831" start="20480" end="20500" title="Thompson v. Oklahoma" label="Thompson v. Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261072" start="20683" end="20699" title="Roper v. Simmons" label="Roper v. Simmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q127409" start="20811" end="20829" title="Atkins v. Virginia" label="Atkins v. Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142806" start="20888" end="20908" title="Developmental disability" label="mentally handicapped"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979566" start="21020" end="21042" title="Weems v. United States" label="Weems v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q898871" start="21102" end="21117" title="judicial review" label="judicial review"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016364" start="21213" end="21228" title="cadena temporal" label="cadena temporal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845585" start="21617" end="21631" title="Trop v. Dulles" label="Trop v. Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q132781" start="21795" end="21802" title="torture" label="torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353090" start="21927" end="21949" title="Robinson v. California" label="Robinson v. California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632070" start="22047" end="22055" title="Substance use disorder" label="addicted"/>
<link wikidata="Q940" start="22070" end="22078" title="narcotic" label="narcotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236108" start="22330" end="22345" title="Powell v. Texas" label="Powell v. Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887424" start="22390" end="22409" title="public intoxication" label="public intoxication"/>
<link wikidata="Q7557576" start="22784" end="22797" title="Solem v. Helm" label="Solem v. Helm"/>
<link wikidata="Q68676" start="23432" end="23449" title="life imprisonment" label="life imprisonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5659091" start="23552" end="23572" title="Harmelin v. Michigan" label="Harmelin v. Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11156" start="24125" end="24131" title="Antonin Scalia" label="Scalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q311562" start="24157" end="24166" title="William Rehnquist" label="Rehnquist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593392" start="24853" end="24870" title="Graham v. Florida" label="Graham v. Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q170079" start="25045" end="25050" title="Minor (law)" label="minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859301" start="25078" end="25095" title="Miller v. Alabama" label="Miller v. Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141729" start="25274" end="25290" title="Coker v. Georgia" label="Coker v. Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25814" end="25820" title="Myopia#Society and culture" label="myopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738811" start="25908" end="25928" title="Kennedy v. Louisiana" label="Kennedy v. Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q11153" start="26470" end="26477" title="John Roberts" label="Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11156" start="26745" end="26759" title="Antonin Scalia" label="Antonin Scalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087840" start="26771" end="26789" title="concurring opinion" label="concurring opinion"/>
<link wikidata="Q240340" start="26842" end="26857" title="Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fifth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q65062236" start="27362" end="27381" title="Bucklew v. Precythe" label="Bucklew v. Precythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312127" start="27793" end="27811" title="Due Process Clause" label="Due Process Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435124" start="27833" end="27867" title="death penalty in the United States" label="death penalty in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559328" start="28258" end="28275" title="Furman v. Georgia" label="Furman v. Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660855" start="28984" end="29000" title="Gregg v. Georgia" label="Gregg v. Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660855" start="29778" end="29803" title="Woodson v. North Carolina" label="Woodson v. North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q15147963" start="30045" end="30063" title="Godfrey v. Georgia" label="Godfrey v. Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797445" start="30315" end="30336" title="Maynard v. Cartwright" label="Maynard v. Cartwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q7966800" start="30553" end="30570" title="Walton v. Arizona" label="Walton v. Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020691" start="30877" end="30895" title="Herrera v. Collins" label="Herrera v. Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002441" start="31086" end="31103" title="Wilkerson v. Utah" label="Wilkerson v. Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q216169" start="31133" end="31154" title="Execution by firing squad" label="death by firing squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379317" start="31229" end="31246" title="Rummel v. Estelle" label="Rummel v. Estelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637292" start="31345" end="31362" title="three strikes law" label="three strikes law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5659091" start="31610" end="31630" title="Harmelin v. Michigan" label="Harmelin v. Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6665918" start="31770" end="31788" title="Lockyer v. Andrade" label="Lockyer v. Andrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637292" start="31906" end="31923" title="three strikes law" label="three strikes law"/>
<link wikidata="Q812660" start="32022" end="32034" title="Baze v. Rees" label="Baze v. Rees"/>
<link wikidata="Q19885296" start="32133" end="32149" title="Glossip v. Gross" label="Glossip v. Gross"/>
<link wikidata="Q210035" start="32184" end="32200" title="lethal injection" label="lethal injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q423071" start="32217" end="32226" title="midazolam" label="midazolam"/>
<link wikidata="Q11156" start="32237" end="32251" title="Antonin Scalia" label="Antonin Scalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087840" start="32263" end="32281" title="concurring opinion" label="concurring opinion"/>
<link wikidata="Q240340" start="32334" end="32349" title="Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fifth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q65062236" start="32836" end="32855" title="Bucklew v. Precythe" label="Bucklew v. Precythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312127" start="33213" end="33231" title="Due Process Clause" label="Due Process Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435124" start="33253" end="33287" title="death penalty in the United States" label="death penalty in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845585" start="34283" end="34297" title="Trop v. Dulles" label="Trop v. Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q311197" start="34321" end="34332" title="Earl Warren" label="Earl Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738811" start="34676" end="34696" title="Kennedy v. Louisiana" label="Kennedy v. Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q453503" start="34902" end="34914" title="Originalism" label="Originalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q11156" start="34929" end="34943" title="Antonin Scalia" label="Antonin Scalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6117840" start="36084" end="36101" title="Jackson v. Bishop" label="Jackson v. Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q250433" start="36111" end="36125" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit" label="Eighth Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979566" start="36393" end="36415" title="Weems v. United States" label="Weems v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979566" start="36627" end="36649" title="Weems v. United States" label="Weems v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379116" start="36693" end="36710" title="Enmund v. Florida" label="Enmund v. Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q453503" start="37480" end="37526" title="Originalism" label="originalism to interpret the U.S. Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221766" start="37912" end="37924" title="John Bessler" label="John Bessler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755269" start="37941" end="37975" title="An Essay on Crimes and Punishments" label="An Essay on Crimes and Punishments"/>
<link wikidata="Q223723" start="37994" end="38009" title="Cesare Beccaria" label="Cesare Beccaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="38107" end="38123" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="38128" end="38141" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5659091" start="38316" end="38336" title="Harmelin v. Michigan" label="Harmelin v. Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323685" start="38456" end="38471" title="Richard Allen Epstein" label="Richard Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892396" start="38762" end="38809" title="United States constitutional criminal procedure" label="United States constitutional criminal procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435124" start="38812" end="38851" title="Capital punishment in the United States" label="Capital punishment in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q173462" start="38854" end="38877" title="Crimes against humanity" label="Crimes against humanity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38918" end="38961" title="Incarceration of women in the United States#Healthcare" label="Healthcare in American women&amp;#x27;s prisons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837107" start="38965" end="38981" title="Michelle Kosilek" label="Michelle Kosilek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5400947" start="38991" end="39008" title="Estelle v. Gamble" label="Estelle v. Gamble"/>
<link wikidata="Q5400947" start="39031" end="39050" title="Helling v. McKinney" label="Helling v. McKinney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435748" start="39073" end="39090" title="Farmer v. Brennan" label="Farmer v. Brennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q59717" start="39107" end="39142" title="Prisoner abuse in the United States" label="Prisoner abuse in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986219" start="39146" end="39189" title="Infectious diseases within American prisons" label="Infectious diseases within American prisons"/>
</links>
</doc>
