<doc id="29484" wikidata="Q1757145" url="?curid=29484" title="Seabee">
<text>United States Naval Construction Battalions, better known as the Navy Seabees, form the U.S. Naval Construction Forces (NCF). The Seabee nickname is a heterograph of the initial letters &quot;CB&quot; from the words &quot;Construction Battalion&quot;. Depending upon context, &quot;Seabee&quot; can refer to all enlisted personnel in the USN&#x27;s occupational field 7 (OF-7), all personnel in the Naval Construction Force (NCF), or Construction Battalion. Seabees serve both in and outside the NCF. During World War II they were plank-holders of both the Naval Combat Demolition Units and the Underwater Demolition Teams (UDTs). The men in the NCF considered these units to be &quot;Seabee&quot;. In addition, Seabees served as elements of Cubs, Lions, Acorns and the United States Marine Corps. They also provided the manpower for the top secret CWS Flame Tank Group. Today the Seabees have many special task assignments starting with Camp David and the Naval Support Unit at the Department of State. Seabees serve under both Commanders of the Naval Surface Forces Atlantic/Pacific fleets as well as on many base Public Works and USN diving commands.
Naval Construction Battalions were conceived of as replacements for civilian construction companies in combat zones after the attack on Pearl Harbor. At the time civilian contractors had roughly 70,000 men working U.S.N. contracts overseas. International law made it illegal for civilian workers to resist an attack. Doing so would classify them as guerrillas and could lead to summary execution. The formation of the Seabees amidst the aftermath of the Battle of Wake Island inspired the backstory for the World War II movie &quot;The Fighting Seabees&quot;. They also feature prominently in the wartime musical drama (and subsequent film) &quot;South Pacific&quot;.

Adm. Moreell&#x27;s concept model CB was a USMC trained military equivalent of those civilian companies: able to work anywhere, under any conditions or circumstances. They have a storied legacy of creative field ingenuity, stretching from Normandy and Okinawa to Iraq and Afghanistan. Adm. Ernest King wrote to the Seabees on their second anniversary, &quot;Your ingenuity and fortitude have become a legend in the naval service.&quot; They were unique at conception and remain unchanged from Adm. Moreell&#x27;s model today. In the October 1944 issue of &quot;Flying&quot;, the Seabees are described as &quot;a phenomenon of WWII&quot;.

== Naval construction history ==

CB Conceptual Formation

In the 1930s Bureau of Yards and Docks (BuDocks) began providing for &quot;Navy Construction Battalions&quot; (CB) in contingency war plans. In 1934, Capt. Carl Carlson&#x27;s version of the CB was approved by Chief of Naval Operations In 1935, RADM. Norman Smith, head of BuDocks, selected Captain Walter Allen, War Plans Officer, to represent BuDocks on the War Plans Board. Capt. Allen presented the bureau&#x27;s CB concept with the Board including it in the Rainbow war plans. The Seabees named their first training center for Capt. Allen. A criticism of the proposal was CBs would have a dual command; military control administrated by fleet line Officers while construction operations would be administrated by Civil Engineer Corps officers. Additional criticisms were no provisions for the military organization or military training necessary to provide unit structure, discipline, and esprit de corps. In December 1937, RADM. Ben Moreell became BuDocks Chief and the lead proponent of the CB proposal.

In 1941, the Navy and BuDocks decided to improve project oversight of civilian contractors by creating &quot;Headquarters Construction Companies&quot;. These companies would have 2 officers and 99 enlisted, but would do no actual construction. On 31 October 1941, RADM. Chester Nimitz, Chief of the Bureau of Navigation, authorized the formation of the 1st Headquarters Construction Company. Recruiting began in November while boot training began 7 December 1941 at Naval Station Newport. By 16 December, four additional companies had been authorized, but Pearl Harbor changed everything.

The Seabee skillset became multi-faceted with all advanced military training being USMC instruction. That training led to CBs being tasked as USMC Pioneers (Shore party) in multiple landings. They added pontoon development, fabrication, and combat utilization. The military training added frontline combat with both the Marine Corps and the Army during WWII and the Marines and Army Special forces during Vietnam. It also led to combat as machine gunners on USN LCVP and PT boats during WWII. On the construction side of their toolbox the NCF CBs were formed with skilled tradesmen making the NCF competent in all types of vertical and horizontal civil construction as well as the associated engineering. The newly formed Naval Construction Force (NCF) toolbox quickly focused on airfield and harbor construction. The toolbox was expanded to include underwater construction, demolition, as well as the related combat applications used by the Seabees that comprised the NCDU&#x27;s and UDTs. The toolbox was further expanded by the creation of Public works units to maintain the facilities they constructed. In addition mosquito/malaria control was added to their Public works skillset. The NCF added traditional fleet salvage, repair, and maintenance as needed. Combat engineering was added to the toolbox when CBs were transferred to the Marine Corps as elements of USMC engineering regiments. War demands added stevedoring to the toolbox both in USMC assault operations and at forward operating facilities. Weapons development and manufacture were added by the USA Chemical Warfare Service. Polar petroleum exploration and construction were specialties that were also added. Postwar the National Science Foundation would take advantage of those skillsets. Ingenuity and resourcefulness were tools they became famous for. Postwar assignments with the CIA and State Department added further to the toolbox in electronic fields related to national security.

Their official motto is &quot;We build, we fight.&quot; The NCF also adopted the motto &quot;Can Do&quot; as the force believed it could do anything it was tasked with. The Seabees boasted of this by posting signs reading: &quot;The difficult we Can Do now, The impossible takes a little longer&quot;.

== World War II ==

On 28 December 1941, Adm. Moreell requested authority to commission three Naval Construction Battalions. His request was approved on 5 January 1942 by Admiral Nimitz. The 1st HQ Construction Company was used to commission the 1st Naval Construction Detachment, which was assigned to Operation Bobcat. They were sent to Bora Bora and are known in Seabee history as &quot;Bobcats&quot;.

Concurrently, the other requested companies had been approved. BuDocks took Companies 2 &amp; 3 to form the 1st Naval Construction Battalion at Charleston, South Carolina. HQ Companies 4 &amp; 5 were used for the 2nd CB. All four companies deployed independently. CBs 3, 4, &amp; 5 were deployed the same way. CB 6 was the first battalion to deploy as a Battalion.

Before all this could happen, BuDocks had to address the dual command issue. Naval regs stated unit command was strictly limited to line officers. BuDocks deemed it essential that CBs be commanded by CEC officers trained in construction. The Bureau of Naval Personnel (BuPers) was strongly opposed. Adm. Moreell took the issue directly to the Secretary of the Navy, Frank Knox. On 19 March 1942, Knox gave the CEC complete command of all NCF personnel. Almost 11,400 would become CEC during WWII with 7,960 doing CB service. Two weeks earlier, on 5 March all CB personnel were officially named &quot;Seabees&quot;.

The first volunteers were tradesmen that received advanced rank for their trade skills. This resulted in the Seabees being the highest-paid group in uniform. To recruit these men, age and physical standards were waived up to age 50. Until November 1942 the average Seabee was 37, even so, all received the same physical training. In December, FDR ordered the Selective Service System to provide CB recruits. Enlistees could request CB service with a written statement certifying that they were trade qualified. This lasted until October 1943 when voluntary enlistment in the Seabees ceased until December 1944. By war&#x27;s end, 258,872 officers and enlisted had served in the Seabees. They never reached the Navy&#x27;s authorized quota of 321,056.

In 1942, initial CB boot was at Camp Allen in Norfolk, Virginia, which moved to Camp Bradford, which moved to Camp Peary and finally moved to Camp Endicott in Quonset Point, Rhode Island. CBs 1–5 were sent directly overseas for urgent projects. CBs that followed were sent to Advance Base Depots (ABDs) for deployment. Camp Rousseau at Port Hueneme became operational first and was the ABD to the Pacific. The Davisville ABD became operational in June with NTC Camp Endicott commissioned that August. Other CB Camps were Camp Parks, Livermore, Ca., and Camp Lee-Stephenson, Quoddy Village, Eastport, Maine and Camp Holliday, Gulfport, Mississippi.

CBs sent to the Pacific were attached to one of the four Amphibious Corps: I, III, and V were USMC. The VII Amphibious Force was under General Douglas MacArthur, Supreme Commander. MacArthur said the only problem he had with the Seabees was that he didn&#x27;t have enough of them.

Advance Bases

The Office of Naval Operations created a code identifying Advance Base (AB) construction as a numbered metaphor for the size/type of base. That code was also used to identify the &quot;unit&quot; that would be the administration for that base. These were Lion, Cub, Oak and Acorn with a Lion being a main Fleet Base (numbered 1–6). Cubs were Secondary Fleet Bases 1/4 the size of a Lion (numbered 1–12). Oak and Acorn were the names given air installations, new or captured (airfield or airstrip). Cubs quickly gained status. The speed with which the Seabees could make one operational led the Marines to consider them a tactical component. Camp Bedilion shared a common fence-line with Camp Rousseau at Port Hueneme and was home to the Acorn Assembly and Training Detachment (AATD) As the war progressed, BuDocks realized that logistics required that Advance Base Construction Depots (ABCDs) be built and CBs built seven. When the code was first created, BuDocks foresaw two CBs constructing a Lion. By 1944 an entire Regiment was being used. The invasion of Okinawa took four Construction Brigades of 55,000 men. The Seabees built the infrastructure needed to take the war to Japan. By war&#x27;s end CBs had, served on six continents, constructed over 300 bases on as many islands. They built everything: airfields, airstrips, piers, wharves, breakwaters, PT &amp; seaplane bases, bridges, roads, com-centers, fuel farms, hospitals, barracks and anything else.

In the Atlantic the Seabees biggest job was the preparations for the Normandy landing. After which CBMUs 627, 628, and 629 were tasked to facilitate the crossing of the Rhine. For CBMU 629 it was front-line work. The Pacific is where 80% of the NCF deployed.

===African American Service: the Seabee stevedores===
In February 1942 CNO Admiral Harold Rainsford Stark recommended African Americans for ratings in the construction trades. In April the Navy announced it would enlist African Americans in the Seabees. Even so, there were just two CBs that were &quot;colored&quot; units, the 34th and 80th. Both had white Southern officers and black enlisted. Both battalions experienced problems with that arrangement that led to the replacement of the officers. The men of the 34th went on a hunger strike which made national news. The Commander of the 80th had 19 enlisted dishonorably discharged for sedition. The NAACP and Thurgood Marshall got 14 of those reversed.

In early 1943 the Navy commissioned its first African American officers. The first to enter the Seabees officer corps was MIT graduate Edward S. Hope. In May 1943 he completed CEC training at Camp Endicott and was posted as the Public Works officer at Manana barracks Hawaii Territory. That same year, the Navy drew up a proposal to raise the number of colored CBs to 5 and require that all non-rated men in the next 24 CBs be colored. The proposal was approved, but not acted on.

The lack of stevedores in combat zones was a huge issue for the Navy. Authorization for the formation of cargo handling CBs or &quot;Special CBs&quot; happened mid-September 1942. By wars end 41 Special CBs had been commissioned of which 15 were &quot;colored&quot;. Neither the Navy or NCF used that label, the units were simply segregated in the men assigned to them. The Special CBs were the first fully integrated units in the U.S. Navy. V-J Day brought the decommissioning of all of them. The Special CBs were forerunners of today&#x27;s Navy Cargo Handling Battalions of the Navy Expeditionary Logistics Support Group (United States). The arrival of 15 African American Special CBs in Pearl Harbor made segregation an issue for the 14th Naval District. For a protracted period the men lived in tents, but the disparity of treatment was obvious even to the Navy. The 14th Naval District Command felt they deserved proper shelter with at least separate but equal barracks. Manana Barracks and Waiawa Gulch became the United States&#x27; largest &quot;colored&quot; installation with over 4,000 Seabee stevedores barracked there. It was the site of racial strife to the point that the camp was fenced in and placed under armed guard. The Seabees were trucked to and from the docks in cattle trucks. Two naval supply depots were located at Waiawa Gulch. At wars end 12,500 African Americans would serve in the Construction Battalions.

The 17th Special CB was one of the segregated Specials and was at Peleliu in September 1944. The unit is not listed in the USMC order of battle at Peleliu despite being attached to the 1st Marine Pioneers. On D-day, the 7th Marines had a situation where they did not have the men to man the lines and get the wounded to safety. Coming to their aid were the 2 companies of the 16th Marine Field Depot (segregated) and the 17th Special CB. The Japanese mounted a banzai counter-attack at 0200 hours that night. By the time it was over, nearly the entire 17th had volunteered to carry ammunition to the front lines on the stretchers they brought the wounded back on. They filled the line where the wounded had been, manned 37mm guns that had lost crews and volunteered for anything the Marines needed. The 17th remained with the 7th Marines until the right flank had been secured D+3. There is nothing comparable in USMC history. According to the Military History Encyclopedia on the Web, &quot;were it not for the Black Marine shore party---the (banzai) on the 7th Marines would not have been repulsed&quot;.
* On Peleliu, shore party detachments from the 33rd and 73rd CBs received Presidential Unit Citations as did the primary shore party (1st Marine Pioneers). The Commander of the 17th Special CB received the same commendatory letter as the Company Commanders of the 7th Marine Ammunition Co. and the 11th Marine Depot Co. Before the battle was even over, Maj. Gen. Rupertus, USMC wrote to each: 
* African American Seabees

===Seabee North Slope Oil Exploration 1944===
Construction Battalion Detachment (CBD) 1058 was formed from &quot;screening Camp Peary and the NCF for geologists, petroleum engineers, oil drillers, tool pushers, roustabouts and roughnecks&quot; and later designated 1058. Additional personnel were chosen for their arctic experience with CBs 12 and 66. They mustered at Camp Lee Stephenson for Operation Pet 4. Congress put $1,000,000 aside to wildcat for oil in U.S. Navy Petroleum Reserve No. 4 (NPR-4) in 1944. NPR-4 had been created and placed in the oil reserve in 1923. Today NPR-4 is the National Petroleum Reserve in Alaska. The detachment&#x27;s mission was:
* Do a detailed geologic study at Umiat and Cape Simpson
* Drill test and core holes
* Drill a deep well
* Do complete aerial and overland pipeline surveys for NPR 4.
* Build a base camp with a runway at Point Barrow
* Build field camp runways at Umiat and Bettles

On July 19 the USS &quot;Spica&quot; headed north with the SS &quot;Jonathan Harrington&quot; for Point Barrow and Cape Simpson. The det&#x27;s base camp was constructed at Point Barrow. Four D-8s with twenty sleds of supplies were prepped for the 330-mile trek to Umiat once the tundra had frozen. The first tractor train delivered supplies, the second, heavy well equipment. The D8s would make eight trips total. When summer arrived a wildcat was drilled to 1,816&#x27; before the cold shut down operations. The hole was designated Seabee#1 It was near four known seeps at Umiat in the very south-east of NPR 4. The rock strata there was from the Upper Cretaceous and a stratum of it was named the &quot;Seabee Formation&quot;. On the coast the Seabees drilled test holes at Cape Simpson and Point Barrow. Once the runways were completed additional supplies were flown in. In March 1946 civilians took over the project. Some Seabees of CBD 1058 were hired immediately upon discharge to continue doing the work they had been doing&quot; The Navy applied the cold weather experience from CBD 1058 for Operation Highjump and Operation Deep Freeze. Seabee #1 remains a USGS monitor well today.

Land surveys

Twice the Seabees have been tasked with large-scale land surveys. The first was done by CBD 1058 for a proposed NPR 4 pipeline route to Fairbanks. The Trans-Alaskan pipeline follows a portion of their survey from roughly the Arctic Circle to Fairbanks. The second would be done by a Seabee team from MCB 10. They went to Vietnam in 1956 to survey and map the existing road network. That survey was extensively used during the Vietnam War.

Malaria and Epidemic Control Group

Navy Medicine created the Malaria and Epidemic Control Group to deal with insect-borne diseases. Between August 1942, and February 1943, American troops in the Pacific averaged 10 malaria cases for every combat injury. Seabees oiled, drained and sprayed mosquito breeding areas and inspected and fumigated ships and aircraft transiting malaria-infested areas. It was an important task that absolutely needed to be done in order for the United States to field an effective combat force. On Guadalcanal the 63rd CB had malaria control as its primary task. At Gulfport a school was established to train Battalions for the Malaria and Epidemic Control Group.

== World War II Seabees outside the NCF ==


During World War II Seabees were tasked outside the NCF in the USMC, NCDUs, and UDTs.

===Marine Corps===
USMC historian Gordon L. Rottman wrote &quot;that one of the biggest contributions the Navy made to the Marine Corps during WWII was the creation of the Seabees&quot;. In exchange, the Corps would be influential upon the CB organization and its history. After the experience of Guadalcanal the Department of War decided that the Marines and Seabees would make all subsequent landings together. That arrangement led to numerous Seabee claims that they had landed first, even leaving signs on the beach asking the Marines &quot;What took you so long?&quot; The Seabees in the UDTs made an effort of this of which their mates in the CBs approved.

When the first three CBs were formed the Seabees did not have a base of their own. Upon leaving boot the recruits were sent to National Youth Administration camps in Illinois, New Jersey, New York, and Virginia to receive military training from the Marine Corps. The Marine Corps listed CBs on their Table of organization: &quot;D-Series Division&quot; for 1942, &quot;E-Series Division&quot; for 1943, and &quot;Amphibious Corps&quot; for 1944–45.

When CBs were created the Marine Corps wanted one for each of the three Marine Divisions, but were told no because of war priorities. Even so, early Seabee units were connected with Marine Corps ops. The 1st Naval Construction Detachment (Bobcats) together with and A Co CB 3 was transferred to the Marines and redesignated 3rd Battalion 22nd Marines. The Bobcats had deployed without receiving advanced military training. The 22nd Marines took care of that. The 4th Construction Detachment was attached to the 5th Marine Defense Battalion for two years.

By autumn, the 18th, 19th and 25th CBs had been transferred to the Corps as combat engineers. Each was attached to a composite engineer regiment, redesignated as 3rd Battalion: 17th Marine Regiment, 18th Marine Regiment, 19th Marine Regiment, and 20th Marine Regiment. The 18th and 19th CBs each claim to have been the first CBs authorized to wear standard USMC issue. Both received their military training and USMC duffle bag at MTC New River, NC. There is no record of how many CBs received USMC issue. It is known that the 31st, 43rd, 76th, 121st and 133rd CBs received partial or complete issues. On 15 January 1944 the 142nd CB was commissioned at New River,Camp Lejeune. On 2 February that Battalion arrived at Camp Pendelton for further training, mounting out 19 April.

After Guadalcanal amphibious operations became joint USMC/Seabee pairings. The 6th CB joined the 1st Marine Division after combat had started on Guadalcanal. The 18th CB was sent to join them from Fleet Marine Force depot Norfolk. Many more would follow. The 6th Special CB was tasked to the 4th Marines Depot in the Russells. November saw the 14th CB tasked to the 2nd Raider Bn on Guadalcanal. In June, the 24th CB had been tasked to the 9th Marine Defense Bn on Rendova. The 33rd and 73rd CBs had dets tasked to the 1st Pioneers as shore party on Peleliu as was the 17th Special CB colored. At Enogi Inlet on Munda, a 47th det was shore party to the 1st and 4th Marine Raiders. The 3rd Marine Div. made the Commander of the 71st CB shore party commander on Bougainville. His 71st had support from the 25th, 53rd, and 75th CBs. At Cape Torokina the 75th had 100 men volunteer to make the assault of the 3rd Marines. Also at Bougainville, the 53rd provided shore parties to the 2nd Raiders on green beach and the 3rd Raiders on Puruata Island. The 121st was formed at the CB Training Center of MTC Camp Lejuene as 3rd Bn 20th Marines. They would be shore party to the 23rd Marines on Roi-Namur, Saipan, and Tinian.

When the Marine Engineer Regiments were inactivated in 1944, CBs were then tasked to Marine Divisions. For Iwo Jima, the 31st and 133rd were attached to the 4th and 5th Marine Divisions. The 133rd was shore party to the 23rd Marines. while the 31st CB was in the 5th Shore Party Regiment. The 31st demolitionsmen attached directly to the Division. The 8th Marine Field Depot was the shore party command eschelon for Iwo Jima. They requested 26 heavy equipment operators and received volunteers from CB 8. Okinawa saw the 58th, 71st, 130th, and 145th CBs detached from the Navy and tasked to the Marine Corps 6th, 2nd, and 1st Marine Divisions respectively.

From Iwo Jima the 5th Marine Div. returned to Camp Tarawa to have the 116th CB attached. When Japan fell the 116th CB was part of the occupation force. V-J day left thousands of Japanese troops in China and the III Marine Amphibious Corps was sent there to get them home. The 33rd NCR was assigned to III Marine Amphib. Corps for this mission.

CBs were also tasked individually to the three USMC Amphibious Corps. The 19th CB started out with the I MAC prior to joining the 17th Marines. The 53rd CB was attached to I MAC as Naval Construction Battalion I M.A.C. When I MAC was redesignated III Amphibious Corps the battalion became an element of the 1st Provisional Marine Brigade. For Guam, III Amphibious Corps had the 2nd Special CB, 25th, and 53rd CBs. The CO 25 CB was shore party commander for the 3rd Marines on beaches Red 1 and Red 2. The 3rd Marines would award 25&#x27;s shore party 17 bronze stars. V Amphibious Corps (VAC) had the 23rd Special and 62nd CBs on Iwo Jima. On Tinian the 6th Construction Brigade was attached to V Amphibious Corps.
* Two sections of CBMU 515 saw combat with the 22nd Marines on Guam.
* When the decision was made to construct Marine Corps Base, Camp Pendleton in 1942, BuDocks issued the main contracts to civilian contractors. However, the base project was so large that some smaller contracts were awarded to the Seabees, one of which was a Quonsent Camp for USMC instruction of Naval Construction Battalions in area 25(Vado del Rio). Seabees were also involved in the construction of Camp Del Mar in area 21 and erected a temporary construction camp close by while they were assigned.

When the war ended the Seabees had a unique interservice standing with the U.S. Marine Corps. Seabee historian William Bradford Huie wrote &quot;that the two have a camaraderie unknown else-wheres in the U.S. military&quot;. Even though they are &quot;Navy&quot; the Seabees adopted USMC fatigues with a Seabee insignia in place of the EGA. At least 10 CB units incorporated USMC insignia into theirs. Admiral Moreell wrote, tongue in cheek, that the Marines were the best fighting men in the Pacific, but one had to serve 90 days with the Seabees to qualify to as a &quot;Junior Bee&quot;.

===Naval Combat Demolition Units===
In early May 1943, a two-phase &quot;Naval Demolition Project&quot; was ordered by the Chief of Naval Operations &quot;to meet a present and urgent requirement&quot; for the invasion of Sicily. Phase-1 began at Amphibious Training Base (ATB) Solomons, Maryland with the creation of Operational Naval Demolition Unit # 1. Six Officers led by Lt. Fred Wise CEC and eighteen enlisted reported from Camp Peary dynamiting and demolition school. Seabees called them &quot;Demolitioneers&quot;.
Naval Combat Demolition Units (NCDUs) consisted of one junior CEC officer, five enlisted, and were numbered 1–216. After that first group had been trained, Lt. Commander Draper Kauffman was selected to command the program. It had been set up in Camp Peary&#x27;s &quot;Area E&quot;(explosives) at the dynamiting and demolition school. Between May and mid-July, the first six NCDU classes graduated at Camp Peary. While the program was at Camp Peary the men were given head-of-the-line privileges at the mess hall. The program was moved to Fort Pierce where the first class began mid-July. Despite the move, Camp Peary remained Kauffman&#x27;s primary recruit center. &quot;He would go back to the dynamite school, assemble the (Seabees) in the auditorium and say, &quot;I need volunteers for hazardous, prolonged and distant duty.&quot; Fort Pierce had two CB units assigned, CBD 1011 and CBMU 570. They were tasked with the construction and maintenance of obstacles needed for demolition training.

The invasion of Normandy had 34 NCDUs. When the first ten arrived in England they had no CO. Lt. Smith (CEC) assumed the role, splitting them up to train with the 146th, 277th and 299th Combat Engineers. As more NCDUs arrived they did the same, with 5 combat engineers attached to each NCDU. Group III (Lt. Smith) did research and development and is credited with developing the Hagensen Pack. NCDUs had a 53% casualty rate at Normandy. Four from Utah beach later took part in Operation Dragoon.

With Europe invaded, Admiral Turner requisitioned all available NCDUs from Fort Pierce for integration into the UDTs for the Pacific. That netted him 20 NCDUs that had received Presidential Unit Citations and another 11 that had gotten Navy Unit Commendations. Prior to Normandy 30 NCDUs had embarked to the Pacific and another three had gone to the Mediterranean. NCDUs 1–10 were staged at Turner City on Florida Island in the beginning of 1944. NCDU 1 was briefly in the Aleutians in 1943. The first NCDUs in combat were 4 and 5 with the 4th Marines on Green Island, Papua New Guinea and Emirau Island. Later, NCDUs 1–10 were combined to form the short-lived UDT Able. NCDUs 2, 3, 19, 20, 21 and 24 were assigned to MacArthur&#x27;s 7th Amphibious Force and were the only NCDUs remaining at the war&#x27;s end.

see Notes

===Underwater Demolition Teams (UDT)s===

Prior to Operation Galvanic and Tarawa, V Amphibious Corps had identified coral as an issue for future amphibious operations. RADM Kelly Turner, commander V Amphibious Corps had ordered a review to get a grip on the problem. VAC found that the only people having any applicable experience with the material were men in the Naval Construction Battalions. Lt. Thomas C. Crist, of CB 10, was in Pearl Harbor from Canton Island where he had been in charge of clearing coral heads. His being in Pearl Harbor was pivotal in UDT history. While there he learned of the Adm. Turner&#x27;s interest in coral blasting and met with him. The Admiral tasked Lt. Crist to develop a method for blasting coral under combat conditions and putting together a team to do it. Lt. Crist started by getting men from CB 10, but got the remainder from the 7th Construction Regiment. By 1 December 1943 he had close to 30 officers and 150 enlisted at Waipio Amphibious Operating Base on Oahu.

In November the Navy had a hard lesson with coral and tides at Tarawa. It prompted Adm. Turner to request the creation of nine Underwater Demolition Teams to address those issues. Six teams for VAC in the Central Pacific while the other three would go to III Amphibious Corps in the South Pacific. UDTs 1 &amp; 2 were formed from the 180 men Lt. Crist had staged. Seabees make up the majority of the men in teams 1–9, 13 and 15. How many Seabees were in UDTs 10 and 12 is not listed, for UDT 11 they composed 20% of the team.
UDT officers were mainly CEC. UDT 10 had 5 officers and 24 enlisted originally trained as OSS Maritime Unit: Operational Swimmer Group II, but the OSS was not allowed to operate in the Pacific Theater. Adm. Nimitz needed swimmers and approved their transfer from the OSS to his control. The MU men brought with the swimfins they had trained with and the Seabees made them a part of UDT attire as quickly as the Supply dept. could get them. In the Seabee dominated teams the next largest group of UDT volunteers came from the joint Army-Navy Scouts and Raiders school that was also in Fort Pierce. Additional volunteers came from the Navy&#x27;s Bomb disposal School, Marine Corps and U.S. Fleet.

The first team commanders were Cmdr. E.D. Brewster (CEC) UDT 1 and Lt. Crist (CEC) UDT 2. Both Teams were &quot;provisional&quot; totaling the 180 men Lt Crist had put together from the 7th NCR. Those men were put through five weeks of training by a Marine Corps Amphibious Reconnaissance Battalion. They wore fatigues, life-vests and were expected to stay in their rubber boats like the NCDUs. At Kwajalein Adm.Turner ordered daylight recon. It was apparent to the Seabees that staying in the boats would not get the Admiral the intel he wanted. Cmdr. Brewester&#x27;s men all wore swim trucks under their fatigues. Ensign Lewis F. Luehrs, and Charp. Bill Acheson spent 45 minutes in the water in broad daylight and were the first team members recovered. Still wet and in their trunks they reported directly to Adm. Turner. He concluded what they had done was the only way to get accurate intelligence on submerged obstacles and conveyed that opinion to Adm. Nimitz. At Engebi Cmdr. Brewster was wounded. The success of UDT-1 not following USMC Recon protocol rewrote the UDT mission model and training regimen. Ens. Luehrs and Charp. Acheson were each awarded a Silver Star for their initiative while unintentionally creating the UDT &quot;naked warrior&quot; image. Diving masks were uncommon in 1944 and some men had tried using goggles at Kwajalein. Diving masks were a rare item in Hawaii so Lt. Crist and CB Chief Howard Roeder had requested supply get them. A fortuitous observation by one of the men spotted a magazine advertisement for diving masks. A priority dispatch was made to the States that appropriated the store&#x27;s entire stock. The UDTs adopted goggles independent of the OSS. When UDTs 1 and 2 returned to Hawaii Chief Acheson and three other UDT Officers were transferred to the 301st dredging CB. The 301st had 12 dredges saving Teams from blasting channels, but needed divers to get the job done. Ensign Leuhrs made Lt. and was a member of UDT 3 until he was made XO of team 18. Commander Brewster&#x27;s purple heart got him out of the UDTs and elevated to Commander 7th NCR instead of back to CB 10.

Adm. Turner also requested the formation of a Demolition Training Center at Kihei. It was approved. The actions of UDT 1 provided the training model, making UDT training distinctly different from Fort Pierce&#x27;s NCDU program. Lt. Crist was briefly the first training officer and emphasized swimming and recon until he was made CO of UDT 3. When UDT 3 returned from Leyte in the fall of 1944 it became the school instructors with Lt. Crist again OIC of training. The classes now included: night ops, weapons, bivouacking, small unit tactics, along with coral and lava blasting. In April 1945, team 3 was sent to Fort Priece to instruct there. Lt. Crist was promoted to Lt. Cmdr. and sent back to Kihei. Team 3 would train teams 12–22. UDT 14 is called the first &quot;all fleet team&quot; even though it had Seabees from Team Able and the CO and XO were both CEC. UDT 15 was the last team formed of NCDUs. Teams 12–15 were sent to Iwo Jima. Three cleared the shoreline for five days, D+2-D+7. After July 1944 new UDTs were only USN. In 1945, CBMU 570 was tasked to the UDT coldwater training center at ATB Oceanside, CA.

On Guam team 8 requested permission to build a base. It was approved by AdComPhibsPac, but disapproved by Island Command. Team 8 turned to the CBs on the island and got everything needed. Coral paving got placed the night before Admiral Nimitz inspected, giving teams 8 &amp; 10 a glowing review.

By V-J day 34 teams had been formed.
Teams 1–21 saw actual deployment with the Seabees providing over half of the men in those teams. The Navy did not publicize the existence of the UDTs until post-war and when they did they gave credit to Lt. Cmdr. Kauffman and the Seabees. During World War II the Navy did not have a rating for the UDTs nor did they have an insignia. Those men with the CB rating on their uniforms considered themselves Seabees that were doing underwater demolition. They did not call themselves &quot;UDTs&quot; or &quot;Frogmen&quot;, but rather &quot;Demolitioneers&quot; reflecting where Lt. Cmdr. Kauffman had recruited them from, the CB dynamiting and demolition school.

UDTs had to be of standard recruiting age, Seabees older could not volunteer. Mid-year 1945, in preparation for the cooler waters around Japan, a cold water training center was created. With it came a more demanding physical. Team 9 lost 70% of the team to this change.

Postwar, MCB 7 was tasked with projects at the UDT training facility on St. Thomas, Virgin Islands

see Notes

== Cold War ==
When World War II ended the Cold War began. Seabee service during this period supported a broad spectrum of the national interest; nuclear testing, two wars, embassy security, space race, CIA, military communications, international relations, pure science, and Camp David.

===Postwar interlude: Siberia-China===
On V-J-Day CB 114 was in the Aleutians. In September 1945 the battalion sent a detachment to the USSR to build a Fleet Weather Central. It was located outside Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky on the Kamchatka Peninsula. The original agreement gave the Seabees 3 weeks to complete the base. Upon arrival the Russians told them they had 10 days and were amazed it was done in 10. It was one of two that Stalin agreed to.

V-J-Day brought about Operation Beleaguer and the repatriation of the Japanese Army from China. Elements of the 33rd CB Regiment were involved: CBs 83, 96, 122 and 32nd Special. These units landed at Qingdao and Tanggu in November 1945 attached to the 6th Marine Division. CB 42 and A Co. 33rd Special landed at Shanghai with Naval Advance Base Unit 13. With the war over, the ongoing discharge men eligible left only enough for one CB and the two CB Specials. The men were consolidated in the 96th with the other CBs decommissioned. In December the 96th started airfields at Qingdao and Qinhuangdao in support of III Marine Amphibious Corps operations. May 1946 CB III Marine Amphibious Corps was ordered to inactivate the 96th CB on 1 August. The 96th was transferred to the 4th Marines, 1st Marine Division and deactivated from them.

===Nuclear tests===

In early 1946 the 53rd NCB was deployed with Operation Crossroads for the nuclear testing at Bikini Atoll. It was designated Task Unit TU 1.8.6. 53&#x27;s project list included observation, instrument and communication towers, radio beacons, seismic huts, photo reference crosses, general base and recreational facilities, as well as dredging the lagoon. In addition, recreational facilities were constructed on Japtan Island for the ships crews of the Operation. The Battalion also assisted the relocation of the natives. They disassembled both the Community center and church for reassembly on Rongerik Atoll. In August the battalion was decommissioned with men transferred to CBD 1156 that was then commissioned on Bikini. The TU 1.8.6 designation transferred to the CBD. CBD 1156 remained for nine days after the second test.

UDT 3 was designated TU 1.1.3 for the operation. On 27 April 1946, seven officers and 51 enlisted embarked at CBC Port Hueneme for Bikini. Their assignment was to retrieve water samples from ground zero of the Baker blast. In 1948, the displaced bikinians put in a request that a channel to the island Kili where they had been relocated be made. This was given to the Seabee detachment on Kwajelin who requested UDT 3 assist.

The 121st CB was decommissioned in December and re-designated CBD 1504. In January 1947 CBs 104 and 105 were reactivated. The 30th NCR was home-ported on Guam composed of CBDs 1501-13 and NCB 103. In 1949, the 103rd was made a Mobile Construction Battalion (MCB) while CBs 104 and 105 were made Amphibious Construction Battalions(ACBs). From 1949 until 1968 CBs were designated MCBs. In 1949, MCB 1 was reactivated at Naval Amphibious Base Little Creek, VA. In June 1950 the NCF totaled a few thousand.

===Korean War===


The outbreak of the Korean War led to a call-up of 10,000 from the Seabee Reserve. Seabees landed at Inchon during the assault, installing causeways dealing with enormous tides and enemy fire. Their actions there and elsewheres underscored the necessity of having CBs. During that war the authorized size of a CB was 550 men. When the truce was declared there was no CB demobilization as there had been at the end of World War II.

During the Korea, the U.S. realized the need of an air station in the region. Cubi Point in the Philippines was selected. Civilian contractors were approached for bids. After seeing the Zambales Mountains and the maze of jungle, they claimed it could not be done. The Navy then turned to the Seabees. The first to arrive was CBD 1802 to do the surveying. MCB 3 arrived on 2 October 1951 to get the project going and was joined by MCB 5 in November. Over the next five years, MCBs 2, 7, 9, 11 and CBD 1803 all contributed to the effort. They leveled a mountain to make way for a nearly runway. NAS Cubi Point turned out to be one of the largest earth-moving projects in the world, equivalent to the construction of the Panama Canal. Seabees there moved of dry fill plus another 15 million that was hydraulic fill. The $100 million facility ($ in dollars) was commissioned on 25 July 1956, and comprised an air station and an adjacent pier that was capable of docking the Navy&#x27;s largest carriers.

Seabee Teams
The World War II precursor to Seabee teams was the PT Advance base Detachment of the 113th CB. Each man was cross-trained in at least three trades with some qualified as corpsmen and divers. During Vietnam the requirement of being skilled in three trades was continued. The first Seabees referred to as &quot;Seabee Teams&quot; were CBDs 1802 and 1803. They were followed by Detachments Able and Baker. The U.S. State Department learned of the teams and concluded they could have a Cold War purpose. They could be U.S. &quot;Good Will Ambassadors&quot; to third world countries to counter the spread of Communism, a military version of the Peace Corps. These 13-man teams would construct schools, drill wells or build clinics creating a positive image for the U.S. They were utilized by the United States Agency for International Development and were in S.E. Asia by the mid-1950s. Then in the early sixties, the U.S. Army Special Forces were being sent into rural areas of South Vietnam to develop a self-defense force to counter the Communist threat and making use of the Seabee teams at these same places made sense to the CIA. To start, twelve &quot;Seabee teams, with Secret Clearances, were sent with the Army&#x27;s Special Forces in the CIA funded Civilian Irregular Defense Group program (CIDG)&quot; in the years 1963–1965. By 1965 the U.S. Army had enough engineers in theater to end Seabee involvement with Special Forces. At first teams were called Seabee Technical Assistance Teams (STAT) and were restricted to two in theater at a time. Teams after STAT 1104 were renamed Seabee Teams and by 1969 there were 17 in theater. As a military force Seabee Teams received many awards for heroism. Teams were sent to other nations as well. The Royal Thai government requested STATs in 1963 and ever since the Seabees have continued to deploy teams.

Construction Civic Action Details or CCAD
CCADs or &quot;See-Kads&quot; are larger civic action units of 20–25 Seabees with the same purpose as Seabee Teams. The CCAD designation is not found in the record prior to 2013.

===Camp David===
Camp David is officially known as Naval Support Facility Thurmont, as it is technically a military installation. The base is staffed by the CEC, Seabees, and Marines. &quot;In the early 1950s, Seabee BUs, UTs and CEs took over routine maintenance of the base and additional rates were added for administrative functions. Today Seabees still man the base public works and see that the grounds are in an impeccable condition.&quot; &quot;Selectees undergo a single scope background investigation to determine if they qualify for a Top Secret Sensitive Yankee White (YW) clearance. All personnel in Presidential support activities are required a &quot;Yankee White&quot; security clearance. The tour lasts 36 months.&quot; When the base has a larger construction project a Construction Battalion from the fleet can be tasked. NMCBs 5 and 133 have drawn these assignments.

===Antarctica: Science===

Operation Highjump

In December 1946, 166 Seabees sailed from Port Hueneme on the USS &quot;Yancey&quot; and USS &quot;Merrick&quot; assigned to Operation Highjump. They were part of Admiral Richard E. Byrd&#x27;s Antarctic expedition. The U.S. Navy was in charge with &quot;Classified&quot; orders &quot;to do all it could to establish a basis for a (U.S.) land claim in Antarctica&quot;. The Navy sent the Seabees to do the job starting with the construction of Little America (exploration base) IV as well as a runway for aerial mapping flights. This Operation was vastly larger than IGY Operation Deep Freeze that followed.

Operation Deep Freeze

In 1955, Seabees were assigned to Operation Deep Freeze making Antarctica an annual deployment site. Their task was the construction and maintenance of scientific bases for the National Science Foundation. The first &quot;wintering over&quot; crew included 200 Seabees. They cleared an ice runway at Mcmurdo for
the advance party of Deep Freeze II to fly to South Pole Station. MCB 1 was assigned for Deep Freeze II.

Antarctica added to the Seabee&#x27;s list of accomplishments:
* Tractor train traverses covering hundreds of miles.
* Bases built: McMurdo Station, South Pole Station, Byrd Station, Palmer Station, Siple Station, Ellsworth Station, Brockton Station, Eights Station, Plateau Station, Hallett Station, and Little America IV and Little America V
* MCB 1s construction of a nuclear power plant which got them a Navy Unit Commendation.
* NMCB 71s construction of a Buckminster Fuller Geodesic dome at So. Pole Station. It became a symbolic icon of the United States Antarctic Research Program (USARP).

===Vietnam War===

Seabees were in Vietnam twice in the 1950s. First in June 1954, as elements of Operation Passage to Freedom and then two years later to survey and map the roads. Seabee teams 501 and 502 arrived January 1963 as the first Seabees of the Vietnam War. They went to Dam Pau and Tri Ton to build Special Forces camps. In 1964 small 14 man Seabee groups were tasked to the U.S. Army advisors in the Special Operations Group. ACB 1 was the first CB in the theater that year. In 1965 the Marines arrived, making an amphibious landing at Chu Lai, with Seabees attached. Entire Naval Construction Regiments followed. Seabees supported the Marines at Khe Sanh and Chu Lai combat bases. The U.S. had many civilian contractors in the country, however the Seabee construction included numerous aircraft-support facilities, roads, and bridges. For every mile of road they improved, they built 100&#x27; of bridge-deck. They also worked civic action projects throughout the country. In June 1965, Construction Mechanic 3rd Class Marvin G. Shields of Seabee Team 1104 was at the Battle of Dong Xoai. He was posthumously awarded the Medal of Honor and is the only Seabee to receive the award. Seabee Teams were part of a propaganda program to promote support for the RVN through positive community engagement, typically building schools, clinics, or drilling wells. In 1966, Seabees repaired the airfield at Khe Sahn covering an area of 3,900&#x27;x60&#x27; with aluminum matting in four days. General Westmoreland &quot;called it one of the most outstanding military engineering feats of the war.&quot; MCB 4 had a det at Con Thien whose actions were a near repeat of Dong Xoai.

In 1968, the Marine Corps requested that the Navy make a change. The Marines were using &quot;MCB&quot; for &quot;Marine Corps Base&quot; while the Navy was using &quot;MCB&quot; for &quot;Mobile Construction Battalion&quot;, it was causing confusion in logistics. The Navy agreed and added &quot;Naval&quot; to MCB creating the NMCBs that now exist. During that year the 30th NCR had five battalions in the Da Nang area and two at Chu Lai. The 32nd NCR had three battalions tasked near Phu Bai and one at Dong Ha. In May 1968 two reserve battalions RNMCB 12 and 22 were activated, bring the total number of battalions in Vietnam to 21. Both ACBs were in theater as well as CBMUs 301 and 302. In 1968, NMCB 10 drew an atypical Seabee &quot;task&quot; supporting the 101st Airborne. It happened again in 1969 when CBs 10, 40 and 121 sent EOs to Fire base Fury. During 1969 the number of Seabees in theater reached 29,000, from there their draw-down began. The last battalion withdrew late 1971 with the last Seabee teams out a year later. When it was over they had sent 137 Seabee teams, built 15 CB camps, and deployed 22 battalions. CBMU 302 became the largest CB ever at over 1400 men and was homeported at Cam Rahn Bay. On 23 April 1975 it was announced that U.S. involvement in Vietnam was over.
That day CB 4 started construction of a temporary camp for Operation New Life on Guam. In seven days 2,000 squad tents were erected and numbered 3,500 when done.

During Vietnam the Seabees had a few uniform variations. One was the stenciling of unit numbers across the back of the field jacket M-65. Another was the collar and cover devices for enlisted E4-E6. The Navy authorized that the &quot;crow&quot; be replaced by the rating insignia of each trade. Nametags were another, they started out white with a multicolored seabee. In 1968, the USMC OD green pattern was copied. The NAVCATs became the only Seabees to ever be authorized to wear a shoulder patch.

NAVCATs Naval Construction Action Teams

CBMU 302 had 23 NAVCATS(Naval Construction Action Teams) total with 15 the most active at one time. Teams were numbered 1-23. They were Vice Admiral Elmo Zumwalt&#x27;s expansion of the Seabee Team concept. He submitted it in November 1968 to General Creighton Abrams commander of Military Assistance Command, Vietnam.

Agent Orange
Many Seabees were exposed to the defoliant herbicide while in Vietnam. NCBC Gulfport was the largest storage depot in the United States for Agent Orange. From there it was shipped to Vietnam. In 1968, the NCBC received 68,000 barrels to forward. Long term barrel storage began in 1969. That lasted until 1977. The site covered 30 acres and was still being cleaned up in 2013.

===Space race: NASA/Tektite I===
In 1960, a MCB 10 detachment built a Project Mercury telemetry and ground instrumentation station on Canton island.

On 28 January 1969 a detachment of 50 men from Amphibious Construction Battalion 2 plus 17 Seabee divers began installation of the Tektite habitat in Great Lameshur Bay at Lameshur, U.S. Virgin Islands. The Tektite program was funded by NASA and was the first scientists-in-the-sea program sponsored by the U.S. government. The Seabees also constructed a 12-hut base camp at Viers that is used today as the Virgin Islands Environmental Resource Station. The project was a by product of the Space Race. It caused the U.S. Navy to realize the need for a permanent Underwater Construction capability that led to the formation the Seabee Underwater Construction Teams&quot;.

At present NASA is working on the Moon to Mars program. In 2015, ACB 1 was involved in moving the Orion&#x27;s Boilerplate Test Article (BTA). ACB 1 was tasked in August 2019 in a test recovery exercise of the Orion spacecraft. ACB 2 was put through the same task a year later in August 2020.

===CIA and Naval Intelligence/Communication support===
* After the Seabees left Camp Peary the CIA moved into the base and now refer to it as &quot;the Farm&quot;.
* During World War II NAS Tanapag, Saipan was a &quot;major propaganda site of the Office of War Information&quot; (OWI). In 1947, CBD 1510 began maintaining NAS Tanapag for the NTTU (Naval Technical Training Unit). In 1948, CBD 1510&#x27;s men were transferred to CBD 1504 when it was replacing CB 121 as island Public Works. That year the CIA created the NTTU as a &quot;cover&quot; and made access highly restricted to the base. The CIA station had Capitol Hill constructed to administer its operations at a cost of $28 million. The station covered the northern half of Saipan including, Kagman Field, Marpi Point Field, and the four radio towers. &quot;Brig. Gen. Edward G. Lansdale, Pentagon expert on guerrilla warfare, shared with Gen. Maxwell D. Taylor, President Kennedy&#x27;s military adviser, on &quot;Resources for Unconventional Warfare in SE. Asia.&quot;...that the &quot;CIA maintains a field training station on the island of Saipan ... the installation is under Navy cover and is known as the Naval Technical Training Unit. The primary mission of the Saipan Training Station is to provide physical facilities and competent instructor personnel to fulfill a variety of training requirements including intelligence tradecraft, communications, counter-intelligence and psychological warfare techniques. Training is performed in support of CIA activities conducted throughout the Far East area.&quot; The Seabees cease listing the Public Works assignments at NAS Tanapag in 1953 while the CIA remained until 1962. However, MCB 9 deployed to Saipan in 1954 with one of their projects being the up-grading of the Public Works shops. MCB 10 Det Bravo deployed to Saipan from July 1957 until February 1958 with projects unlisted.

* A year before the Bay of pigs and Cuban Missile Crisis the CIA took a &quot;top secret&quot; urgent/immediate project to the Seabees. The agency wanted two 220&#x27; radio towers with a supporting airstrip, dock, and quonsets erected on Swan Island, built asap, with no construction plans for the Seabees. The station would be independent-self sufficient. Det Tango of MCB 6 was given the project. LSTs 1046 and 1056 delivered men and materials from CBC Quonset Point. The Seabees had the CIA&#x27;s &quot;Radio Swan&quot; on the air in short order.

Naval Intelligence: NAVFACs

The Navy built 22 Naval Facilities (NAVFACs) for its Sound Surveillance System (SOSUS) to track Soviet submarines. They were in service 1954–79 with Seabees staffing all the Public works. In the 1980s the number of tracking stations was halved with the advent of the Integrated Underwater Surveillance System (IUSS). The NAVFACs were decommissioned by further advances in technology, the end of the Cold War and disclosures by John Walker to the Soviets.

The Seabees have also been tasked building Naval Communication facilities. One at Nea Makri Greece was built by MCB 6 in 1962 and upgraded by NMCB 133. Naval Comm Station Sidi Yahya was first built in World War II another is NavCommSta Guam. It started out on the island as the Joint Communications Agency (JCA) in 1945.

===Naval Support Unit: Department of State/Embassy security===

In 1964, at the height of the Cold War, Seabees were assigned to the State Department because listening devices were found in the Embassy of the United States in Moscow. Those initial Seabees were &quot;Naval Mobile Construction Battalion FOUR, Detachment November&quot;. The U.S. had just constructed a new embassy in Warsaw. After what had been found in Moscow Seabees were dispatched and found many &quot;bugs&quot; there also. This led to the creation of the Naval Support Unit in 1966 as well as the decision to make it permanent two years later. That year William Darrah, a Seabee of the support unit, is credited with saving the U.S. Embassy in Prague, Czechoslovakia from a potentially disastrous fire. In 1986, &quot;as a result of reciprocal expulsions ordered by Washington and Moscow&quot; Seabees were sent to &quot;Moscow and Leningrad to help keep the embassy and the consulate functioning&quot;.

The Support Unit has a limited number of special billets for select NCOs, E-5 and above. These Seabees are assigned to the Department of State and attached to Diplomatic Security. Those chosen can be assigned to the Regional Security Officer of a specific embassy or be part of a team traveling from one embassy to the next. Duties include the installation of alarm systems, CCTV cameras, electromagnetic locks, safes, vehicle barriers, and securing compounds. They can also assist with the security engineering in sweeping embassies (electronic counter-intelligence). They are tasked with new construction or renovations in security sensitive areas and supervise private contractors in non-sensitive areas. Due to Diplomatic protocol the Support Unit is required to wear civilian clothes most of the time they are on duty and receive a supplemental clothing allowance for this. The information regarding this assignment is very scant, but State Department records in 1985 indicate department security had 800 employees, plus 1,200 Marines and 115 Seabees. That Seabee number is roughly the same today.

===Cold War winds down===
As the Cold War wound down, new challenges and changes came for the Seabees starting with the increased incidence of terrorism. This was in addition to ongoing Seabee support missions for USN/USMC bases worldwide. Cold War Facilities still required support, like the Polaris and Poseidon submarines at Holy Loch, Rota. In 1971, the Seabees began the huge project on Diego Garcia in the Indian Ocean. It was completed in 1987 at a cost of $200 million. With the extended construction timeline, it is difficult to inflation-adjust that cost into today&#x27;s dollars. The complex accommodates the Navy&#x27;s largest ships and cargo planes. The base served as a staging facility for Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm. Additionally, Seabees were also tasked upgrading and expanding Naval Air Station Sigonella, Sicily for the United States Sixth Fleet.

In 1983, a truck bomb demolished the Marine&#x27;s barracks in Beirut, Lebanon. From the Beirut International Airport Druze militia artillery harassed the Marines. NMCB-1 was in Rota and sent its AirDet to construct bunkers for the Marines. EO2 Kirt May became the first Seabee post-Vietnam to receive a Purple Heart while on this mission.

CN Carmella Jones became the first female Seabee when she cross-rated to Equipment Operator during the summer of 1972.

== International terrorism ==
The Cold war did not end until 1991 and 9/11 was further off yet, but SW2 Robert Stethem was executed by the Lebanese Shia militia Hezbollah when they hijacked TWA Flight 847 in 1985. Stethem was a diver in UCT 1. The Navy named in his honor. On 24 August 2010, during a shipboard ceremony, Stethem was posthumously honored to the rank of Master Chief Constructionman (CUCM) by the Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy and given the Prisoner of War Medal.

===Persian Gulf War===

Over 5,000 Seabees served in the Gulf War. In August 1990 the 1st Marine Expeditionary Force (I MEF) was assigned NMCBs 4, 5, 7, and 40. The first Seabees in theater were a Det from ABC 1, followed by a Det from ACB 2 and then CBUs 411 and 415. Mid September Air-Dets from the four battalions deployed to construct air fields for Marine Air Groups (MAG) 11, 13, 16, and 25 of the 3rd Marine Air Wing. NMCB 7 was the first Battalion to arrive. Camp Nomad was a NMBC-74 project at Ras Al Mishab for MAG 26. Camps were constructed for both the 1st and 2nd Marine Divisions as well as Hq complexes for MEF I and II. In Saudi Arabia, Seabees built numerous camps, galleys, runways, aprons, helo zones, plus two 500-bed Fleet Hospitals near Al-Jubayl. The 3rd NCR was activated to provide a command echelon. NMCBs 24 and 74 also deployed in support of the Marines.

===Iraq, Afghanistan, and the War on Terror===
Seabees deployed in both initial invasions of the Afghanistan War and Iraq War. All active and reserve NMCBs and NCRs were deployed to building to work on civil infrastructure. One of the most visible tasks assigned to the NCF was the removal of statues of Saddam Hussein in Baghdad.

In Afghanistan, the Seabees&#x27; main task was the construction of multiple forward operating bases. NMCB 133 deployed to FOB Camp Rhino and help build Kandahar Airfield where a detention facility was constructed as well.

Since 2002, Seabees have provided civic action support in the Philippines, most notably near Abu Sayyaf&#x27;s jungle training area in the southern Philippines. Seabees work with Army, Marines, and Air Force under the Joint Special Operations Task Forcem -Philippines.

Seabees have supported the War on Terror ever since the invasion with numerous deployments over the years.

== Disaster Relief and Recovery ==
* Hurricane Camille hit NCBC Gulfport, Mississippi, NMCB-121 was in homeport and was tasked with base cleanup, rescue, and community outreach.
* Cyclone Ofa in 1990 NMCB 133 sent a det to American Samoa to aid the recovery.
* 1994 Northridge earthquake, Seabees supported the disaster recovery.
* Hurricane Andrew in 1992, Seabees provided disaster recovery to Homestead, Florida.
* Operation Restore Hope In 1992–1993 two battalions were sent for the humanitarian efforts in Somalia.
* Operation Sea Signal 1994 Seabees provided assistance to the Haitian Relief effort at Guantanamo Bay Naval Base.
* Operation Joint Endeavor In Dec. 1995, Seabees were in Croatia supporting the peacekeeping in Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina. NMCB 40 was tasked to the U.S. Army 1st Infantry Div. for dismantling FOBs during the IFOR/SFOR phase.
* Hurricane Georges Seabees deployed to the Caribbean with damage assessment teams, generators and water trucks providing disaster relief.
* Hurricane Mitch 1998 Seabees deployed to Honduras with Joint Task Force Bravo. They did road and bridge repair, debris cleanup, and erected camps. For NMCB 7, it was on their second humanitarian mission of the deployment.
* Hurricane Ivan NMCBs 1 &amp; 74 deployed in September 2004 to the repair Naval Air Station Pensacola. They cleared debris, repaired roads, erected tents, and provided general support.
* Typhoon Nanmadol (2004) NMCB 7 provided disaster relief.
* 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami NMCBs 7, 40, and UCT 2 provided disaster relief.
* Joint Task Force Katrina 2005. Seabees from NMCBs 1, 7, 18, 40 and 133 plus ACB 2 and CBMUs 202 and 303 and UCT 1 were tasked the reconstruction of CBC Gulfport and the recovery of the Gulf Coast
* 2010 Haiti earthquake NMCB 7 provided construction support and disaster relief with UCT 1, ACB-2 and Army Engineers.
* April 2011 Miyagi earthquake Seabees from NMCB-133 and UCT 2 deployed to Japan as part of the relief effort.
* Hurricane Sandy NMCB 11 Air Det deployed to support disaster recovery in New Jersey and New York. NMCB 5 assisted disaster relief throughout the Sandy Hook area.

== Naval Construction Force (NCF) ==
At present, there are six active-duty Naval Mobile Construction Battalions (NMCBs) in the United States Navy, split between the Pacific Fleet and the Atlantic Fleet.

30th Naval Construction Regiment is located on Guam. Naval Construction Battalion Center Port Hueneme, CA is homeport to the Regiment&#x27;s battalions.
* Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 3
* Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 4
* Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 5

22nd Naval Construction Regiment is stationed at Naval Construction Battalion Center (Gulfport, Mississippi) the homeport to the Atlantic fleet CBs.
* Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 1
* Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 11
* Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 133

NCF Reserve
From the 1960s through 1991, reserve battalions were designated as &quot;Reserve Naval Mobile Construction Battalions&quot; (RNMCBs). After 1991 &quot;Reserve&quot; was dropped with the integration of reserve units within the NCF making all battalions NMCBs
* Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 14, HQ Gulfport, MS. detachments in five states and Puerto Rico.
* Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 18, HQ Port Hueneme, CA., detachments in six states and Guam.
* Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 22, HQ Port Hueneme, CA. detachments in five states.
* Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 25, HQ Port Hueneme, CA. detachments in six states.
* Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 27, HQ Gulfport, MS. detachments in seven states.

Detachment: A construction crew that is &quot;detached&quot; from the battalion&#x27;s &quot;main body&quot; deployment site. The size is determined by the project scale and timeline.

Battalion: The battalion is the basic NCF unit with a HQ Company plus four Construction Companies: A, B, C, &amp; D. CBs are organized to function as independent self sufficient units.

Regiment: Naval Construction Regiments (NCRs) provide a higher echelon command to three or four CBs operating on close proximity.

Naval Construction Groups 1 and 2: In 2013, Seabee Readiness Groups (SRGs) were decommissioned, and re-organized as NCG-1 and NCG-2. They are regimental-level command groups tasked with administrative and operational control of CBs, as well as conducting pre deployment training for all assigned units. NCG-2 is based at CBC Gulfport while NCG-1 is at CBC Port Hueneme.

Seabee Engineer Reconnaissance Team (SERTs)

SERTs are the Special operations capable element of the NCF developed by the First Naval Construction Division (1st NCD) in Operation Iraqi Freedom. They are intended to provide engineering assessments in the field in support of the United States Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions. A team has two CEC officers and eight enlisted Seabees, augmented by additional personnel as needed. A team has three elements: liaison, security, and reconnaissance. The liaison (LNO) element has an officer and two communications specialists responsible for communicating the assessments and intelligence. Reconnaissance has the other officer, who is the Officer-in-Charge (OIC), a BU or SW cpo with bridge construction experience. The team has a corpsman or medically trained member, the remainder are selected for being the most qualified in their trade. All are required to have the Seabee Warfare pin. In 2013, 1st Naval Construction Division along with SERT&#x27;s were decommissioned. Today, UCTs performance demonstrate the SERT concept for NECC.

== Seabees outside the NCF ==
Amphibious Construction Battalions (PHIBCBs)
ACBs (or PHIBCB) were preceded by the pontoon assembly CBs formed during World War II. On 31 October 1950, MCBs 104 and 105 were re-designated ACB 1 and ACB 2, and assigned to Naval Beach Groups. ACBs report to surface TYCOMs. Additionally, in an ACB half the enlisted are a construction rate while the other half are fleet.

Construction Battalion Maintenance Units
When during World War II these units had 1/4 the personnel of a CB. Their task was to assume maintenance of bases once CBs had completed construction. Today, CBMU&#x27;s provide public works support at Naval Support Activities, Forward Operating Bases, and Fleet Hospital/Expeditionary Medical Facilities during wartime or contingency operations for a Marine Expeditionary Force (MEF), Marine Expeditionary Group (MEG), or NSW. They also provide disaster recovery support to Naval Regional Commanders in CONUS.
* CBMU 202 Joint Expeditionary Base Little Creek-Fort Story, VA (formerly Naval Amphibious Base)
** det Jacksonville
* CBMU 303 Navy Expeditionary Combat Force, Naval Base San Diego, Ca.
** det Port Hueneme
** det Pearl Harbor

NAVFAC Engineering &amp; Expeditionary Warfare Center Ocean Facilities Department. Gives support to the Fleet through the support of Underwater Construction Teams. UCTs deploy worldwide to conduct underwater construction, inspection, repair, and underwater demolition.

Underwater Construction Teams (UCT)
UCTs deploy worldwide tasked with underwater construction, inspections, repairs, and demolition operations. They can support a Fleet Marine Force amphibious operation or provide combat service support ashore. UCT1 is home ported at Little Creek, Virginia, while UCT2 is at Port Hueneme, California.

After basic UCT training a diver is qualified as a 2nd Class Diver. Training is 26 weeks at the Dive school at Panama City, Florida.
It includes a tactical training phase for advanced combat and demolitions skills.
The training qualifies divers as Underwater Construction Technicians skilled in: seafloor excavation, hydrographic surveys, search and recovery, engineering reconnaissance, and precision demolitions. Senior NCOs are schooled for their supervisory positions whether construction or demolition.

UCT divers can apply for selection to support the Naval Special Warfare Development Group.

Public Works: U.S. Naval Bases

These units have CEC officers leading them and enlisted Seabees for the various crews. About one-third of new Seabees are assigned to Public Works Departments (PWD) at naval installations both within the United States and overseas. While stationed at a Public Works Department, a Seabee can get specialized training and experience in multiple facets of their rating. Many bases have civilians that augment Public Works, but the department is a military operation.

Combat Service Support Detachments (CSSD) / Naval Special Warfare (NSW)

The Seabee detachments have several hundred supporting Naval Special Warfare (NSW) units based out of Coronado, CA, and Virginia Beach, VA. Field support can include camp construction, camp and vehicle maintenance, power generation, transportation logistics, and water purification. The assignment requires additional training in first aid, small arms, driving, specialized equipment, and qualifying as Expeditionary Warfare Specialists. With that qualification a Seabee can be classified as 5306 – Naval Special Warfare (Combat Service Support) or 5307 – Naval Special Warfare (Combat Support). They also can apply for selection to support the Naval Special Warfare Development Group.

== Training and rates ==


Trainees begin &quot;A&quot; School (trade school) upon completion of boot: 4 weeks classroom, 8 weeks hands-on. From &quot;A&quot; School, trainees most often report to a NMCB or ACB. There, recruits go through four-weeks of Expeditionary Combat Skills (ECS), which is also required for those who report to a Navy Expeditionary Combat Command. ECS provides basic training in map reading, combat first aid, recon and other combat-related skills. Half of each course is spent on basic marksmanship to qualify with the M4 carbine and the M9 service pistol. Those posted to Alfa Company of an NMCB may be assigned to a crew-served weapon, like the MK 19 40 mm grenade launcher, the M2 Browning .50-caliber machine gun or the M240 machine gun. Many reserve units still field the M60 machine gun. Seabees were last in the U.S. military to wear the U.S. Woodland camouflage uniform and the Desert Camouflage Uniform. They now have the Navy Working Uniform Type III and use ALICE field gear. Some units with the Marines will use USMC-issue Improved load-bearing equipment (ILBE).

Current rates: The current ratings were adopted by the Navy in 1948.
* BU : Builder
* CE : Construction electrician
* CM : Construction mechanic
* EA : Engineering aide
* EO : Equipment operator
* SW : Steelworker
* UT : Utilitiesman

The Seabee &quot;constructionman&quot; ranks of E-1 through E-3 are designated by sky-blue stripes on uniforms. The color was adopted in 1899 as a uniform trim color designating the Civil Engineer Corps, but was later given up. Its continued use is a bit of Naval Heritage in the NCF.

At paygrade E-8, the Builder, Steelworker, and Engineering Aid rates combine into a single rate: Senior Chief Constructionman (CUCS). Before NAVADMIN 054/21, at the E-9 paygrade they were referred to as a Master Chief Constructionman (CUCM).

Before NAVADMIN 054/21, the remaining Seabee rates combined only at the E-9 paygrade:
* Master Chief Equipmentman (EQCM) for Equipment Operator and Construction Mechanic.
* Master Chief Utilitiesman (UCCM) for Construction Electrician and Utilitiesman.

Per NAVADMIN 054/21: Constructionman Master Chief (CUCM), Equipmentman Master Chief (EQCM) and Utilities Constructionman Master Chief (UCCM) renamed Seabee Master Chief (CBCM). Those Master Chiefs already in CUCM, EQCM or UCCM ratings were to be automatically converted to CBCM on 15 March 2021, but current source ratings badges were to be retained.

Diver is a qualification that the various rates can obtain with three grades: Basic Underwater Construction Technician/ NEC B17A (2nd Class Diver), Advanced Underwater Construction Technician/ NEC B18A (1st Class Diver), and Master Underwater Construction Technician/ NEC B16A (Master diver). Seabee divers are attached to five principal commands outside the NCF:
* UCT ONE, Little Creek, VA.
* UCT TWO, Port Hueneme, CA.
* Naval Facilities Engineering Service Center (NFESC) that has detachments in Port Hueneme, CA, and in the Washington Navy Yard, DC. These are CEC officer billets only. Those at Port Hueneme are with the highly technical NFESC &quot;Dive Locker Team&quot;.
* Navy System Commands, e.g., NAVSEA or NAVAIR. These are CEC officer billets only.
* Navy Experimental Diving Unit Navy Diving &amp; Salvage Training Center (NEDU/NDSTC)

== The &quot;Seabee&quot; and Unit insignias ==

On 1 March 1942 the RADM Moreell recommended that an insignia be created to promote &quot;esprit de corps&quot; in the new CBs to ID their equipment as the Air corps did to ID squadrons. It was not intended for uniforms. Frank J. Iafrate, a civilian file clerk at Quonset Point Advance Naval Base, Davisville, Rhode Island, who created the original &quot;Disney Style&quot; Seabee. In early 1942 his design was sent to RADM Moreell who made a single request: that the Seabee being set inside a letter Q, for Quonset Point, be changed to a hawser rope and it would be officially adopted.

The Seabees had a second Logo. It was of a shirtless constructionman holding a sledge hammer with a rifle strapped across his back standing upon the words &quot;Construimus Batuimus USN&quot;. The figure was on a shield with a blue field across the top and vertical red and white stripes. A small CEC logo is left of the figure and a small anchor is to the right. This logo was incorporated into many CB Unit insignias.

During World War II, artists working for Disney Insignia Department designed logos for about ten Seabee units including the: 60th NCB, 78th NCB 112th NCB, and the 133rd NCB. There are two Disney published Seabee logos that are not identified with any unit.

== Qualification badges and Unit awards ==

The military qualification badge for the Seabees is known as the Seabee combat warfare specialist insignia (SCW). It was created in 1993 for both officers and enlisted personnel attached to qualifying units: NMCBs, ACBs, UCTs, or NCRs. Its designer, Commander Ross S. Selvidge, CEC, USNR, was the first to wear the insignia.
The Fleet Marine Force Insignia or Fleet Marine Force pin (FMF pin), is for USN officers or enlisted trained and qualified to support the USMC. It comes in three classes : enlisted, officer, and chaplain. For requirements, see: Fleet Marine Force Warfare Specialist (EFMFWS) Program per OPNAV Instruction 1414.4B.

The Peltier Award is given annually to the &quot;Best of Type&quot; active duty Construction Battalion. It was instituted by Rear Admiral Eugene J. Peltier CEC in 1960. He was Commander of BuDocks 1959–1962.

== Seabee barge carriers ==
There were six &quot;Seabee&quot; ships built: the SS &quot;Cape Mendocino&quot; (T-AKR-5064), the , and three operated by Lykes Brothers Steamship Company. (the SS Doctor Lykes, the SS Tillie Lykes, and the SS Almeria Lykes). The NCF is the principal user of Seabee barges. Barges are shuttled to and from the mother ship, facilitating the unloading of containerized cargo wherever needed. These ships have an elevator system for lifting the barges out of the water at the stern onto the vessel. Barges, loaded or not are elevated to one of the three decks and then moved forward towards the bow on a track to be stored. The ship can carry 38 barges, 12 each on the lower decks and 14 on the upper. The 38 barges have a total capacity for 160 shipping containers. They have a draft of 2.5&#x27;, and measure 97&#x27;x35&#x27;. Besides the barges, the ship has a fuel storage capacity of nearly 36000 m3 (9,510,194 gal.) built in its sides and double hull, allowing it to double as a fuel transport. The ships were purchased by the Military Sealift Command.

== Museums ==
The U.S. Navy Seabee Museum is located outside the main gate of Naval Base Ventura County in Port Hueneme, California. In July 2011, the new facility opened with galleries, a grand hall, a theater, storage, and research areas.

The Seabee Heritage Center is the Atlantic Coast Annex of the Seabee Museum in Port Hueneme. It opened in 1995. Exhibits at the Gulfport Annex are provided by the Seabee Museum in Port Hueneme.

The Seabee Museum and Memorial Park in Davisville, Rhode Island was opened in the late 1990s. A Fighting Seabee Statue is located there.

== Seabees of notable Seabee service ==
* Admiral Ben Moreell (created the Seabees)
* CM3 Marvin Glenn Shields (Medal of Honor)
* SW2 Robert Stethem (Seabee diver)
* Cdr Blake Wayne Van Leer

== See also ==

* Military engineering of the United States
* Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 7
* Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 26
* Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 40
* Parks Reserve Forces Training Area
* Seabees Memorial
* United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit
* Unsinkable aircraft carrier
* Seabees Naval Bases in North Africa

Other U.S. military construction/engineering units:
* RED HORSE U.S. Air Force
* United States Army Corps of Engineers
* USMC Combat Engineer Battalions

== Notes ==
World War II
*   Presidential Unit Citation USN/USMC
** 6th CB, 1st Marine Div., Guadalcanal.
** 18th CB, 2nd Marine Div., Tarawa
** 33rd CB, shore party detachment, 1st Marine Div., Peleliu
** 73rd CB, shore party detachment, 1st Marine Div., Peleliu
** 121st CB, 12-man doodlebug landing party, 4th Marine Div., Tinian
*   U.S. Army Distinguished Unit Citation
** 40th CB, 1st Cavalry Div., Los Negros
** 78th CB, 12 men, 1st Cavalry Div., Los Negros
* WWII U.S.N. CB awards for valor were listed each month in &quot;All Hands&quot; along with the rest of the Navy.

Marine Corps, Seabees outside the NCF
* When the 18th, 19th and 25th CBs were transferred to the Marine Corps they each were reduced by one company plus 1/5th of Hq Co to match the organization of a USMC battalion. B Co from the 25th CB and C Co from the 18th CB were used to form the 53rd CB. The other company was used to form the 121st CB.
* Due to Seabees being given advanced rank upon enlistment, enlisted Marines referred to construction battalions as &quot;sergeant&#x27;s battalions&quot;. USMC sergeants do not pull guard duty, so the ranked Seabees would not be assigned. The NCOs of the 18th wore USMC chevrons and not USN &quot;crows&quot; on their uniforms.
* USN insignia on USMC issue.
* Seabees were shore party for the Marines on Bougainville, Peleliu, Guam, Purata Island, Roi-Namur, Saipan, Iwo Jima, and Okinawa. The Marines deployed them as combat engineers at Cape Gloucester, Tarawa, and Tinian.
* The first Marines assigned to a CB were attached to CBD 1010 on Guam. The 2nd Separate Marine Engineer Battalion was next, assigned to the 27th NCR with two former USMC CBs; the 25th and the 53rd. In mid-August 1944 the 1st Separate Marine Engineer Battalion was assigned to the 30th NCR. Prior, 100 Marines were assigned to the 71st CB on Bougainville.

NCDUs, Seabees outside the NCF
* NCDUs at Normandy: 11, 22–30, 41–46, 127–8, 130-42
* The Joint Army Navy Experimental Testing (JANET) site for beach obstacle removal, Project DM-361, was located at the ex-Seabee base, Camp Bradford after the NCDU program moved.
* 14 NCDUs were combined to create UDT 9, almost completely Seabees
* NCDUs 200 – 216 were combined to create UDT 15.
*   Presidential Unit Citation USN/USMC : Naval Combat Demolition Force O on Omaha beach at Normandy.
*   Navy Unit Commendation: Naval Combat Demolition Force U on Utah beach at Normandy.

UDTs, Seabees outside the NCF
* The Naval Special Warfare Command building at the U.S.N. Seal base at Fort Pierce is named for Ltjg. Frank Kaine CEC commander of NCDU 2.
* General Donovan the head of the OSS approached General MacArthur and Admiral Nimitz about using OSS men in the Pacific with Europe invaded. Gen. MacArthur had no interest. Adm. Nimitz looked at Donovan&#x27;s list and also said no, except he could use the swimmers from the Maritime Unit. He was only interested in them for being swimmers not being OSS.
* Seabees outside the NCF, made naval history. Admiral Turner recommended over 60 Silver Stars and over 300 Bronze Stars with Vs for the Seabees and other service members of UDTs 1-7 That was unpresendented in USN/USMC history. For UDTs 5 and 7 at Tinian and UDTs 3 and 4 at Guam, all officers received a silver stars and all enlisted received bronze stars with Vs. Adm. Conolly felt Lt. Crist and Lt. Carberry of UDTs 3 &amp; 4 should have received Navy Crosses at Guam.
* many of the men from UDTs 1 and 2 were used to form UDTs 3 and 4.
* UDT 3 at formation had 11 CEC, 4 USN, 1 USMC Officers
* UDT 7&#x27;s officers went through &quot;indoctrination&quot; in &quot;Area E&quot; at Camp Peary.

Seabee North Slope Oil Exploration 1944
* Seabee Creek was named by CBD 1058 and runs into the Colville River at Umiat, AK.
* USN geologists with CBD 1058 discovered the large Aupuk Gas Seep.

Cold War: Korea – Seabee Teams
* In October 1965 MCB 11 had two Seabee Teams assigned to &quot;Project Demo&quot;. The U.S. State Dept. tasked them with de-bugging embassies behind the Iron Curtain and repair the damage caused by the removal.

Cold War: Antarctica
* Seabee Heights is a geologic feature of the Transantarctic Mountains. It overlooks the Beardmore Glacier Seabee traverse route inland.
* Seabee Hook is located near the site of Hallett Station on the Ross Sea.

Cold War: Vietnam
* Commander Naval Construction Battalion U.S. Pacific Fleet, Tân Sơn Nhất, Republic of Vietnam, Completion Report 1963–1972.
* Military training for CBs during this period lasted six weeks. Two weeks were at the respective homeport and four weeks with the Marines at Camp Lejuene or Camp Pendleton.
*   Presidential Unit Citation USN/USMC : Dets from MCBs 5, 10, 53 and CBMU 301 in support of the 26th Marines at the Battle of Khe Sanh Jan–Feb 1968.
* Cold War projects: 1961 floating dry dock for Polaris submarines at Holy Loch, Scotland. 1963 U.S. Naval Communications Listening Station Nea Makri, Greece.

Cold War: CIA
* When CBD 1510 transferred to CBD 1504 it was designated for function similar to Acorns: Aviation and OTA. The Navy&#x27;s use of &quot;OTA&quot; denotes the assignment to the CIA in that Other Transaction Authority (OTA) is the term commonly used to refer to the (10 U.S.C. 2371b) authority of the Department of Defense (DoD) to carry out certain prototype, research and production projects.&quot;
* In 2007, the Naval Expeditionary Combat Command (NECC) authorized funding forty Naval Intelligence billets in the NCF. The goal was to have organic NCF Intelligence personnel. Historically the training officer would become the intelligence officer when a CB deployed.
* CIA redacted memorandum dated 14 June 1968 discusses the use on Naval Construction Personnel/Seabees on a project.

Iraq Afghanistan
*   Presidential Unit Citation USN/USMC : 30th NCR, NMCBs 4, 5, 74, 133, Air-Det 22nd NCR, Air-Det UCT 2, NCF Support Unit 2 in support of the First Marine Expeditionary Force (I MEF Engineer Group) in November 2003 added later upon review were: NMCBs 7, 15 as well as Air-Det NMCB 21, Air-Det NMCB 25, and CBMU 303 Det. (per: CMC MARADMIN 507/03)
* In 2015, ACB 1 moved the Orion (spacecraft) Boilerplate (spaceflight) test article for NASA at San Diego, CA.

Seabee insignia
* World War II Naval Construction Battalion Logos
* CBs sponsored many B-29s on Tinian tagging the aircraft with Seabee unit insignia as nose art.

Naval Support Unit
* In 1977, the U.S. Embassy in Moscow suffered a severe fire prompting the construction of a new one in 1979. At the construction site of the new embassy twenty to thirty Seabees were assigned to oversee 800 plus Russian construction workers. This prompted the Russians to embed bugs in construction materials prior to delivery to the construction site. The success of the KGB in bugging the new embassy only reinforced the State Department&#x27;s need for the Seabees.

SEABEE Barge Carriers
* Unusual Hull Design Requirements of the SEABEE Barge Carriers.

== References ==

== General sources ==

== Further reading ==
* &quot;A Brief History of USOM Support to the Office of Accelerated Rural Development&quot;, prepared by USOM Office of Field Operations, James W. Dawson, Assistant Program Officer, Sept, 1969 
* COM-ICE-PAC, reports CBD 1058, Lt. Harry F. Corbin, ChC, CBD 1058, 1956
* &quot;Exploration of the Petroleum Reserve No. 4 and Adjacent Areas, Northern Alaska 1944–53&quot;, Part 1, History of the Exploration, Cmdr. John C. Reed CEC, Geological Survey Professional Paper 301, U.S. GPO, Washington, DC, 1958, pp. 21–46
* &quot;History of the SEABEES&quot;, Command Historian, Naval Facilities Engineering Command, 1996
* 
* 
* MILPERSMAN 1306–919, Naval Support Unit State Dept. 
* NAVPERS 15,790 (REV 1953), Navy and Marine Corps Awards Manual, Dept of the Navy, Unit Awards, Part II,
* NAVEDTRA-14234A, USN BMR for Seabee Combat Handbook 14234A. USN BMR online 
* Peleliu 1944, Jim Moran Gordon L Rottman, Osprey Publishing, 2012, &quot;Black Shore party&quot; 
* Tektite and the Birth of the Underwater Construction Teams by Dr. Frank A. Blazich Jr., Historian, U.S. Navy Seabee Museum 
* Test Wells, Umiat Area Alaska, Florence I. Rucker Collins, Exploration of Naval Petroleum Reserve No. 4 and Adjacent Areas, Northern Alaska, 1944–53, Part 5, Subsurface Geology And Engineering Data, Geological Survey Professional Paper 305-B, U. S. Dept. of the Navy, Office of Naval Petroleum and Oil Shale Reserves, U.S. GPO, Washington, DC: 1958 
* Capt. A. N. Olsen (CEC), &quot;The King Bee&quot;, Trafford Publishing, 2007
* Thesis: USAWC Strategy Research Project, The effectiveness of the Seabee in Employing New Concepts During Operation Iraqi Freedom, Cmdr. Marshall Sykes USN, U.S. Army War College, Carlisle Barracks, PA, 2005. 
* Thesis: U.S. Navy Seabees as a Stability Asset, Aaron W. Park, 2009, Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, CA 
* Thesis: &quot;Navy Seabees: Versatile Instruments of Power Projection&quot;, Master of Military Studies: Lt Cmdr. Wernher C. Heyres, CEC, USN, 2013, USMC Command &amp; Staff College, Marine Corps University, Quantico, VA 
* &quot;United States Navy Construction Battalions, Seabees in Action, Seabee Teams&quot;, published by: Dept. of the Navy, Naval Facilities Engineering Command, 1967, Washington, DC
* &quot;All gave some, some gave all: 17th Special CB, Bob Sohrt/Full Memoirs, Featured WWII Memoirs/Stories&quot; (click: branch of service: Marines) Witness to War website, p. 4 of 11

== External links ==

* Camille and the Seabees (1971)
* Report_EuropeanOperations Seabees Report: European Operations (1945)
* Seabees. Department of the Navy. Bureau of Yards and Docks (c. 1944)
* Seabee Divers 
* Seabee History, Naval History &amp; Heritage Command
* Seabee &amp; CEC Historical Foundation
* Seabees in the Antarctic: Base Construction
* &quot;Seabee Online&quot;: official online magazine of the Seabees
* Seabee Unit Histories and Cruisebooks at the Seabee Museum
* The Marston Mat and Seabee
* The Pacific War Online Encyclopedia
* U.S. Navy Seabee Museum Online Reading Room
* U.S. Navy Divers Training Center </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1757145" start="0" end="43" title="Seabee" label="United States Naval Construction Battalions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757145" start="70" end="77" title="Seabee" label="Seabees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757145" start="88" end="118" title="Seabee" label="U.S. Naval Construction Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757145" start="120" end="123" title="Seabee" label="NCF"/>
<link wikidata="Q221079" start="151" end="162" title="heterograph" label="heterograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201318" start="531" end="544" title="plankowner" label="plank-holders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883853" start="557" end="586" title="Naval Combat Demolition Units" label="Naval Combat Demolition Units"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883853" start="595" end="621" title="Underwater Demolition Team" label="Underwater Demolition Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="770" end="796" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="" start="853" end="869" title="Chemical Warfare Service: Flame Tank Group Seabees" label="Flame Tank Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q309202" start="938" end="948" title="Camp David" label="Camp David"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="983" end="1002" title="Department of State" label="Department of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q627364" start="1116" end="1128" title="Public Works" label="Public Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="1290" end="1302" title="Attack on Pearl Harbor" label="Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="1503" end="1513" title="guerrillas" label="guerrillas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752350" start="1532" end="1549" title="summary execution" label="summary execution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141380" start="1608" end="1629" title="Battle of Wake Island" label="Battle of Wake Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638595" start="1686" end="1706" title="The Fighting Seabees" label="The Fighting Seabees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535240" start="1801" end="1814" title="South Pacific (musical)" label="South Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q4057849" start="1823" end="1827" title="Admiral (United States)" label="Adm."/>
<link wikidata="Q4886189" start="1828" end="1835" title="Ben Moreell" label="Moreell"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="1866" end="1870" title="United States Marine Corps" label="USMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="2062" end="2070" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q766445" start="2075" end="2082" title="Okinawa Prefecture" label="Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="2086" end="2090" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="2095" end="2106" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q366731" start="2113" end="2124" title="Ernest King" label="Ernest King"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577908" start="2384" end="2390" title="Flying (magazine)" label="Flying"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998435" start="2534" end="2559" title="Bureau of Yards and Docks" label="Bureau of Yards and Docks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072415" start="2731" end="2756" title="Chief of Naval Operations" label="Chief of Naval Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278830" start="2766" end="2771" title="Rear admiral (United States)" label="RADM."/>
<link wikidata="Q1143596" start="2834" end="2851" title="United States Department of War" label="War Plans Officer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2984" end="2991" title="United States color-coded war plans#Rainbow plans" label="Rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932857" start="3169" end="3181" title="line Officer" label="line Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124476" start="3239" end="3259" title="Civil Engineer Corps" label="Civil Engineer Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q15627509" start="3319" end="3340" title="military organization" label="military organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351849" start="3344" end="3361" title="military training" label="military training"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029789" start="3399" end="3409" title="Military discipline" label="discipline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465318" start="3415" end="3430" title="esprit de corps" label="esprit de corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886189" start="3456" end="3467" title="Ben Moreell" label="Ben Moreell"/>
<link wikidata="Q217645" start="3803" end="3817" title="Chester Nimitz" label="Chester Nimitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998402" start="3832" end="3852" title="Bureau of Navigation (United States Navy)" label="Bureau of Navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550460" start="3960" end="3973" title="boot training" label="boot training"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="3980" end="3995" title="Attack on Pearl Harbor" label="7 December 1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981941" start="3999" end="4020" title="Naval Station Newport" label="Naval Station Newport"/>
<link wikidata="Q205961" start="4134" end="4142" title="skillset" label="skillset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391014" start="4156" end="4163" title="Faceted classification" label="faceted"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351849" start="4182" end="4199" title="military training" label="military training"/>
<link wikidata="Q13393921" start="4265" end="4278" title="Pioneer (military)" label="USMC Pioneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q348120" start="4305" end="4313" title="Amphibious assault" label="landings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395034" start="4334" end="4345" title="New product development" label="development"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="4347" end="4358" title="Manufacturing" label="fabrication"/>
<link wikidata="Q482421" start="4501" end="4520" title="United States Army Special Forces" label="Army Special forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="4528" end="4535" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q12800" start="4562" end="4573" title="machine gun" label="machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1803024" start="4585" end="4589" title="LCVP (United States)" label="LCVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888190" start="4594" end="4602" title="PT boats" label="PT boats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588761" start="4695" end="4704" title="tradesmen" label="tradesmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q77590" start="4815" end="4826" title="Civil Engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501161" start="4876" end="4883" title="toolbox" label="toolbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q62447" start="4903" end="4911" title="airfield" label="airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q283202" start="4916" end="4922" title="harbor" label="harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875186" start="4923" end="4935" title="construction" label="construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q98078923" start="4973" end="4996" title="underwater construction" label="underwater construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q331483" start="4998" end="5008" title="demolition" label="demolition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883853" start="5108" end="5111" title="Underwater Demolition Teams" label="UDT"/>
<link wikidata="Q627364" start="5166" end="5178" title="Public works" label="Public works"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367" start="5242" end="5250" title="mosquito" label="mosquito"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="5251" end="5258" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q820382" start="5335" end="5348" title="ship salvage" label="fleet salvage"/>
<link wikidata="Q474200" start="5350" end="5356" title="ship repair" label="repair"/>
<link wikidata="Q151197" start="5385" end="5403" title="Combat engineering" label="Combat engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537445" start="5536" end="5547" title="stevedoring" label="stevedoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q348120" start="5576" end="5594" title="amphibious landing" label="assault operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q329864" start="5632" end="5651" title="Weapons development" label="Weapons development"/>
<link wikidata="Q392933" start="5656" end="5667" title="Arms industry" label="manufacture"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="5686" end="5689" title="United States Army" label="USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093909" start="5690" end="5714" title="Chemical Warfare Service" label="Chemical Warfare Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q25322" start="5716" end="5721" title="Arctic" label="Polar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241434" start="5722" end="5743" title="petroleum exploration" label="petroleum exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="5812" end="5839" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="5975" end="5978" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="5983" end="5999" title="United States Department of State" label="State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q272826" start="6032" end="6042" title="Electronic warfare" label="electronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q258307" start="6061" end="6078" title="national security" label="national security"/>
<link wikidata="Q42470" start="6096" end="6101" title="motto" label="motto"/>
<link wikidata="Q217645" start="6555" end="6569" title="Admiral Nimitz" label="Admiral Nimitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q183113" start="6687" end="6703" title="Operation Bobcat" label="Operation Bobcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q183113" start="6723" end="6732" title="Bora Bora" label="Bora Bora"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144834" start="7233" end="7243" title="United States Navy Regulations" label="Naval regs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932857" start="7288" end="7300" title="line officer" label="line officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124476" start="7356" end="7359" title="Civil Engineer Corps" label="CEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998400" start="7398" end="7423" title="Bureau of Naval Personnel" label="Bureau of Naval Personnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q940135" start="7499" end="7520" title="Secretary of the Navy" label="Secretary of the Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q526220" start="7522" end="7532" title="Frank Knox" label="Frank Knox"/>
<link wikidata="Q309252" start="8083" end="8100" title="physical training" label="physical training"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="8115" end="8118" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="FDR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750391" start="8131" end="8155" title="Selective Service System" label="Selective Service System"/>
<link wikidata="Q5026959" start="8556" end="8566" title="Camp Allen" label="Camp Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q49231" start="8570" end="8587" title="Norfolk, Virginia" label="Norfolk, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q488929" start="8634" end="8644" title="Camp Peary" label="Camp Peary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027158" start="8666" end="8679" title="Camp Endicott" label="Camp Endicott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748229" start="8683" end="8710" title="Quonset Point, Rhode Island" label="Quonset Point, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q106611506" start="8800" end="8819" title="US Naval Advance Bases" label="Advance Base Depots"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027158" start="8985" end="8998" title="Camp Endicott" label="Camp Endicott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138655" start="9045" end="9055" title="Camp Parks" label="Camp Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q785669" start="9114" end="9129" title="Eastport, Maine" label="Eastport, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q490587" start="9149" end="9170" title="Gulfport, Mississippi" label="Gulfport, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687290" start="9277" end="9297" title="VII Amphibious Force" label="VII Amphibious Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q127417" start="9316" end="9333" title="Douglas MacArthur" label="Douglas MacArthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q471889" start="9335" end="9352" title="Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers" label="Supreme Commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q207645" start="10092" end="10100" title="Military tactics" label="tactical"/>
<link wikidata="Q192660" start="10519" end="10538" title="invasion of Okinawa" label="invasion of Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q863454" start="10801" end="10805" title="pier" label="pier"/>
<link wikidata="Q828909" start="10808" end="10815" title="wharves" label="wharves"/>
<link wikidata="Q215635" start="10817" end="10828" title="breakwaters" label="breakwaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888190" start="10830" end="10832" title="PT boat" label="PT"/>
<link wikidata="Q115940" start="10839" end="10847" title="seaplane" label="seaplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="11005" end="11021" title="Normandy landing" label="Normandy landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="11105" end="11110" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072415" start="11267" end="11270" title="Chief of Naval Operations" label="CNO"/>
<link wikidata="Q700730" start="11279" end="11301" title="Harold Rainsford Stark" label="Harold Rainsford Stark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149038" start="11499" end="11506" title="colored" label="colored"/>
<link wikidata="Q502044" start="11850" end="11855" title="NAACP" label="NAACP"/>
<link wikidata="Q312348" start="11860" end="11877" title="Thurgood Marshall" label="Thurgood Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="12027" end="12030" title="MIT" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q131375952" start="12040" end="12054" title="Edward S. Hope" label="Edward S. Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q55648441" start="12930" end="12959" title="Navy Cargo Handling Battalion" label="Navy Cargo Handling Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982630" start="12968" end="13026" title="Navy Expeditionary Logistics Support Group (United States)" label="Navy Expeditionary Logistics Support Group (United States)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892607" start="13125" end="13144" title="14th Naval District" label="14th Naval District"/>
<link wikidata="Q609030" start="13891" end="13898" title="Battle of Peleliu" label="Peleliu"/>
<link wikidata="Q609030" start="13972" end="13979" title="Battle of Peleliu" label="Peleliu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644108" start="14045" end="14056" title="7th Marines" label="7th Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384456" start="14116" end="14121" title="front line" label="lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q655177" start="14126" end="14151" title="Medical evacuation" label="get the wounded to safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q696497" start="14286" end="14292" title="Banzai charge" label="banzai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329143" start="14293" end="14307" title="counter-attack" label="counter-attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q185785" start="14407" end="14417" title="ammunition" label="ammunition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384456" start="14425" end="14436" title="front lines" label="front lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q838960" start="14444" end="14454" title="stretchers" label="stretchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q227558" start="14545" end="14554" title="37 mm gun M3" label="37mm guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427134" start="14673" end="14684" title="Flanking maneuver" label="right flank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387572" start="15285" end="15309" title="William H. Rupertus" label="Maj. Gen. Rupertus, USMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q520549" start="15504" end="15513" title="geologist" label="geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273174" start="15516" end="15534" title="petroleum engineer" label="petroleum engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307564" start="15537" end="15549" title="driller (oil)" label="oil drillers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824053" start="15551" end="15562" title="tool pusher" label="tool pusher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594327" start="15565" end="15575" title="roustabout" label="roustabout"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370910" start="15581" end="15590" title="roughneck" label="roughneck"/>
<link wikidata="Q25322" start="15668" end="15674" title="arctic" label="arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079276" start="15908" end="15919" title="Office of Naval Petroleum and Oil Shale Reserves" label="oil reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974897" start="15948" end="15984" title="National Petroleum Reserve in Alaska" label="National Petroleum Reserve in Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q29824475" start="16065" end="16077" title="Smith Bay" label="Cape Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841394" start="16160" end="16168" title="Pipeline transport" label="pipeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q79943" start="16278" end="16285" title="Bettles, Alaska" label="Bettles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874294" start="16302" end="16323" title="USS Spica" label="USS &amp;quot;Spica&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6576826" start="16346" end="16380" title="List of Liberty ships (Je–L)" label="SS &amp;quot;Jonathan Harrington&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343019" start="16385" end="16397" title="Point Barrow" label="Point Barrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227198" start="16402" end="16414" title="Cape Simpson" label="Cape Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343019" start="16460" end="16472" title="Point Barrow" label="Point Barrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2941769" start="16479" end="16482" title="Caterpillar D8" label="D-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q43262" start="16567" end="16573" title="tundra" label="tundra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16821" end="16829" title="Oil wells#By purpose" label="Seabee#1"/>
<link wikidata="Q782491" start="16853" end="16858" title="petroleum seep" label="seeps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3548222" start="16862" end="16867" title="Umiat" label="Umiat"/>
<link wikidata="Q338199" start="16936" end="16952" title="Upper Cretaceous" label="Upper Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q12758989" start="16959" end="16966" title="stratum" label="stratum"/>
<link wikidata="Q429280" start="17388" end="17406" title="Operation Highjump" label="Operation Highjump"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756995" start="17411" end="17432" title="Operation Deep Freeze" label="Operation Deep Freeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="17454" end="17458" title="USGS" label="USGS"/>
<link wikidata="Q937088" start="17645" end="17667" title="Trans-Alaska Pipeline System" label="Trans-Alaskan pipeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q176609" start="17719" end="17732" title="Arctic Circle" label="Arctic Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q358078" start="17862" end="17874" title="road network" label="road network"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="17920" end="17931" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q17986161" start="17970" end="17983" title="Bureau of Medicine and Surgery" label="Navy Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="18150" end="18157" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q217145" start="19055" end="19066" title="Battle of Guadalcanal" label="Guadalcanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143596" start="19071" end="19088" title="United States Department of War" label="Department of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550460" start="19518" end="19522" title="Recruit training" label="boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336958" start="19549" end="19578" title="National Youth Administration" label="National Youth Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q358648" start="19722" end="19743" title="Table of organization" label="Table of organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631398" start="20210" end="20222" title="22nd Marines" label="22nd Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4553639" start="20605" end="20625" title="17th Marine Regiment" label="17th Marine Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056924" start="20627" end="20647" title="18th Marine Regiment" label="18th Marine Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595787" start="20649" end="20669" title="19th Marine Regiment" label="19th Marine Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630782" start="20675" end="20695" title="20th Marine Regiment" label="20th Marine Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190525" start="20844" end="20854" title="duffle bag" label="duffle bag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479693" start="20862" end="20875" title="Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune" label="New River, NC"/>
<link wikidata="Q163669" start="21303" end="21322" title="1st Marine Division (United States)" label="1st Marine Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427712" start="21403" end="21421" title="Fleet Marine Force" label="Fleet Marine Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147699" start="21523" end="21531" title="Russell Islands" label="Russells"/>
<link wikidata="Q952882" start="21671" end="21678" title="Rendova" label="Rendova"/>
<link wikidata="Q497981" start="21756" end="21763" title="Peleliu" label="Peleliu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149038" start="21791" end="21798" title="colored" label="colored"/>
<link wikidata="Q617069" start="21818" end="21823" title="Munda, Solomon Islands" label="Munda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6764203" start="21871" end="21885" title="Marine Raiders" label="Marine Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q926115" start="22039" end="22052" title="Cape Torokina" label="Cape Torokina"/>
<link wikidata="Q926115" start="22235" end="22249" title="Cape Torokina" label="Puruata Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q201633" start="22530" end="22538" title="Iwo Jima" label="Iwo Jima"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631666" start="22643" end="22655" title="23rd Marines" label="23rd Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027627" start="23127" end="23138" title="Camp Tarawa" label="Camp Tarawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q618979" start="23233" end="23240" title="V-J day" label="V-J day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5978397" start="23529" end="23534" title="I Marine Amphibious Corps" label="I MAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q491478" start="23673" end="23693" title="III Amphibious Corps" label="III Amphibious Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q11616" start="23733" end="23763" title="1st Provisional Marine Brigade" label="1st Provisional Marine Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907712" start="23994" end="24012" title="V Amphibious Corps" label="V Amphibious Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q8005831" start="24826" end="24847" title="William Bradford Huie" label="William Bradford Huie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072415" start="25430" end="25455" title="Chief of Naval Operations" label="Chief of Naval Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q217981" start="25517" end="25535" title="invasion of Sicily" label="invasion of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q753730" start="25585" end="25603" title="Solomons, Maryland" label="Solomons, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883853" start="25831" end="25860" title="Naval Combat Demolition Units" label="Naval Combat Demolition Units"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305858" start="26001" end="26016" title="Draper Kauffman" label="Draper Kauffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q584340" start="26370" end="26381" title="Fort Pierce" label="Fort Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="26835" end="26855" title="invasion of Normandy" label="invasion of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q151197" start="27017" end="27033" title="Combat Engineers" label="Combat Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q276099" start="27149" end="27173" title="research and development" label="research and development"/>
<link wikidata="Q221111" start="27308" end="27325" title="Operation Dragoon" label="Operation Dragoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889864" start="27678" end="27691" title="United States Eighth Fleet" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q513066" start="27734" end="27748" title="Florida Island" label="Florida Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q119285" start="27801" end="27810" title="Aleutians" label="Aleutians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343504" start="27883" end="27913" title="Green Island, Papua New Guinea" label="Green Island, Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337856" start="27918" end="27931" title="Emirau Island" label="Emirau Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q250309" start="28204" end="28222" title="Operation Galvanic" label="Operation Galvanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q171446" start="28269" end="28274" title="coral" label="coral"/>
<link wikidata="Q348120" start="28298" end="28319" title="amphibious operations" label="amphibious operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q728413" start="28326" end="28338" title="Richmond K. Turner" label="Kelly Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q30895" start="28605" end="28618" title="Canton Island" label="Canton Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q171446" start="28659" end="28670" title="coral" label="coral heads"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883853" start="28713" end="28716" title="Underwater Demolition Team" label="UDT"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100004" start="29120" end="29126" title="Waipio" label="Waipio"/>
<link wikidata="Q250309" start="29226" end="29232" title="invasion of Tarawa" label="Tarawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883853" start="29290" end="29317" title="Underwater Demolition Teams" label="Underwater Demolition Teams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892573" start="29783" end="29826" title="Operational Swimmer Groups" label="Maritime Unit: Operational Swimmer Group II"/>
<link wikidata="Q12296445" start="29874" end="29889" title="Asiatic-Pacific Theater" label="Pacific Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q752296" start="30004" end="30012" title="swimfins" label="swimfins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982687" start="30100" end="30111" title="Navy Supply Corps" label="Supply dept"/>
<link wikidata="Q178033" start="30230" end="30248" title="Scouts and Raiders" label="Scouts and Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890815" start="30322" end="30354" title="Explosive ordnance disposal (United States Navy)" label="Navy&amp;#x27;s Bomb disposal School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890712" start="30636" end="30684" title="United States Marine Corps Amphibious Reconnaissance Battalion" label="Marine Corps Amphibious Reconnaissance Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q251741" start="30822" end="30827" title="reconnaissance" label="recon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168000" start="30916" end="30921" title="military intelligence" label="intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q14944696" start="30993" end="31001" title="Combat uniform" label="fatigues"/>
<link wikidata="Q14595679" start="31003" end="31009" title="Ensign (rank)" label="Ensign"/>
<link wikidata="Q217645" start="31341" end="31352" title="Chester Nimitz" label="Adm. Nimitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q649190" start="31357" end="31363" title="Engebi" label="Engebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q852071" start="31550" end="31561" title="Silver Star" label="Silver Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q37038" start="31914" end="31927" title="advertisement" label="advertisement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026771" start="32593" end="32598" title="Kihei" label="Kihei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962707" start="33008" end="33017" title="Night operations (military)" label="night ops"/>
<link wikidata="Q879208" start="33028" end="33039" title="bivouacking" label="bivouacking"/>
<link wikidata="Q207645" start="33047" end="33059" title="Military tactics" label="unit tactics"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="33082" end="33086" title="lava" label="lava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137295" start="34481" end="34488" title="Frogmen" label="Frogmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q835153" start="34853" end="34861" title="physical examination" label="physical"/>
<link wikidata="Q463937" start="34980" end="35006" title="St. Thomas, Virgin Islands" label="St. Thomas, Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="35062" end="35070" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="35444" end="35448" title="USSR" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951" start="35506" end="35530" title="Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky" label="Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q993" start="35538" end="35557" title="Kamchatka Peninsula" label="Kamchatka Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="35740" end="35746" title="Stalin" label="Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203620" start="35781" end="35800" title="Operation Beleaguer" label="Operation Beleaguer"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="35848" end="35853" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q170322" start="35959" end="35966" title="Qingdao" label="Qingdao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210368" start="35971" end="35977" title="Tanggu District" label="Tanggu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="36071" end="36079" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q58560" start="36347" end="36358" title="Qinhuangdao" label="Qinhuangdao"/>
<link wikidata="Q569545" start="36663" end="36683" title="Operation Crossroads" label="Operation Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q17194312" start="36692" end="36723" title="nuclear testing at Bikini Atoll" label="nuclear testing at Bikini Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q908488" start="36845" end="36857" title="radio beacon" label="radio beacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q852170" start="36952" end="36960" title="dredging" label="dredging"/>
<link wikidata="Q187223" start="36965" end="36971" title="lagoon" label="lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q697826" start="37214" end="37228" title="Rongerik Atoll" label="Rongerik Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q485146" start="37627" end="37633" title="sample (material)" label="sample"/>
<link wikidata="Q107410" start="37640" end="37651" title="ground zero" label="ground zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q697832" start="37751" end="37755" title="Kili Island" label="Kili"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="38419" end="38429" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q483039" start="38500" end="38506" title="Battle of Inchon" label="Inchon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017866" start="38909" end="38919" title="Naval Air Station Cubi Point" label="Cubi Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q145442" start="39017" end="39035" title="Zambales Mountains" label="Zambales Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q17157253" start="39186" end="39191" title="Naval Mobile Construction Battalion Three" label="MCB 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350" start="39549" end="39561" title="Panama Canal" label="Panama Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12132310" start="39628" end="39642" title="hydraulic fill" label="hydraulic fill"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="40252" end="40273" title="U.S. State Department" label="U.S. State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="40327" end="40335" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="40448" end="40457" title="Communism" label="Communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q458620" start="40485" end="40496" title="Peace Corps" label="Peace Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q217072" start="40636" end="40686" title="United States Agency for International Development" label="United States Agency for International Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q482421" start="40758" end="40782" title="U.S. Army Special Forces" label="U.S. Army Special Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="40971" end="40974" title="CIA" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q540846" start="41101" end="41141" title="Civilian Irregular Defense Group program" label="Civilian Irregular Defense Group program"/>
<link wikidata="Q309202" start="41975" end="42006" title="Camp David" label="Naval Support Facility Thurmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q245016" start="42031" end="42052" title="military installation" label="military installation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098937" start="42325" end="42332" title="Groundskeeping" label="grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087682" start="42410" end="42434" title="Background check" label="background investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q161959" start="42470" end="42518" title="Security clearance" label="Top Secret Sensitive Yankee White (YW) clearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q72103729" start="42770" end="42771" title="Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 5" label="5"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981870" start="42776" end="42779" title="Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 133" label="133"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875688" start="42920" end="42942" title="USS Yancey" label="USS &amp;quot;Yancey&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q11679476" start="42947" end="42970" title="USS Merrick" label="USS &amp;quot;Merrick&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q429280" start="42983" end="43001" title="Operation Highjump" label="Operation Highjump"/>
<link wikidata="Q210268" start="43029" end="43044" title="Richard E. Byrd" label="Richard E. Byrd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502365" start="43302" end="43335" title="Little America (exploration base)" label="Little America (exploration base)"/>
<link wikidata="Q724505" start="43425" end="43428" title="International Geophysical Year" label="IGY"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756995" start="43429" end="43450" title="Operation Deep Freeze" label="Operation Deep Freeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756995" start="43524" end="43545" title="Operation Deep Freeze" label="Operation Deep Freeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="43667" end="43694" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056751" start="43790" end="43797" title="McMurdo Sound" label="Mcmurdo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981874" start="43868" end="43873" title="Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 1" label="MCB 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314410" start="43987" end="43996" title="Traverse (climbing)" label="traverses"/>
<link wikidata="Q498627" start="44040" end="44055" title="McMurdo Station" label="McMurdo Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q243307" start="44057" end="44075" title="South Pole Station" label="South Pole Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2987067" start="44077" end="44089" title="Byrd Station" label="Byrd Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333903" start="44091" end="44105" title="Palmer Station" label="Palmer Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110548" start="44107" end="44120" title="Siple Station" label="Siple Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366162" start="44122" end="44139" title="Ellsworth Station" label="Ellsworth Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972874" start="44141" end="44157" title="Brockton Station (Antarctica)" label="Brockton Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382060" start="44175" end="44190" title="Plateau Station" label="Plateau Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728309" start="44192" end="44207" title="Hallett Station" label="Hallett Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502365" start="44213" end="44251" title="Little America (exploration base)" label="Little America IV and Little America V"/>
<link wikidata="Q134447" start="44279" end="44298" title="nuclear power plant" label="nuclear power plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q102289" start="44369" end="44387" title="Buckminster Fuller" label="Buckminster Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135180" start="44388" end="44401" title="Geodesic dome" label="Geodesic dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992435" start="44605" end="44633" title="Operation Passage to Freedom" label="Operation Passage to Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q816425" start="44662" end="44668" title="surveying" label="survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="44762" end="44773" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q729365" start="44800" end="44807" title="Tri Ton" label="Tri Ton"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639545" start="45179" end="45198" title="Chu Lai Base Area" label="Chu Lai combat base"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778350" start="45539" end="45556" title="Marvin Glenn Shields" label="Marvin G. Shields"/>
<link wikidata="Q588774" start="45588" end="45607" title="Battle of Dong Xoai" label="Battle of Dong Xoai"/>
<link wikidata="Q203535" start="45641" end="45655" title="Medal of Honor" label="Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281" start="45729" end="45739" title="propaganda" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012164" start="45916" end="45924" title="Khe Sanh Combat Base" label="Khe Sahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q298793" start="46002" end="46022" title="General Westmoreland" label="General Westmoreland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626571" start="46131" end="46140" title="Con Thien" label="Con Thien"/>
<link wikidata="Q588774" start="46177" end="46186" title="Battle of Đồng Xoài" label="Dong Xoai"/>
<link wikidata="Q165256" start="46955" end="46969" title="101st Airborne" label="101st Airborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164417" start="47323" end="47331" title="Construction Battalion Maintenance Unit 302" label="CBMU 302"/>
<link wikidata="Q11072051" start="47398" end="47410" title="Cam Rahn Bay" label="Cam Rahn Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097324" start="47548" end="47566" title="Operation New Life" label="Operation New Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q666620" start="48343" end="48355" title="Elmo Zumwalt" label="Elmo Zumwalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q280290" start="48445" end="48461" title="Creighton Abrams" label="Creighton Abrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q485921" start="48475" end="48511" title="Military Assistance Command, Vietnam" label="Military Assistance Command, Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q53744" start="48560" end="48569" title="defoliant" label="defoliant"/>
<link wikidata="Q178266" start="48570" end="48579" title="herbicide" label="herbicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q215946" start="48667" end="48679" title="Agent Orange" label="Agent Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q10289" start="48753" end="48759" title="barrel" label="barrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q81292" start="48857" end="48861" title="acre" label="acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q52162" start="48974" end="48989" title="Project Mercury" label="Project Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q209867" start="48990" end="48999" title="telemetry" label="telemetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349167" start="49004" end="49034" title="Ground station" label="ground instrumentation station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748191" start="49101" end="49136" title="Amphibious Construction Battalion 2" label="Amphibious Construction Battalion 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695497" start="49185" end="49200" title="Tektite habitat" label="Tektite habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481795" start="49226" end="49255" title="Lameshur, U.S. Virgin Islands" label="Lameshur, U.S. Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="49291" end="49295" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932" start="49544" end="49554" title="Space Race" label="Space Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q51075" start="49760" end="49772" title="Human mission to Mars" label="Moon to Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4938353" start="49837" end="49848" title="Boilerplate (spacecraft)" label="Boilerplate"/>
<link wikidata="Q211727" start="49936" end="49952" title="Orion spacecraft" label="Orion spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630740" start="50267" end="50292" title="Office of War Information" label="Office of War Information"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273113" start="50636" end="50648" title="Capitol Hill, Saipan" label="Capitol Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328343" start="50775" end="50787" title="East Field (Saipan)" label="Kagman Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981740" start="50789" end="50806" title="Marpi Point Field" label="Marpi Point Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q558992" start="50852" end="50870" title="Edward G. Lansdale" label="Edward G. Lansdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="50891" end="50908" title="guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q313972" start="50927" end="50944" title="Maxwell D. Taylor" label="Maxwell D. Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="50946" end="50963" title="President Kennedy" label="President Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342628" start="51012" end="51034" title="Unconventional Warfare" label="Unconventional Warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="51402" end="51425" title="Espionage" label="intelligence tradecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q501700" start="51443" end="51463" title="counter-intelligence" label="counter-intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q163698" start="51468" end="51489" title="psychological warfare" label="psychological warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q208508" start="51945" end="51956" title="Bay of pigs" label="Bay of pigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q128160" start="51961" end="51981" title="Cuban Missile Crisis" label="Cuban Missile Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068623" start="52093" end="52105" title="radio towers" label="radio towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547671" start="52164" end="52175" title="Swan Islands, Honduras" label="Swan Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281068" start="52433" end="52443" title="Radio Swan" label="Radio Swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755312" start="52560" end="52585" title="Sound Surveillance System" label="Sound Surveillance System"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071545" start="52934" end="52945" title="John Anthony Walker" label="John Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292363" start="53045" end="53054" title="Nea Makri" label="Nea Makri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890794" start="53115" end="53144" title="United States Naval Communications Station Sidi Yahya El Gharb" label="Naval Comm Station Sidi Yahya"/>
<link wikidata="Q722374" start="53479" end="53517" title="Embassy of the United States in Moscow" label="Embassy of the United States in Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="53668" end="53674" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="54001" end="54023" title="Prague, Czechoslovakia" label="Prague, Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="54385" end="54404" title="Department of State" label="Department of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q16241039" start="54421" end="54440" title="Diplomatic Security" label="Diplomatic Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q17153986" start="54478" end="54503" title="Regional Security Officer" label="Regional Security Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q945434" start="54622" end="54635" title="alarm systems" label="alarm systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135310" start="54637" end="54649" title="CCTV cameras" label="CCTV cameras"/>
<link wikidata="Q4274070" start="54651" end="54671" title="electromagnetic lock" label="electromagnetic lock"/>
<link wikidata="Q365674" start="54753" end="54773" title="security engineering" label="security engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="55399" end="55407" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q859041" start="55659" end="55666" title="UGM-27 Polaris" label="Polaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331175" start="55671" end="55679" title="UGM-73 Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625344" start="55694" end="55703" title="Holy Loch" label="Holy Loch"/>
<link wikidata="Q729530" start="55705" end="55709" title="Naval Station Rota, Spain" label="Rota"/>
<link wikidata="Q11694190" start="55758" end="55770" title="Naval Support Facility Diego Garcia" label="Diego Garcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="55778" end="55790" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="56084" end="56097" title="Desert Shield" label="Desert Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="56102" end="56114" title="Desert Storm" label="Desert Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q938394" start="56179" end="56206" title="Naval Air Station Sigonella" label="Naval Air Station Sigonella"/>
<link wikidata="Q2381805" start="56223" end="56248" title="United States Sixth Fleet" label="United States Sixth Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q518303" start="56288" end="56320" title="1983 Beirut barracks bombings" label="Marine&amp;#x27;s barracks in Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q668329" start="56340" end="56368" title="Beirut International Airport" label="Beirut International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q163943" start="56369" end="56374" title="Druze" label="Druze"/>
<link wikidata="Q145752" start="56555" end="56567" title="Purple Heart" label="Purple Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="56782" end="56786" title="9/11" label="9/11"/>
<link wikidata="Q2158890" start="56816" end="56830" title="Robert Stethem" label="Robert Stethem"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="56860" end="56864" title="Shia Islam" label="Shia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41053" start="56873" end="56882" title="Hezbollah" label="Hezbollah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302456" start="56902" end="56916" title="TWA Flight 847" label="TWA Flight 847"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890816" start="56940" end="56945" title="Navy diver (United States Navy)" label="diver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605847" start="57081" end="57116" title="Steelworker (United States Navy)" label="Master Chief Constructionman (CUCM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907851" start="57124" end="57162" title="Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy" label="Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816763" start="57177" end="57198" title="Prisoner of War Medal" label="Prisoner of War Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="57258" end="57266" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636835" start="57605" end="57624" title="3rd Marine Air Wing" label="3rd Marine Air Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6764016" start="57722" end="57728" title="MAG 26" label="MAG 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="57840" end="57852" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q184590" start="57893" end="57900" title="runways" label="runways"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="57910" end="57914" title="helicopter" label="helo"/>
<link wikidata="Q27430" start="57960" end="57969" title="Jubail" label="Al-Jubayl"/>
<link wikidata="Q182865" start="58182" end="58197" title="War in Afghanistan (2001-2021)" label="Afghanistan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644969" start="58202" end="58210" title="War in Iraq" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q121359" start="58293" end="58307" title="infrastructure" label="infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="58389" end="58403" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="58407" end="58414" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604714" start="58494" end="58516" title="forward operating base" label="forward operating base"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027535" start="58544" end="58554" title="Camp Rhino" label="Camp Rhino"/>
<link wikidata="Q33156" start="58570" end="58587" title="Kandahar Airfield" label="Kandahar Airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q335361" start="58734" end="58744" title="Abu Sayyaf" label="Abu Sayyaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="58938" end="58951" title="War on Terror" label="War on Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638557" start="59056" end="59073" title="Hurricane Camille" label="Hurricane Camille"/>
<link wikidata="Q5198852" start="59199" end="59210" title="Cyclone Ofa" label="Cyclone Ofa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519015" start="59280" end="59306" title="1994 Northridge earthquake" label="1994 Northridge earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050309" start="59351" end="59367" title="Hurricane Andrew" label="Hurricane Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q280557" start="59415" end="59433" title="Homestead, Florida" label="Homestead, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q460844" start="59437" end="59459" title="Unified Task Force" label="Operation Restore Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="59530" end="59537" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097517" start="59541" end="59561" title="Operation Sea Signal" label="Operation Sea Signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q762570" start="59627" end="59652" title="Guantanamo Bay Naval Base" label="Guantanamo Bay Naval Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q313577" start="59656" end="59680" title="Implementation Force" label="Operation Joint Endeavor"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="59711" end="59718" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="59750" end="59758" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q313577" start="59870" end="59874" title="Implementation Force" label="IFOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q313440" start="59875" end="59879" title="Stabilisation Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="SFOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243975" start="59889" end="59906" title="Hurricane Georges" label="Hurricane Georges"/>
<link wikidata="Q390115" start="60028" end="60043" title="Hurricane Mitch" label="Hurricane Mitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269437" start="60083" end="60105" title="Joint Task Force Bravo" label="Joint Task Force Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q933067" start="60252" end="60266" title="Hurricane Ivan" label="Hurricane Ivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q321162" start="60325" end="60352" title="Naval Air Station Pensacola" label="Naval Air Station Pensacola"/>
<link wikidata="Q15904596" start="60438" end="60461" title="Typhoon Nanmadol (2004)" label="Typhoon Nanmadol (2004)"/>
<link wikidata="Q130754" start="60497" end="60537" title="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami" label="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269443" start="60589" end="60613" title="Joint Task Force Katrina" label="Joint Task Force Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q55241" start="60774" end="60784" title="Gulf Coast of the United States" label="Gulf Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q43777" start="60787" end="60808" title="2010 Haiti earthquake" label="2010 Haiti earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066427" start="60906" end="60934" title="April 2011 Miyagi earthquake" label="April 2011 Miyagi earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q264" start="61017" end="61032" title="Hurricane Sandy" label="Hurricane Sandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981792" start="61437" end="61485" title="Naval Construction Battalion Center Port Hueneme" label="Naval Construction Battalion Center Port Hueneme"/>
<link wikidata="Q17157253" start="61539" end="61576" title="Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 3" label="Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981872" start="61579" end="61616" title="Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 4" label="Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q72103729" start="61619" end="61656" title="Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 5" label="Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q12063608" start="61707" end="61766" title="Naval Construction Battalion Center (Gulfport, Mississippi)" label="Naval Construction Battalion Center (Gulfport, Mississippi)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981874" start="61809" end="61846" title="Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 1" label="Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q48770854" start="61849" end="61887" title="Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 11" label="Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981870" start="61890" end="61929" title="Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 133" label="Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 133"/>
<link wikidata="Q23198597" start="62497" end="62535" title="Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 25" label="Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382533" start="62874" end="62883" title="battalion" label="battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440159" start="63592" end="63597" title="Seabee Engineer Reconnaissance Team" label="SERTs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574644" start="63606" end="63632" title="Marine expeditionary unit (special operations capable)" label="Special operations capable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018676" start="63825" end="63877" title="United States Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions" label="United States Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986420" start="64262" end="64264" title="Builder (US Navy)" label="BU"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605847" start="64268" end="64270" title="Steelworker (US Navy)" label="SW"/>
<link wikidata="Q461167" start="64271" end="64274" title="chief petty officer" label="cpo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034117" start="64327" end="64335" title="corpsman" label="corpsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560882" start="64921" end="64928" title="Surface warfare" label="surface"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64929" end="64935" title="U.S. Navy type commands#Commander, Naval Surface Forces" label="TYCOMs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604714" start="65305" end="65328" title="Forward Operating Bases" label="Forward Operating Bases"/>
<link wikidata="Q6764145" start="65429" end="65455" title="Marine Expeditionary Force" label="Marine Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q578170" start="65581" end="65586" title="Contiguous United States" label="CONUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q550023" start="66062" end="66083" title="underwater demolition" label="underwater demolition"/>
<link wikidata="Q98078923" start="66156" end="66179" title="underwater construction" label="underwater construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427712" start="66249" end="66267" title="Fleet Marine Force" label="Fleet Marine Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q348120" start="66268" end="66288" title="Amphibious warfare" label="amphibious operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1595601" start="66339" end="66348" title="home port" label="home port"/>
<link wikidata="Q852591" start="66533" end="66553" title="Panama City, Florida" label="Panama City, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q963354" start="66981" end="67020" title="Naval Special Warfare Development Group" label="Naval Special Warfare Development Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q627364" start="67189" end="67201" title="Public Works" label="Public Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q476135" start="67648" end="67669" title="Naval Special Warfare" label="Naval Special Warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q963354" start="68238" end="68277" title="Naval Special Warfare Development Group" label="Naval Special Warfare Development Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303101" start="68377" end="68381" title="Recruit Training Command, Great Lakes, Illinois" label="boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982627" start="68617" end="68650" title="Navy Expeditionary Combat Command" label="Navy Expeditionary Combat Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q214688" start="68824" end="68834" title="M4 carbine" label="M4 carbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q647367" start="68843" end="68860" title="Beretta M9" label="M9 service pistol"/>
<link wikidata="Q482529" start="68952" end="68957" title="Mk 19 grenade launcher" label="MK 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q218932" start="68986" end="69021" title="M2 Browning" label="M2 Browning .50-caliber machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q772765" start="69029" end="69045" title="M240 machine gun" label="M240 machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q494361" start="69082" end="69097" title="M60 machine gun" label="M60 machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770272" start="69150" end="69163" title="U.S. Woodland" label="U.S. Woodland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263894" start="69191" end="69216" title="Desert Camouflage Uniform" label="Desert Camouflage Uniform"/>
<link wikidata="Q19297117" start="69236" end="69256" title="Navy Working Uniform" label="Navy Working Uniform"/>
<link wikidata="Q4393120" start="69274" end="69279" title="All-purpose lightweight individual carrying equipment" label="ALICE"/>
<link wikidata="Q6007825" start="69340" end="69371" title="Improved load-bearing equipment" label="Improved load-bearing equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986420" start="69457" end="69464" title="Builder (United States Navy)" label="Builder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164422" start="69472" end="69496" title="Construction electrician (United States Navy)" label="Construction electrician"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164433" start="69504" end="69525" title="Construction mechanic (United States Navy)" label="Construction mechanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377809" start="69533" end="69549" title="Engineering aide" label="Engineering aide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384556" start="69557" end="69575" title="Equipment operator" label="Equipment operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605847" start="69583" end="69594" title="Steelworker (United States Navy)" label="Steelworker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7902825" start="69602" end="69614" title="Utilitiesman (United States Navy)" label="Utilitiesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124476" start="69798" end="69818" title="Civil Engineer Corps" label="Civil Engineer Corps"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="69905" end="69913" title="Uniformed services pay grades of the United States#Enlisted pay grades" label="paygrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890816" start="70751" end="70756" title="Navy diver (United States Navy)" label="Diver"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981811" start="71175" end="71218" title="Naval Facilities Engineering Service Center" label="Naval Facilities Engineering Service Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663859" start="71432" end="71452" title="United States Navy systems commands" label="Navy System Commands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890817" start="71516" end="71545" title="Navy Experimental Diving Unit" label="Navy Experimental Diving Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748229" start="71915" end="71928" title="Quonset Point" label="Quonset Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="72701" end="72727" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="Disney Insignia Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440158" start="73027" end="73068" title="Seabee combat warfare specialist insignia" label="Seabee combat warfare specialist insignia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5458408" start="73291" end="73318" title="Fleet Marine Force Insignia" label="Fleet Marine Force Insignia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072843" start="73574" end="73591" title="OPNAV Instruction" label="OPNAV Instruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824710" start="73854" end="73872" title="Seabee (barge)" label="&amp;quot;Seabee&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878675" start="73962" end="73994" title="Lykes Brothers Steamship Company" label="Lykes Brothers Steamship Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q244777" start="74616" end="74621" title="Draft (hull)" label="draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q333386" start="74871" end="74895" title="Military Sealift Command" label="Military Sealift Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q17082712" start="74976" end="75001" title="Naval Base Ventura County" label="Naval Base Ventura County"/>
<link wikidata="Q983853" start="75005" end="75029" title="Port Hueneme, California" label="Port Hueneme, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197591" start="75339" end="75370" title="Seabee Museum and Memorial Park" label="Seabee Museum and Memorial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242029" start="75374" end="75398" title="Davisville, Rhode Island" label="Davisville, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q132851" start="75515" end="75522" title="Admiral" label="Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886189" start="75523" end="75534" title="Ben Moreell" label="Ben Moreell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778350" start="75563" end="75583" title="Marvin Glenn Shields" label="Marvin Glenn Shields"/>
<link wikidata="Q203535" start="75585" end="75599" title="Medal of Honor" label="Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2158890" start="75607" end="75621" title="Robert Stethem" label="Robert Stethem"/>
<link wikidata="Q92326209" start="75643" end="75663" title="Blake Wayne Van Leer" label="Blake Wayne Van Leer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6852281" start="75683" end="75724" title="Military engineering of the United States" label="Military engineering of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981873" start="75727" end="75764" title="Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 7" label="Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q18379708" start="75767" end="75805" title="Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 26" label="Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981871" start="75808" end="75846" title="Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 40" label="Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138655" start="75849" end="75883" title="Parks Reserve Forces Training Area" label="Parks Reserve Forces Training Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q14712944" start="75886" end="75902" title="Seabees Memorial" label="Seabees Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890817" start="75905" end="75948" title="United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit" label="United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897472" start="75951" end="75978" title="Unsinkable aircraft carrier" label="Unsinkable aircraft carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q121494509" start="75981" end="76016" title="US Naval Bases North Africa" label="Seabees Naval Bases in North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294159" start="76072" end="76081" title="Rapid Engineer Deployable Heavy Operational Repair Squadron Engineers" label="RED HORSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="76082" end="76096" title="U.S. Air Force" label="U.S. Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="76099" end="76136" title="United States Army Corps of Engineers" label="United States Army Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601858" start="76139" end="76170" title="List of United States Marine Corps battalions" label="USMC Combat Engineer Battalions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607946" start="76201" end="76236" title="Presidential Unit Citation (US)" label="Presidential Unit Citation USN/USMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607946" start="76509" end="76546" title="Presidential Unit Citation (US)" label="U.S. Army Distinguished Unit Citation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607946" start="78415" end="78450" title="Presidential Unit Citation (US)" label="Presidential Unit Citation USN/USMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q194744" start="78517" end="78539" title="Navy Unit Commendation" label="Navy Unit Commendation"/>
<link wikidata="Q476135" start="78637" end="78666" title="Naval Special Warfare Command" label="Naval Special Warfare Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q541981" start="78773" end="78788" title="William J. Donovan" label="General Donovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q127417" start="78820" end="78837" title="Douglas MacArthur" label="General MacArthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q217645" start="78842" end="78856" title="Admiral Nimitz" label="Admiral Nimitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517192" start="79159" end="79172" title="History of the United States Navy" label="naval history"/>
<link wikidata="Q928314" start="79235" end="79246" title="Bronze Star" label="Bronze Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327174" start="79498" end="79505" title="Richard Lansing Conolly" label="Conolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q124425" start="80203" end="80215" title="Iron Curtain" label="Iron Curtain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244187" start="80285" end="80299" title="Seabee Heights" label="Seabee Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q319671" start="80329" end="80353" title="Transantarctic Mountains" label="Transantarctic Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q791644" start="80372" end="80389" title="Beardmore Glacier" label="Beardmore Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440161" start="80422" end="80433" title="Seabee Hook" label="Seabee Hook"/>
<link wikidata="Q164466" start="80485" end="80493" title="Ross Sea" label="Ross Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1595601" start="80737" end="80745" title="homeport" label="homeport"/>
<link wikidata="Q195334" start="80797" end="80811" title="Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton" label="Camp Pendleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607946" start="80817" end="80852" title="Presidential Unit Citation (US)" label="Presidential Unit Citation USN/USMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q247253" start="80931" end="80949" title="Battle of Khe Sanh" label="Battle of Khe Sanh"/>
<link wikidata="Q811177" start="80999" end="81007" title="dry dock" label="dry dock"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="81034" end="81043" title="Holy Loch#US Navy at Holy Loch" label="Holy Loch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292363" start="81104" end="81113" title="Nea Makri" label="Nea Makri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="81327" end="81354" title="Other Transaction Authority" label="Other Transaction Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607946" start="81947" end="81982" title="Presidential Unit Citation (US)" label="Presidential Unit Citation USN/USMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q211727" start="82318" end="82336" title="Orion (spacecraft)" label="Orion (spacecraft)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4938353" start="82337" end="82362" title="Boilerplate (spaceflight)" label="Boilerplate (spaceflight)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705750" start="82363" end="82375" title="test article (aerospace)" label="test article"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="82960" end="82963" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q320765" start="82967" end="82974" title="bugging" label="bugging"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29485" wikidata="Q11303" url="?curid=29485" title="Skyscraper">
<text>A skyscraper is a tall continuously habitable building having multiple floors. Modern sources define skyscrapers as being at least or in height, though there is no universally accepted definition, other than being very tall high-rise buildings. Skyscrapers may host offices, hotels, residential spaces, and retail spaces.

One common feature of skyscrapers is having a steel frame that supports curtain walls. These curtain walls either bear on the framework below or are suspended from the framework above, rather than resting on load-bearing walls of conventional construction. Some early skyscrapers have a steel frame that enables the construction of load-bearing walls taller than of those made of reinforced concrete.

Modern skyscraper walls are not load-bearing, and most skyscrapers are characterized by large surface areas of windows made possible by steel frames and curtain walls. However, skyscrapers can have curtain walls that mimic conventional walls with a small surface area of windows. Modern skyscrapers often have a tubular structure, and are designed to act like a hollow cylinder to resist wind, seismic, and other lateral loads. To appear more slender, allow less wind exposure and transmit more daylight to the ground, many skyscrapers have a design with setbacks, which in some cases is also structurally required.

, fifteen cities in the world have more than 100 skyscrapers that are or taller. As of 2024, there are over 7 thousand skyscrapers over 150 m (492 ft) in height worldwide.

==Definition==
The term &quot;skyscraper&quot; was first applied to buildings of steel-framed construction of at least 10 stories in the late 19th century, a result of public amazement at the tall buildings being built in major American cities like New York City, Philadelphia, Boston, Chicago, Detroit, and St. Louis.

The first steel-frame skyscraper was the Home Insurance Building, originally 10 stories with a height of , in Chicago in 1885; two additional stories were added. Some point to Philadelphia&#x27;s 10-story Jayne Building (1849–50) as a proto-skyscraper, or to New York&#x27;s seven-floor Equitable Life Building, built in 1870. Steel skeleton construction has allowed for today&#x27;s supertall skyscrapers now being built worldwide. The nomination of one structure versus another being the first skyscraper, and why, depends on what factors are stressed.

The structural definition of the word &quot;skyscraper&quot; was refined later by architectural historians, based on engineering developments of the 1880s that had enabled construction of tall multi-story buildings. This definition was based on the steel skeleton—as opposed to constructions of load-bearing masonry, which passed their practical limit in 1891 with Chicago&#x27;s Monadnock Building.
:::— Louis Sullivan&#x27;s &quot;The Tall Office Building Artistically Considered&quot; (1896)

Some structural engineers define a high-rise as any vertical construction for which wind is a more significant load factor than earthquake or weight. Note that this criterion fits not only high-rises but some other tall structures, such as towers.

Different organizations from the United States and Europe define skyscrapers as buildings at least in height or taller, with &quot;supertall&quot; skyscrapers for buildings higher than and &quot;megatall&quot; skyscrapers for those taller than .

The tallest structure in ancient times was the Great Pyramid of Giza in ancient Egypt, built in the 26th century BC. It was not surpassed in height for thousands of years, the Lincoln Cathedral having exceeded it in 1311–1549, before its central spire collapsed. The latter in turn was not surpassed until the Washington Monument in 1884. However, being uninhabited, none of these structures actually comply with the modern definition of a skyscraper.

High-rise apartments flourished in classical antiquity. Ancient Roman insulae in imperial cities reached 10 and more stories. Beginning with Augustus (r. 30 BC-14 AD), several emperors attempted to establish limits of for multi-stories buildings, but were met with only limited success. Lower floors were typically occupied by shops or wealthy families, with the upper rented to the lower classes. Surviving Oxyrhynchus Papyri indicate that seven-stories buildings existed in provincial towns such as in 3rd century AD Hermopolis in Roman Egypt.

The skylines of many important medieval cities had large numbers of high-rise urban towers, built by the wealthy for defense and status. The residential Towers of 12th century Bologna numbered between 80 and 100 at a time, the tallest of which is the high Asinelli Tower. A Florentine law of 1251 decreed that all urban buildings be immediately reduced to less than . Even medium-sized towns of the era are known to have proliferations of towers, such as the 72 towers that ranged up to height in San Gimignano.

The medieval Egyptian city of Fustat housed many high-rise residential buildings, which Al-Muqaddasi in the 10th century described as resembling minarets. Nasir Khusraw in the early 11th century described some of them rising up to 14 stories, with roof gardens on the top floor complete with ox-drawn water wheels for irrigating them. Cairo in the 16th century had high-rise apartment buildings where the two lower floors were for commercial and storage purposes and the multiple stories above them were rented out to tenants. An early example of a city consisting entirely of high-rise housing is the 16th-century city of Shibam in Yemen. Shibam was made up of over 500 tower houses, each one rising 5 to 11 stories high, with each floor being an apartment occupied by a single family. The city was built in this way in order to protect it from Bedouin attacks. Shibam still has the tallest mudbrick buildings in the world, with many of them over high.

An early modern example of high-rise housing was in 17th-century Edinburgh, Scotland, where a defensive city wall defined the boundaries of the city. Due to the restricted land area available for development, the houses increased in height instead. Buildings of 11 stories were common, and there are records of buildings as high as 14 stories. Many of the stone-built structures can still be seen today in the old town of Edinburgh. The oldest iron framed building in the world, although only partially iron framed, is The Flaxmill in Shrewsbury, England. Built in 1797, it is seen as the &quot;grandfather of skyscrapers&quot;, since its fireproof combination of cast iron columns and cast iron beams developed into the modern steel frame that made modern skyscrapers possible. In 2013 funding was confirmed to convert the derelict building into offices.

===Early skyscrapers===

In 1857, Elisha Otis introduced the safety elevator at the E. V. Haughwout Building in New York City, allowing convenient and safe transport to buildings&#x27; upper floors. Otis later introduced the first commercial passenger elevators to the Equitable Life Building in 1870, considered by some architectural historians to be the first skyscraper. Another crucial development was the use of a steel frame instead of stone or brick, otherwise the walls on the lower floors on a tall building would be too thick to be practical. An early development in this area was Oriel Chambers in Liverpool, England, built in 1864. It was only five floors high. The Royal Academy of Arts states, &quot;critics at the time were horrified by its &#x27;large agglomerations of protruding plate glass bubbles&#x27;. In fact, it was a precursor to Modernist architecture, being the first building in the world to feature a metal-framed glass curtain wall, a design element which creates light, airy interiors and has since been used the world over as a defining feature of skyscrapers&quot;.

Further developments led to what many individuals and organizations consider the world&#x27;s first skyscraper, the ten-story Home Insurance Building in Chicago, built in 1884–1885. While its original height of 42.1 m (138 ft) does not even qualify as a skyscraper today, it was record setting. The building of tall buildings in the 1880s gave the skyscraper its first architectural movement, broadly termed the Chicago School, which developed what has been called the Commercial Style.

The architect, Major William Le Baron Jenney, created a load-bearing structural frame. In this building, a steel frame supported the entire weight of the walls, instead of load-bearing walls carrying the weight of the building. This development led to the &quot;Chicago skeleton&quot; form of construction. In addition to the steel frame, the Home Insurance Building also utilized fireproofing, elevators, and electrical wiring, key elements in most skyscrapers today.

Burnham and Root&#x27;s Rand McNally Building in Chicago, 1889, was the first all-steel framed skyscraper, while Louis Sullivan&#x27;s Wainwright Building in St. Louis, Missouri, 1891, was the first steel-framed building with soaring vertical bands to emphasize the height of the building and is therefore considered to be the first early skyscraper. In 1889, the Mole Antonelliana in Italy was 197 m (549 ft) tall.

Most early skyscrapers emerged in the land-strapped areas of New York City and Chicago toward the end of the 19th century. A land boom in Melbourne, Australia between 1888 and 1891 spurred the creation of a significant number of early skyscrapers, though none of these were steel reinforced and few remain today. Height limits and fire restrictions were later introduced. In the late 1800s, London builders found building heights limited due to issues with existing buildings. High-rise development in London is restricted at certain sites if it would obstruct protected views of St Paul&#x27;s Cathedral and other historic buildings. This policy, &#x27;St Paul&#x27;s Heights&#x27;, has officially been in operation since 1927.

Concerns about aesthetics and fire safety had likewise hampered the development of skyscrapers across continental Europe for the first half of the 20th century. By 1940, there were around 100 high-rise buildings in Europe (List of early skyscrapers). Some examples of these are the tall 1898 Witte Huis &quot;(White House)&quot; in Rotterdam; the tall PAST Building (1906–1908) in Warsaw; the Royal Liver Building in Liverpool, completed in 1911 and high; the tall 1924 Marx House in Düsseldorf, the tall Borsigturm in Berlin, built in 1924, the tall Hansahochhaus in Cologne, Germany, built in 1925; the Kungstornen &quot;(Kings&#x27; Towers)&quot; in Stockholm, Sweden, which were built 1924–25; the Ullsteinhaus in Berlin, Germany, built in 1927; the Edificio Telefónica in Madrid, Spain, built in 1929; the Boerentoren in Antwerp, Belgium, built in 1932; the Prudential Building in Warsaw, Poland, built in 1934; and the Torre Piacentini in Genoa, Italy, built in 1940.

After an early competition between New York City and Chicago for the world&#x27;s tallest building, New York took the lead by 1895 with the completion of the tall American Surety Building, leaving New York with the title of the world&#x27;s tallest building for many years.

===Modern skyscrapers===
Modern skyscrapers are built with steel or reinforced concrete frameworks and curtain walls of glass or polished stone. They use mechanical equipment such as water pumps and elevators. Since the 1960s, according to the CTBUH, the skyscraper has been reoriented away from a symbol for North American corporate power to instead communicate a city or nation&#x27;s place in the world.

Skyscraper construction entered a three-decades-long era of stagnation in 1930 due to the Great Depression and then World War II. Shortly after the war ended, Russia began construction on a series of skyscrapers in Moscow. Seven, dubbed the &quot;Seven Sisters&quot;, were built between 1947 and 1953; and one, the Main building of Moscow State University, was the tallest building in Europe for nearly four decades (1953–1990). Other skyscrapers in the style of Socialist Classicism were erected in East Germany (Frankfurter Tor), Poland (PKiN), Ukraine (Hotel Moscow), Latvia (Academy of Sciences), and other Eastern Bloc countries. Western European countries also began to permit taller skyscrapers during the years immediately following World War II. Early examples include Edificio España (Spain) and Torre Breda (Italy).

From the 1930s onward, skyscrapers began to appear in various cities in East and Southeast Asia as well as in Latin America. Finally, they also began to be constructed in cities in Africa, the Middle East, South Asia, and Oceania from the late 1950s.

Skyscraper projects after World War II typically rejected the classical designs of the early skyscrapers, instead embracing the uniform international style; many older skyscrapers were redesigned to suit contemporary tastes or even demolished—such as New York&#x27;s Singer Building, once the world&#x27;s tallest skyscraper.

German-American architect Ludwig Mies van der Rohe became one of the world&#x27;s most renowned architects in the second half of the 20th century. He conceived the glass façade skyscraper and, along with Norwegian Fred Severud, designed the Seagram Building in 1958, a skyscraper that is often regarded as the pinnacle of modernist high-rise architecture.

Skyscraper construction surged throughout the 1960s. The impetus behind the upswing was a series of transformative innovations which made it possible for people to live and work in &quot;cities in the sky&quot;.

In the early 1960s Bangladeshi-American structural engineer Fazlur Rahman Khan, considered the &quot;father of tubular designs&quot; for high-rises, discovered that the dominating rigid steel frame structure was not the only system apt for tall buildings, marking a new era of skyscraper construction in terms of multiple structural systems. His central innovation in skyscraper design and construction was the concept of the &quot;tube&quot; structural system, including the &quot;framed tube&quot;, &quot;trussed tube&quot;, and &quot;bundled tube&quot;. His &quot;tube concept&quot;, using all the exterior wall perimeter structure of a building to simulate a thin-walled tube, revolutionized tall building design. These systems allow greater economic efficiency, and also allow skyscrapers to take on various shapes, no longer needing to be rectangular and box-shaped. The first building to employ the tube structure was the Chestnut De-Witt apartment building, considered to be a major development in modern architecture. These new designs opened an economic door for contractors, engineers, architects, and investors, providing vast amounts of real estate space on minimal plots of land. Over the next fifteen years, many towers were built by Fazlur Rahman Khan and the &quot;Second Chicago School&quot;, including the hundred-story John Hancock Center and the massive Willis Tower. Other pioneers of this field include Hal Iyengar, William LeMessurier, and Minoru Yamasaki, the architect of the World Trade Center.

Many buildings designed in the 70s lacked a particular style and recalled ornamentation from earlier buildings designed before the 50s. These design plans ignored the environment and loaded structures with decorative elements and extravagant finishes. This approach to design was opposed by Fazlur Khan and he considered the designs to be whimsical rather than rational. Moreover, he considered the work to be a waste of precious natural resources. Khan&#x27;s work promoted structures integrated with architecture and the least use of material resulting in the smallest impact on the environment. The next era of skyscrapers will focus on the environment including performance of structures, types of material, construction practices, absolute minimal use of materials/natural resources, embodied energy within the structures, and more importantly, a holistically integrated building systems approach.

Modern building practices regarding supertall structures have led to the study of &quot;vanity height&quot;. Vanity height, according to the CTBUH, is the distance between the highest floor and its architectural top (excluding antennae, flagpole or other functional extensions). Vanity height first appeared in New York City skyscrapers as early as the 1920s and 1930s but supertall buildings have relied on such uninhabitable extensions for on average 30% of their height, raising potential definitional and sustainability issues. The current era of skyscrapers focuses on sustainability, its built and natural environments, including the performance of structures, types of materials, construction practices, absolute minimal use of materials and natural resources, energy within the structure, and a holistically integrated building systems approach. LEED is a current green building standard.

Architecturally, with the movements of Postmodernism, New Urbanism and New Classical Architecture, that established since the 1980s, a more classical approach came back to global skyscraper design, that remains popular today. Examples are the Wells Fargo Center, NBC Tower, Parkview Square, 30 Park Place, the Messeturm, the iconic Petronas Towers and Jin Mao Tower.

Other contemporary styles and movements in skyscraper design include organic, sustainable, neo-futurist, structuralist, high-tech, deconstructivist, blob, digital, streamline, novelty, critical regionalist, vernacular, Neo Art Deco and neohistorist, also known as revivalist.

3 September is the global commemorative day for skyscrapers, called &quot;Skyscraper Day&quot;.

New York City developers competed among themselves, with successively taller buildings claiming the title of &quot;world&#x27;s tallest&quot; in the 1920s and early 1930s, culminating with the completion of the Chrysler Building in 1930 and the Empire State Building in 1931, the world&#x27;s tallest building for forty years. The first completed tall World Trade Center tower became the world&#x27;s tallest building in 1972. However, it was overtaken by the Sears Tower (now Willis Tower) in Chicago within two years. The tall Sears Tower stood as the world&#x27;s tallest building for 24 years, from 1974 until 1998, until it was edged out by Petronas Twin Towers in Kuala Lumpur, which held the title for six years.

==Design and construction==

The design and construction of skyscrapers involves creating safe, habitable spaces in very tall buildings. The buildings must support their weight, resist wind and earthquakes, and protect occupants from fire. Yet they must also be conveniently accessible, even on the upper floors, and provide utilities and a comfortable climate for the occupants. The problems posed in skyscraper design are considered among the most complex encountered given the balances required between economics, engineering, and construction management.

One common feature of skyscrapers is a steel framework from which curtain walls are suspended, rather than load-bearing walls of conventional construction. Most skyscrapers have a steel frame that enables them to be built taller than typical load-bearing walls of reinforced concrete. Skyscrapers usually have a particularly small surface area of what are conventionally thought of as walls. Because the walls are not load-bearing most skyscrapers are characterized by surface areas of windows made possible by the concept of steel frame and curtain wall. However, skyscrapers can also have curtain walls that mimic conventional walls and have a small surface area of windows.

The concept of a skyscraper is a product of the industrialized age, made possible by cheap fossil fuel derived energy and industrially refined raw materials such as steel and concrete. The construction of skyscrapers was enabled by steel frame construction that surpassed brick and mortar construction starting at the end of the 19th century and finally surpassing it in the 20th century together with reinforced concrete construction as the price of steel decreased and labor costs increased.

The steel frames become inefficient and uneconomic for supertall buildings as usable floor space is reduced for progressively larger supporting columns. Since about 1960, tubular designs have been used for high rises. This reduces the usage of material (more efficient in economic terms – Willis Tower uses a third less steel than the Empire State Building) yet allows greater height. It allows fewer interior columns, and so creates more usable floor space. It further enables buildings to take on various shapes.

Elevators are characteristic to skyscrapers. In 1852 Elisha Otis introduced the safety elevator, allowing convenient and safe passenger movement to upper floors. Another crucial development was the use of a steel frame instead of stone or brick, otherwise the walls on the lower floors on a tall building would be too thick to be practical. Today major manufacturers of elevators include Otis, ThyssenKrupp, Schindler, and KONE.

Advances in construction techniques have allowed skyscrapers to narrow in width, while increasing in height. Some of these new techniques include mass dampers to reduce vibrations and swaying, and gaps to allow air to pass through, reducing wind shear.

===Basic design considerations===

Good structural design is important in most building design, but particularly for skyscrapers since even a small chance of catastrophic failure is unacceptable given the tremendous damage such failure would cause. This presents a paradox to civil engineers: the only way to assure a lack of failure is to test for all modes of failure, in both the laboratory and the real world. But the only way to know of all modes of failure is to learn from previous failures. Thus, no engineer can be absolutely sure that a given structure will resist all loadings that could cause failure; instead, one can only have large enough margins of safety such that a failure is acceptably unlikely. When buildings do fail, engineers question whether the failure was due to some lack of foresight or due to some unknowable factor.

===Loading and vibration===
The load a skyscraper experiences is largely from the force of the building material itself. In most building designs, the weight of the structure is much larger than the weight of the material that it will support beyond its own weight. In technical terms, the dead load, the load of the structure, is larger than the live load, the weight of things in the structure (people, furniture, vehicles, etc.). As such, the amount of structural material required within the lower levels of a skyscraper will be much larger than the material required within higher levels. This is not always visually apparent. The Empire State Building&#x27;s setbacks are actually a result of the building code at the time (1916 Zoning Resolution), and were not structurally required. On the other hand, John Hancock Center&#x27;s shape is uniquely the result of how it supports loads. Vertical supports can come in several types, among which the most common for skyscrapers can be categorized as steel frames, concrete cores, tube within tube design, and shear walls.

The wind loading on a skyscraper is also considerable. In fact, the lateral wind load imposed on supertall structures is generally the governing factor in the structural design. Wind pressure increases with height, so for very tall buildings, the loads associated with wind are larger than dead or live loads.

Other vertical and horizontal loading factors come from varied, unpredictable sources, such as earthquakes.

===Steel frame===
By 1895, steel had replaced cast iron as skyscrapers&#x27; structural material. Its malleability allowed it to be formed into a variety of shapes, and it could be riveted, ensuring strong connections. The simplicity of a steel frame eliminated the inefficient part of a shear wall, the central portion, and consolidated support members in a much stronger fashion by allowing both horizontal and vertical supports throughout. Among steel&#x27;s drawbacks is that as more material must be supported as height increases, the distance between supporting members must decrease, which in turn increases the amount of material that must be supported. This becomes inefficient and uneconomic for buildings above 40 stories tall as usable floor spaces are reduced for supporting column and due to more usage of steel.

===Tube structural systems===
A new structural system of framed tubes was developed by Fazlur Rahman Khan in 1963. The framed tube structure is defined as &quot;a three dimensional space structure composed of three, four, or possibly more frames, braced frames, or shear walls, joined at or near their edges to form a vertical tube-like structural system capable of resisting lateral forces in any direction by cantilevering from the foundation&quot;. Closely spaced interconnected exterior columns form the tube. Horizontal loads (primarily wind) are supported by the structure as a whole. Framed tubes allow fewer interior columns, and so create more usable floor space, and about half the exterior surface is available for windows. Where larger openings like garage doors are required, the tube frame must be interrupted, with transfer girders used to maintain structural integrity. Tube structures cut down costs, at the same time allowing buildings to reach greater heights. Concrete tube-frame construction was first used in the DeWitt-Chestnut Apartment Building, completed in Chicago in 1963, and soon after in the John Hancock Center and World Trade Center.

The tubular systems are fundamental to tall building design. Most buildings over 40 stories constructed since the 1960s now use a tube design derived from Khan&#x27;s structural engineering principles, examples including the construction of the World Trade Center, Aon Center, Petronas Towers, Jin Mao Building, and most other supertall skyscrapers since the 1960s. The strong influence of tube structure design is also evident in the construction of the current tallest skyscraper, the Burj Khalifa, which uses a Buttressed core.

Trussed tube and X-bracing:

Khan pioneered several other variations of the tube structure design. One of these was the concept of X-bracing, or the trussed tube, first employed for the John Hancock Center. This concept reduced the lateral load on the building by transferring the load into the exterior columns. This allows for a reduced need for interior columns thus creating more floor space. This concept can be seen in the John Hancock Center, designed in 1965 and completed in 1969. One of the most famous buildings of the structural expressionist style, the skyscraper&#x27;s distinctive X-bracing exterior is actually a hint that the structure&#x27;s skin is indeed part of its &#x27;tubular system&#x27;. This idea is one of the architectural techniques the building used to climb to record heights (the tubular system is essentially the spine that helps the building stand upright during wind and earthquake loads). This X-bracing allows for both higher performance from tall structures and the ability to open up the inside floorplan (and usable floor space) if the architect desires.

The John Hancock Center was far more efficient than earlier steel-frame structures. Where the Empire State Building (1931), required about 206 kilograms of steel per square metre and 28 Liberty Street (1961) required 275, the John Hancock Center required only 145. The trussed tube concept was applied to many later skyscrapers, including the Onterie Center, Citigroup Center and Bank of China Tower.
Bundled tube:
An important variation on the tube frame is the bundled tube, which uses several interconnected tube frames. The Willis Tower in Chicago used this design, employing nine tubes of varying height to achieve its distinct appearance. The bundled tube structure meant that &quot;buildings no longer need be boxlike in appearance: they could become sculpture.&quot;

Tube in tube:
Tube-in-tube system takes advantage of core shear wall tubes in addition to exterior tubes. The inner tube and outer tube work together to resist gravity loads and lateral loads and to provide additional rigidity to the structure to prevent significant deflections at the top. This design was first used in One Shell Plaza. Later buildings to use this structural system include the Petronas Towers.

Outrigger and belt truss:
The outrigger and belt truss system is a lateral load resisting system in which the tube structure is connected to the central core wall with very stiff outriggers and belt trusses at one or more levels. BHP House was the first building to use this structural system followed by the First Wisconsin Center, since renamed U.S. Bank Center, in Milwaukee. The center rises 601 feet, with three belt trusses at the bottom, middle and top of the building. The exposed belt trusses serve aesthetic and structural purposes. Later buildings to use this include Shanghai World Financial Center.

Concrete tube structures:
The last major buildings engineered by Khan were the One Magnificent Mile and Onterie Center in Chicago, which employed his bundled tube and trussed tube system designs respectively. In contrast to his earlier buildings, which were mainly steel, his last two buildings were concrete. His earlier DeWitt-Chestnut Apartments building, built in 1963 in Chicago, was also a concrete building with a tube structure. Trump Tower in New York City is also another example that adapted this system.

Shear wall frame interaction system:

Khan developed the shear wall frame interaction system for mid high-rise buildings. This structural system uses combinations of shear walls and frames designed to resist lateral forces. The first building to use this structural system was the 35-stories Brunswick Building. The Brunswick building (today known as the &quot;Cook County Administration Building&quot;) was completed in 1965 and became the tallest reinforced concrete structure of its time. The structural system of Brunswick Building consists of a concrete shear wall core surrounded by an outer concrete frame of columns and spandrels. Apartment buildings up to 70 stories high have successfully used this concept.

===The elevator conundrum===
The invention of the elevator was a precondition for the invention of skyscrapers, given that most people would not (or could not) climb more than a few flights of stairs at a time. The elevators in a skyscraper are not simply a necessary utility, like running water and electricity, but are in fact closely related to the design of the whole structure: a taller building requires more elevators to service the additional floors, but the elevator shafts consume valuable floor space. If the service core, which contains the elevator shafts, becomes too big, it can reduce the profitability of the building. Architects must therefore balance the value gained by adding height against the value lost to the expanding service core.

Many tall buildings use elevators in a non-standard configuration to reduce their footprint. Buildings such as the former World Trade Center Towers and Chicago&#x27;s John Hancock Center use sky lobbies, where express elevators take passengers to upper floors which serve as the base for local elevators. This allows architects and engineers to place elevator shafts on top of each other, saving space. Sky lobbies and express elevators take up a significant amount of space, however, and add to the amount of time spent commuting between floors.

Other buildings, such as the Petronas Towers, use double-deck elevators, allowing more people to fit in a single elevator, and reaching two floors at every stop. It is possible to use even more than two levels on an elevator, although this has never been done. The main problem with double-deck elevators is that they cause everyone in the elevator to stop when only person on one level needs to get off at a given floor.

Buildings with sky lobbies include the World Trade Center, Petronas Twin Towers, Willis Tower and Taipei 101. The 44th-floor sky lobby of the John Hancock Center also featured the first high-rise indoor swimming pool, which remains the highest in the United States.

==Economic rationale==

Skyscrapers are usually situated in city centres where the price of land is high. Constructing a skyscraper becomes justified if the price of land is so high that it makes economic sense to build upward as to minimize the cost of the land per the total floor area of a building. Thus the construction of skyscrapers is dictated by economics and results in skyscrapers in a certain part of a large city unless a building code restricts the height of buildings.

Skyscrapers are rarely seen in small cities and they are characteristic of large cities, because of the critical importance of high land prices for the construction of skyscrapers. Usually only office, commercial and hotel users can afford the rents in the city center and thus most tenants of skyscrapers are of these classes.

Today, skyscrapers are an increasingly common sight where land is expensive, as in the centres of big cities, because they provide such a high ratio of rentable floor space per unit area of land.

Another disadvantage of very high skyscrapers is the loss of usable floorspace, as many elevator shafts are needed to enable performant vertical travelling. This led to the introduction of express lifts and sky lobbies where transfer to slower distribution lifts can be done.

==Environmental impact==

Constructing a single skyscraper requires large quantities of materials like steel, concrete, and glass, and these materials represent significant embodied energy. Skyscrapers are thus material and energy intensive buildings.

Skyscrapers have considerable mass, requiring a stronger foundation than a shorter, lighter building. In construction, building materials must be lifted to the top of a skyscraper during construction, requiring more energy than would be necessary at lower heights. Furthermore, a skyscraper consumes much electricity because potable and non-potable water have to be pumped to the highest occupied floors, skyscrapers are usually designed to be mechanically ventilated, elevators are generally used instead of stairs, and electric lights are needed in rooms far from the windows and windowless spaces such as elevators, bathrooms and stairwells.

Skyscrapers can be artificially lit and the energy requirements can be covered by renewable energy or other electricity generation with low greenhouse gas emissions. Heating and cooling of skyscrapers can be efficient, because of centralized HVAC systems, heat radiation blocking windows and small surface area of the building. There is Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) certification for skyscrapers. For example, the Empire State Building received a gold Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design rating in September 2011 and the Empire State Building is the tallest LEED certified building in the United States, proving that skyscrapers can be environmentally friendly. The Gherkin in London, the United Kingdom is another example of an environmentally friendly skyscraper.

In the lower levels of a skyscraper a larger percentage of the building floor area must be devoted to the building structure and services than is required for lower buildings:
* More structure – because it must be stronger to support more floors above
* The elevator conundrum creates the need for more lift shafts—everyone comes in at the bottom and they all have to pass through the lower part of the building to get to the upper levels.
* Building services – power and water enter the building from below and have to pass through the lower levels to get to the upper levels.

In low-rise structures, the support rooms (chillers, transformers, boilers, pumps and air handling units) can be put in basements or roof space—areas which have low rental value. There is, however, a limit to how far this plant can be located from the area it serves. The farther away it is the larger the risers for ducts and pipes from this plant to the floors they serve and the more floor area these risers take. In practice this means that in highrise buildings this plant is located on &#x27;plant levels&#x27; at intervals up the building.

===Operational energy===

The building sector accounts for approximately 50% of greenhouse gas emissions, with operational energy accounting for 80-90% of building related energy use. Operational energy use is affected by the magnitude of conduction between the interior and exterior, convection from infiltrating air, and radiation through glazing. The extent to which these factors affect the operational energy vary depending on the microclimate of the skyscraper, with increased wind speeds as the height of the skyscraper increases, and a decrease in the dry bulb temperature as the altitude increases. For example, when moving from 1.5 meters to 284 meters, the dry bulb temperature decreased by 1.85 °C while the wind speeds increased from 2.46 meters per seconds to 7.75 meters per second, which led to a 2.4% decrease in summer cooling in reference to the Freedom Tower in New York City. However, for the same building it was found that the annual energy use intensity was 9.26% higher because of the lack of shading at high altitudes which increased the cooling loads for the remainder of the year while a combination of temperature, wind, shading, and the effects of reflections led to a combined 13.13% increase in annual energy use intensity.

In a study performed by Leung and Ray in 2013, it was found that the average energy use intensity of a structure with between 0 and 9 floors was approximately 80 kBtu/ft/yr, while the energy use intensity of a structure with more than 50 floors was about 117 kBtu/ft/yr. Refer to Figure 1 to see the breakdown of how intermediate heights affect the energy use intensity. The slight decrease in energy use intensity over 30-39 floors can be attributed to the fact that the increase in pressure within the heating, cooling, and water distribution systems levels out at a point between 40 and 49 floors and the energy savings due to the microclimate of higher floors are able to be seen. There is a gap in data in which another study looking at the same information but for taller buildings is needed.

====Elevators====

A portion of the operational energy increase in tall buildings is related to the usage of elevators because the distance traveled and the speed at which they travel increases as the height of the building increases. Between 5 and 25% of the total energy consumed in a tall building is from the use of elevators. As the height of the building increases it is also more inefficient because of the presence of higher drag and friction losses.

===Embodied energy===

The embodied energy associated with the construction of skyscrapers varies based on the materials used. Embodied energy is quantified per unit of material. Skyscrapers inherently have higher embodied energy than low-rise buildings due to the increase in material used as more floors are built. Figures 2 and 3 compare the total embodied energy of different floor types and the unit embodied energy per floor type for buildings with between 20 and 70 stories. For all floor types except for steel-concrete floors, it was found that after 60 stories, there was a decrease in unit embodied energy but when considering all floors, there was exponential growth due to a double dependence on height. The first of which is the relationship between an increase in height leading to an increase in the quantity of materials used, and the second being the increase in height leading to an increase in size of elements to increase the structural capacity of the building. A careful choice in building materials can likely reduce the embodied energy without reducing the number of floors constructed within the bounds presented.

===Embodied carbon===

Similar to embodied energy, the embodied carbon of a building is dependent on the materials chosen for its construction. Figures 4 and 5 show the total embodied carbon for different structure types for increasing numbers of stories and the embodied carbon per square meter of gross floor area for the same structure types as the number of stories increases. Both methods of measuring the embodied carbon show that there is a point where the embodied carbon is lowest before increasing again as the height increases. For the total embodied carbon it is dependent on the structure type, but is either around 40 stories, or approximately 60 stories. For the square meter of gross floor area, the lowest embodied carbon was found at either 40 stories, or approximately 70 stories.

===Air pollution===
In urban areas, the configuration of buildings can lead to exacerbated wind patterns and an uneven dispersion of pollutants. When the height of buildings surrounding a source of air pollution is increased, the size and occurrence of both &quot;dead-zones&quot; and &quot;hotspots&quot; were increased in areas where there were almost no pollutants and high concentrations of pollutants, respectively. Figure 6 depicts the progression of a Building F&#x27;s height increasing from 0.0315 units in Case 1, to 0.2 units in Case 2, to 0.6 units in Case 3. This progression shows how as the height of Building F increases, the dispersion of pollutants decreases, but the concentration within the building cluster increases. The variation of velocity fields can be affected by the construction of new buildings as well, rather than solely the increase in height as shown in the figure.

As urban centers continue to expand upward and outward, the present velocity fields will continue to trap polluted air close to the tall buildings within the city. Specifically within major cities, a majority of air pollution is derived from transportation, whether it be cars, trains, planes, or boats. As urban sprawl continues and pollutants continue to be emitted, the air pollutants will continue to be trapped within these urban centers. Different pollutants can be detrimental to human health in different ways. For example, particulate matter from vehicular exhaust and power generation can cause asthma, bronchitis, and cancer, while nitrogen dioxide from motor engine combustion processes can cause neurological disfunction and asphyxiation.

===LEED/green building rating===

Like with all other buildings, if special measures are taken to incorporate sustainable design methods early on in the design process, it is possible to obtain a green building rating, such as a Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) certification. An integrated design approach is crucial in making sure that design decisions that positively impact the whole building are made at the beginning of the process. Because of the massive scale of skyscrapers, the decisions made by the design team must take all factors into account, including the buildings impact on the surrounding community, the effect of the building on the direction in which air and water move, and the impact of the construction process, must be taken into account. There are several design methods that could be employed in the construction of a skyscraper that would take advantage of the height of the building.

The microclimates that exist as the height of the building increases can be taken advantage of to increase the natural ventilation, decrease the cooling load, and increase daylighting. Natural ventilation can be increased by utilizing the stack effect, in which warm air moves upward and increases the movement of the air within the building. If utilizing the stack effect, buildings must take extra care to design for fire separation techniques, as the stack effect can also exacerbate the severity of a fire. Skyscrapers are considered to be internally dominated buildings because of their size as well as the fact that a majority are used as some sort of office building with high cooling loads. Due to the microclimate created at the upper floors with the increased wind speed and the decreased dry bulb temperatures, the cooling load will naturally be reduced because of infiltration through the thermal envelope. By taking advantage of the naturally cooler temperatures at higher altitudes, skyscrapers can reduce their cooling loads passively. On the other side of this argument, is the lack of shading at higher altitudes by other buildings, so the solar heat gain will be larger for higher floors than for floors at the lower end of the building. Special measures should be taken to shade upper floors from sunlight during the overheated period to ensure thermal comfort without increasing the cooling load.

==History of the tallest skyscrapers==

At the beginning of the 20th century, New York City was a center for the Beaux-Arts architectural movement, attracting the talents of such great architects as Stanford White and Carrere and Hastings. As better construction and engineering technology became available as the century progressed, New York City and Chicago became the focal point of the competition for the tallest building in the world. Each city&#x27;s striking skyline has been composed of numerous and varied skyscrapers, many of which are icons of 20th-century architecture:

* The E. V. Haughwout Building in Manhattan was the first building to successfully install a passenger elevator, doing so on 23 March 1857.
* The Equitable Life Building in Manhattan was the first office building to feature passenger elevators.
* The Home Insurance Building in Chicago, which was built in 1884, was the first tall building with a steel skeleton.
* The Singer Building, an expansion to an existing structure in Lower Manhattan was the world&#x27;s tallest building when completed in 1908. Designed by Ernest Flagg, it was tall.
* The Metropolitan Life Insurance Company Tower, across Madison Square Park from the Flatiron Building, was the world&#x27;s tallest building when completed in 1909. It was designed by the architectural firm of Napoleon LeBrun &amp; Sons and stood tall.
* The Woolworth Building, a neo-Gothic &quot;Cathedral of Commerce&quot; overlooking New York City Hall, was designed by Cass Gilbert. At 792 feet (241 m), it became the world&#x27;s tallest building upon its completion in 1913, an honor it retained until 1930.
* 40 Wall Street, a 71-story, neo-Gothic tower designed by H. Craig Severance, was the world&#x27;s tallest building for a month in May 1930. 
* The Chrysler Building in New York City took the lead in late May 1930 as the tallest building in the world, reaching 1,046 feet (319 m). Designed by William Van Alen, an Art Deco style masterpiece with an exterior crafted of brick, the Chrysler Building continues to be a favorite of New Yorkers to this day.
* The Empire State Building, nine streets south of the Chrysler in Manhattan, topped out at 1,250 feet (381 m) and 102 stories in 1931. The first building to have more than 100 floors, it was designed by Shreve, Lamb and Harmon in the contemporary Art Deco style and takes its name from the nickname of New York State. The antenna mast added in 1951 brought pinnacle height to 1,472 feet (449 m), lowered in 1984 to 1,454 feet (443 m).
* The World Trade Center officially surpassed the Empire State Building in 1970, was completed in 1973, and consisted of two tall towers and several smaller buildings. For a short time the World Trade Center&#x27;s North Tower―completed in 1972―was the world&#x27;s tallest building, until surpassed by the Sears Tower in 1973. Upon completion, the towers stood for 28 years, until the September 11 attacks destroyed the buildings in 2001.
* The Sears Tower (now known as Willis Tower) was completed in 1974. It was the first building to employ the &quot;bundled tube&quot; structural system, designed by Fazlur Khan. It was surpassed in height by the Petronas Towers in 1998, but remained the tallest in some categories until Burj Khalifa surpassed it in all categories in 2010. It is currently the third tallest building in the United States, after One World Trade Center (which was built following 9/11), and Central Park Tower in New York City.

Momentum in setting records passed from the United States to other nations with the opening of the Petronas Twin Towers in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, in 1998. The record for the world&#x27;s tallest building has remained in Asia since the opening of Taipei 101 in Taipei, Taiwan, in 2004. A number of architectural records, including those of the world&#x27;s tallest building and tallest free-standing structure, moved to the Middle East with the opening of the Burj Khalifa in Dubai, United Arab Emirates.

This geographical transition is accompanied by a change in approach to skyscraper design. For much of the 20th century large buildings took the form of simple geometrical shapes. This reflected the &quot;international style&quot; or modernist philosophy shaped by Bauhaus architects early in the century. The last of these, the Willis Tower and World Trade Center towers in New York, erected in the 1970s, reflect the philosophy. Tastes shifted in the decade which followed, and new skyscrapers began to exhibit postmodernist influences. This approach to design avails itself of historical elements, often adapted and re-interpreted, in creating technologically modern structures. The Petronas Twin Towers recall Asian pagoda architecture and Islamic geometric principles. Taipei 101 likewise reflects the pagoda tradition as it incorporates ancient motifs such as the ruyi symbol. The Burj Khalifa draws inspiration from traditional Islamic art. Architects in recent years have sought to create structures that would not appear equally at home if set in any part of the world, but that reflect the culture thriving in the spot where they stand.

The following list measures height of the roof, not the pinnacle. The more common gauge is the &quot;highest architectural detail&quot;; such ranking would have included Petronas Towers, built in 1996.

===Gallery===
==Future developments==

Proposals for such structures have been put forward, including the Burj Mubarak Al Kabir in Kuwait and Azerbaijan Tower in Baku. Kilometer-plus structures present architectural challenges that may eventually place them in a new architectural category. The first building under construction and planned to be over one kilometre tall is the Jeddah Tower.

===Wooden skyscrapers===
Several wooden skyscraper designs have been designed and built. A 14-story housing project in Bergen, Norway known as &#x27;Treet&#x27; or &#x27;The Tree&#x27; became the world&#x27;s tallest wooden apartment block when it was completed in late 2015. The Tree&#x27;s record was eclipsed by Brock Commons, an 18-story wooden dormitory at the University of British Columbia in Canada, when it was completed in September 2016.

A 40-story residential building &#x27;Trätoppen&#x27; has been proposed by architect Anders Berensson to be built in Stockholm, Sweden. Trätoppen would be the tallest building in Stockholm, though there are no immediate plans to begin construction. The tallest currently-planned wooden skyscraper is the 70-story W350 Project in Tokyo, to be built by the Japanese wood products company Sumitomo Forestry Co. to celebrate its 350th anniversary in 2041. An 80-story wooden skyscraper, the River Beech Tower, has been proposed by a team including architects Perkins + Will and the University of Cambridge. The River Beech Tower, on the banks of the Chicago River in Chicago, Illinois, would be 348 feet shorter than the W350 Project despite having 10 more storys.

Wooden skyscrapers are estimated to be around a quarter of the weight of an equivalent reinforced-concrete structure as well as reducing the building carbon footprint by 60–75%. Buildings have been designed using cross-laminated timber (CLT) which gives a higher rigidity and strength to wooden structures. CLT panels are prefabricated and can therefore save on building time.

==See also==

* CTBUH Skyscraper Award
* Earthscraper
* Emporis Skyscraper Award
* Groundscraper
* List of cities with the most skyscrapers
* List of tallest buildings
* List of tallest buildings and structures
* Pencil tower
* Plyscraper
* Seascraper
* Skyscraper design and construction
* Skyscraper Index
* Skyscraper Museum in NYC
* Skyscrapers in film
* Skyline
* Vertical farming, &quot;farmscrapers&quot;
* World&#x27;s littlest skyscraper
* drag-coefficient
* material-fatigue
* down-force
* Steel frame

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
*Judith Dupré. &quot;Skyscrapers: A History of the World&#x27;s Most Extraordinary Buildings-Revised and Updated.&quot; (2013). Hachette/Black Dog &amp; Leventhal. 2013 ed.: 
*&quot;Skyscrapers: Form and Function&quot;, by David Bennett, Simon &amp; Schuster, 1995.
* Willis, Carol, &quot;Form Follows Finance: Skyscrapers and Skylines in New York and Chicago&quot;. Princeton Architectural Press, 1995. 224 P. 
* Van Leeuwen, Thomas A P, &quot;The Skyward Trend of Thought: The Metaphysics of the American Skyscraper&quot;, Cambridge: MIT Press, 1988.

==External links==
* Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat
* SkyscraperCity construction updates magazine
* Skyscraper definition on Phorio Standards
* Skyscraper Museum
* SkyscraperPage Technical information and diagrams</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11303" start="2" end="12" title="Skyscraper" label="skyscraper"/>
<link wikidata="Q18142" start="224" end="243" title="Tower block" label="high-rise buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727909" start="369" end="380" title="steel frame" label="steel frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370962" start="395" end="408" title="Curtain wall (architecture)" label="curtain walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313934" start="531" end="548" title="load-bearing wall" label="load-bearing wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q184190" start="703" end="722" title="reinforced concrete" label="reinforced concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313934" start="757" end="769" title="load-bearing" label="load-bearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850763" start="1037" end="1054" title="Tube (structure)" label="tubular structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q34132" start="1094" end="1102" title="cylinder" label="cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830791" start="1280" end="1288" title="Setback (architecture)" label="setbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q831691" start="1637" end="1644" title="storey" label="stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1764" end="1777" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="1779" end="1791" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="1793" end="1799" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="1801" end="1808" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="1810" end="1817" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="1823" end="1832" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q944544" start="1876" end="1899" title="Home Insurance Building" label="Home Insurance Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014178" start="2040" end="2054" title="William L. Johnston" label="Jayne Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272426" start="2122" end="2145" title="Equitable Life Building (Manhattan)" label="Equitable Life Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q272999" start="2699" end="2706" title="masonry" label="masonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199833" start="2771" end="2789" title="Monadnock Building" label="Monadnock Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q243240" start="2796" end="2810" title="Louis Sullivan" label="Louis Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305987" start="2892" end="2911" title="structural engineer" label="structural engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964839" start="2998" end="3009" title="Structural load" label="load factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="3015" end="3025" title="earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q12518" start="3127" end="3132" title="tower" label="tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q20718149" start="3267" end="3276" title="supertall" label="supertall"/>
<link wikidata="Q52459683" start="3331" end="3339" title="List of megatall skyscrapers" label="megatall"/>
<link wikidata="Q37200" start="3430" end="3451" title="Great Pyramid of Giza" label="Great Pyramid of Giza"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="3455" end="3468" title="ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q390169" start="3559" end="3576" title="Lincoln Cathedral" label="Lincoln Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q178114" start="3693" end="3712" title="Washington Monument" label="Washington Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="3871" end="3890" title="classical antiquity" label="classical antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="3892" end="3905" title="Ancient Rome" label="Ancient Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q827617" start="3906" end="3913" title="Insula (building)" label="insulae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="3917" end="3925" title="Roman Empire" label="imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="3977" end="3985" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="4012" end="4020" title="Roman emperor" label="emperors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249435" start="4244" end="4262" title="Oxyrhynchus Papyri" label="Oxyrhynchus Papyri"/>
<link wikidata="Q182547" start="4312" end="4322" title="Roman province" label="provincial"/>
<link wikidata="Q732908" start="4355" end="4365" title="Hermopolis" label="Hermopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q202311" start="4369" end="4380" title="History of Roman Egypt" label="Roman Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="4414" end="4422" title="Middle Ages" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784259" start="4536" end="4542" title="Towers of Bologna" label="Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="4559" end="4566" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="4657" end="4667" title="Florence" label="Florentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q91413" start="4880" end="4893" title="San Gimignano" label="San Gimignano"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696332" start="4900" end="4917" title="History of Arab Egypt" label="medieval Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q839456" start="4926" end="4932" title="Fustat" label="Fustat"/>
<link wikidata="Q294116" start="4984" end="4996" title="Al-Muqaddasi" label="Al-Muqaddasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q48356" start="5041" end="5048" title="minaret" label="minaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q328796" start="5051" end="5064" title="Nasir Khusraw" label="Nasir Khusraw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156696" start="5144" end="5155" title="roof garden" label="roof garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q146728" start="5197" end="5208" title="water wheel" label="water wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="5231" end="5236" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q188507" start="5271" end="5289" title="apartment building" label="apartment building"/>
<link wikidata="Q157171" start="5400" end="5406" title="Renting" label="rented"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630687" start="5414" end="5421" title="Leasehold estate" label="tenants"/>
<link wikidata="Q192518" start="5519" end="5525" title="Shibam" label="Shibam"/>
<link wikidata="Q805" start="5529" end="5534" title="Yemen" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q188507" start="5644" end="5653" title="apartment" label="apartment"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="5742" end="5749" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090236" start="5788" end="5796" title="mudbrick" label="mudbrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="5916" end="5925" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1839955" start="6370" end="6382" title="Ditherington Flax Mill" label="The Flaxmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q201970" start="6386" end="6396" title="Shrewsbury" label="Shrewsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q171413" start="6742" end="6753" title="Elisha Otis" label="Elisha Otis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589264" start="6792" end="6816" title="E. V. Haughwout Building" label="E. V. Haughwout Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272426" start="6977" end="7000" title="Equitable Life Building (Manhattan)" label="Equitable Life Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102250" start="7299" end="7313" title="Oriel Chambers" label="Oriel Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="7317" end="7326" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q270920" start="7386" end="7407" title="Royal Academy of Arts" label="Royal Academy of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370962" start="7657" end="7669" title="Curtain wall (architecture)" label="curtain wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q944544" start="7934" end="7957" title="Home Insurance Building" label="Home Insurance Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072060" start="8220" end="8234" title="Chicago school (architecture)" label="Chicago School"/>
<link wikidata="Q715701" start="8317" end="8340" title="William Le Baron Jenney" label="William Le Baron Jenney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999763" start="8766" end="8782" title="Burnham and Root" label="Burnham and Root"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291429" start="8790" end="8811" title="Rand McNally Building" label="Rand McNally Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q243240" start="8879" end="8893" title="Louis Sullivan" label="Louis Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143548" start="8901" end="8920" title="Wainwright Building" label="Wainwright Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727909" start="8965" end="8986" title="steel-framed building" label="steel-framed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q201902" start="9130" end="9147" title="Mole Antonelliana" label="Mole Antonelliana"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="9151" end="9156" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="9321" end="9330" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="9574" end="9580" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118263" start="9744" end="9758" title="protected view" label="protected view"/>
<link wikidata="Q173882" start="9763" end="9787" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q35986" start="9928" end="9938" title="aesthetics" label="aesthetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6617603" start="10136" end="10161" title="List of early skyscrapers" label="List of early skyscrapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510082" start="10205" end="10215" title="Witte Huis" label="Witte Huis"/>
<link wikidata="Q34370" start="10245" end="10254" title="Rotterdam" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q821379" start="10265" end="10278" title="PAST (Poland)" label="PAST Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="10294" end="10300" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469988" start="10306" end="10326" title="Royal Liver Building" label="Royal Liver Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571528" start="10383" end="10393" title="Wilhelm Marx House" label="Marx House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718" start="10397" end="10407" title="Düsseldorf" label="Düsseldorf"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10418" end="10428" title=":de:Borsig (Unternehmen)#Borsigturm" label="Borsigturm"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="10432" end="10438" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q281051" start="10464" end="10477" title="Hansahochhaus" label="Hansahochhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="10481" end="10488" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2688028" start="10518" end="10529" title="Kungstornen" label="Kungstornen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="10566" end="10575" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10615" end="10627" title=":de:Ullsteinhaus" label="Ullsteinhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092717" start="10667" end="10686" title="Edificio Telefónica" label="Edificio Telefónica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="10690" end="10696" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q59487" start="10724" end="10735" title="Boerentoren" label="Boerentoren"/>
<link wikidata="Q821342" start="10776" end="10795" title="Prudential, Warsaw" label="Prudential Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="10799" end="10805" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571475" start="10838" end="10854" title="Terrazza Martini Tower" label="Torre Piacentini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="10858" end="10863" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q467043" start="11051" end="11075" title="American Surety Building" label="American Surety Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="11222" end="11227" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q184190" start="11231" end="11250" title="reinforced concrete" label="reinforced concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370962" start="11266" end="11278" title="curtain wall (architecture)" label="curtain wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q11469" start="11283" end="11288" title="glass" label="glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269231" start="11292" end="11306" title="polished stone" label="polished stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q134574" start="11346" end="11356" title="water pump" label="water pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q132911" start="11362" end="11370" title="elevator" label="elevator"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="11472" end="11485" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="11661" end="11677" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="11687" end="11699" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="11786" end="11792" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q521935" start="11818" end="11831" title="Seven Sisters (Moscow)" label="Seven Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2387534" start="11886" end="11926" title="Main building of Moscow State University" label="Main building of Moscow State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134824" start="12034" end="12054" title="Stalinist architecture" label="Socialist Classicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q568577" start="12085" end="12100" title="Frankfurter Tor" label="Frankfurter Tor"/>
<link wikidata="Q167566" start="12111" end="12115" title="Palace of Culture and Science" label="PKiN"/>
<link wikidata="Q633737" start="12127" end="12139" title="Hotel Ukrayina" label="Hotel Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615464" start="12150" end="12169" title="Latvian Academy of Sciences" label="Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="12182" end="12194" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="12206" end="12220" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q649426" start="12349" end="12364" title="Edificio España" label="Edificio España"/>
<link wikidata="Q3995141" start="12377" end="12388" title="Torre Breda" label="Torre Breda"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="12471" end="12475" title="East Asia" label="East"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="12480" end="12494" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="12509" end="12522" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="12580" end="12586" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="12592" end="12603" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="12605" end="12615" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="12621" end="12628" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326897" start="12738" end="12755" title="early skyscrapers" label="early skyscrapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q162324" start="12787" end="12806" title="International Style (architecture)" label="international style"/>
<link wikidata="Q651362" start="12918" end="12933" title="Singer Building" label="Singer Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="12978" end="12984" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q41508" start="13004" end="13028" title="Ludwig Mies van der Rohe" label="Ludwig Mies van der Rohe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496243" start="13192" end="13204" title="Fred Severud" label="Fred Severud"/>
<link wikidata="Q737484" start="13219" end="13235" title="Seagram Building" label="Seagram Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855425" start="13567" end="13587" title="Bangladeshi-American" label="Bangladeshi-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q62918" start="13608" end="13626" title="Fazlur Rahman Khan" label="Fazlur Rahman Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850763" start="13659" end="13674" title="Tube (structure)" label="tubular designs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727909" start="13734" end="13745" title="steel frame" label="steel frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448108" start="13870" end="13887" title="structural system" label="structural system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7538019" start="13916" end="13950" title="skyscraper design and construction" label="skyscraper design and construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850763" start="13974" end="14008" title="Tube (structure)" label="&amp;quot;tube&amp;quot; structural system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203722" start="14477" end="14493" title="Plaza on DeWitt" label="Chestnut De-Witt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072060" start="14830" end="14851" title="Chicago School (architecture)" label="Second Chicago School"/>
<link wikidata="Q217727" start="14887" end="14906" title="John Hancock Center" label="John Hancock Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q29294" start="14923" end="14935" title="Willis Tower" label="Willis Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586451" start="14974" end="14985" title="Srinivasa &amp;#x27;Hal&amp;#x27; Iyengar" label="Hal Iyengar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568782" start="14987" end="15006" title="William LeMessurier" label="William LeMessurier"/>
<link wikidata="Q347215" start="15012" end="15027" title="Minoru Yamasaki" label="Minoru Yamasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q11235" start="15050" end="15068" title="World Trade Center (1973-2001)" label="World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7625005" start="15546" end="15585" title="Structural Art" label="structures integrated with architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q219416" start="16549" end="16563" title="sustainability" label="sustainability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521623" start="16829" end="16833" title="Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design" label="LEED"/>
<link wikidata="Q242606" start="16847" end="16861" title="green building" label="green building"/>
<link wikidata="Q595448" start="16912" end="16925" title="Postmodern architecture" label="Postmodernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q735901" start="16927" end="16939" title="New Urbanism" label="New Urbanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q50084199" start="16944" end="16970" title="New Classical Architecture" label="New Classical Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385191" start="17116" end="17134" title="Wells Fargo Center (Minneapolis)" label="Wells Fargo Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810949" start="17136" end="17145" title="NBC Tower" label="NBC Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365482" start="17147" end="17162" title="Parkview Square" label="Parkview Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q224126" start="17164" end="17177" title="30 Park Place" label="30 Park Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q156198" start="17183" end="17192" title="Messeturm" label="Messeturm"/>
<link wikidata="Q83063" start="17205" end="17220" title="Petronas Towers" label="Petronas Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q80813" start="17225" end="17238" title="Jin Mao Tower" label="Jin Mao Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q36118" start="17310" end="17317" title="Organic architecture" label="organic"/>
<link wikidata="Q185035" start="17319" end="17330" title="Sustainable architecture" label="sustainable"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012219" start="17332" end="17344" title="Neo-Futurism" label="neo-futurist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667680" start="17346" end="17359" title="Structuralism (architecture)" label="structuralist"/>
<link wikidata="Q845318" start="17361" end="17370" title="High-tech architecture" label="high-tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q238255" start="17372" end="17388" title="Deconstructivism" label="deconstructivist"/>
<link wikidata="Q884574" start="17390" end="17394" title="Blobitecture" label="blob"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276034" start="17396" end="17403" title="Digital architecture" label="digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q928960" start="17405" end="17415" title="Streamline Moderne" label="streamline"/>
<link wikidata="Q548879" start="17417" end="17424" title="Novelty architecture" label="novelty"/>
<link wikidata="Q24798" start="17426" end="17446" title="Critical regionalism" label="critical regionalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q930314" start="17448" end="17458" title="Vernacular architecture" label="vernacular"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="17460" end="17472" title="Art Deco" label="Neo Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q50084199" start="17477" end="17489" title="neohistorist" label="neohistorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216982" start="17505" end="17515" title="Revivalism (architecture)" label="revivalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11274" start="17826" end="17843" title="Chrysler Building" label="Chrysler Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q9188" start="17860" end="17881" title="Empire State Building" label="Empire State Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q11235" start="17967" end="17985" title="World Trade Center (1973–2001)" label="World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q29294" start="18092" end="18104" title="Willis Tower" label="Willis Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q83063" start="18261" end="18281" title="Petronas Twin Towers" label="Petronas Twin Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="18842" end="18851" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q77590" start="18853" end="18864" title="Civil Engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875186" start="18870" end="18882" title="construction" label="construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q917614" start="19622" end="19640" title="Industrial society" label="industrialized age"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="19665" end="19676" title="fossil fuel" label="fossil fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="19739" end="19744" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q22657" start="19749" end="19757" title="concrete" label="concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727909" start="19806" end="19817" title="steel frame" label="steel frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q726870" start="19846" end="19862" title="brick and mortar" label="brick and mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q184190" start="19976" end="19995" title="reinforced concrete" label="reinforced concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q29294" start="20358" end="20370" title="Willis Tower" label="Willis Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q132911" start="20585" end="20593" title="Elevator" label="Elevator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134069" start="20973" end="20977" title="Otis Elevator Company" label="Otis"/>
<link wikidata="Q137910" start="20979" end="20991" title="ThyssenKrupp AG" label="ThyssenKrupp"/>
<link wikidata="Q651212" start="20993" end="21002" title="Schindler Group" label="Schindler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146592" start="21008" end="21012" title="KONE" label="KONE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891986" start="21161" end="21173" title="Tuned mass damper" label="mass dampers"/>
<link wikidata="Q77590" start="21545" end="21560" title="Civil engineering" label="civil engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964839" start="22407" end="22416" title="dead load" label="dead load"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964839" start="22464" end="22473" title="live load" label="live load"/>
<link wikidata="Q9188" start="22753" end="22774" title="Empire State Building" label="Empire State Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830791" start="22782" end="22790" title="Setback (architecture)" label="setbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q219955" start="22847" end="22869" title="1916 Zoning Resolution" label="1916 Zoning Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q217727" start="22927" end="22946" title="John Hancock Center" label="John Hancock Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="23640" end="23645" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q483269" start="23659" end="23668" title="cast iron" label="cast iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q62918" start="24528" end="24546" title="Fazlur Rahman Khan" label="Fazlur Rahman Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203722" start="25476" end="25510" title="DeWitt-Chestnut Apartment Building" label="DeWitt-Chestnut Apartment Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="25525" end="25532" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q217727" start="25564" end="25583" title="John Hancock Center" label="John Hancock Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q811095" start="25588" end="25606" title="construction of the World Trade Center" label="World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850763" start="25613" end="25628" title="tube (structure)" label="tubular systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q811095" start="25834" end="25872" title="construction of the World Trade Center" label="construction of the World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q271695" start="25874" end="25884" title="Aon Center (Chicago)" label="Aon Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q83063" start="25886" end="25901" title="Petronas Towers" label="Petronas Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q80813" start="25903" end="25919" title="Jin Mao Building" label="Jin Mao Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q12495" start="26096" end="26108" title="Burj Khalifa" label="Burj Khalifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q60791155" start="26123" end="26138" title="Buttressed core" label="Buttressed core"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041545" start="26272" end="26281" title="X-bracing" label="X-bracing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26290" end="26302" title="Tube (structure)#Trussed tube" label="trussed tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q217727" start="26327" end="26346" title="John Hancock Center" label="John Hancock Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q845318" start="26671" end="26695" title="Structural Expressionism" label="structural expressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026731" start="27049" end="27065" title="seismic loading" label="earthquake loads"/>
<link wikidata="Q217727" start="27243" end="27262" title="John Hancock Center" label="John Hancock Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727909" start="27299" end="27310" title="Steel frame" label="steel-frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q9188" start="27333" end="27354" title="Empire State Building" label="Empire State Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050074" start="27422" end="27439" title="28 Liberty Street" label="28 Liberty Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2240739" start="27582" end="27596" title="Onterie Center" label="Onterie Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q391243" start="27598" end="27614" title="Citigroup Center" label="Citigroup Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q214855" start="27619" end="27638" title="Bank of China Tower, Hong Kong" label="Bank of China Tower"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27702" end="27714" title="Tube (structure)#Bundled tube" label="bundled tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q29294" start="27767" end="27779" title="Willis Tower" label="Willis Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537698" start="28336" end="28351" title="One Shell Plaza" label="One Shell Plaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q83063" start="28411" end="28426" title="Petronas Towers" label="Petronas Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4549612" start="28659" end="28668" title="140 William Street, Melbourne" label="BHP House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487098" start="28776" end="28792" title="U.S. Bank Center (Milwaukee)" label="U.S. Bank Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q80852" start="29008" end="29039" title="Shanghai World Financial Center" label="Shanghai World Financial Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860472" start="29121" end="29141" title="One Magnificent Mile" label="One Magnificent Mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2240739" start="29146" end="29160" title="Onterie Center" label="Onterie Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203722" start="29364" end="29390" title="DeWitt-Chestnut Apartments" label="DeWitt-Chestnut Apartments"/>
<link wikidata="Q868772" start="29479" end="29490" title="Trump Tower" label="Trump Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q106091150" start="29920" end="29955" title="Cook County Administration Building" label="Cook County Administration Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q132911" start="30328" end="30336" title="elevator" label="elevator"/>
<link wikidata="Q11235" start="31159" end="31184" title="World Trade Center (1973–2001)" label="World Trade Center Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q217727" start="31204" end="31223" title="John Hancock Center" label="John Hancock Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537579" start="31228" end="31239" title="sky lobby" label="sky lobbies"/>
<link wikidata="Q83063" start="31614" end="31629" title="Petronas Towers" label="Petronas Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4156189" start="31635" end="31655" title="double-deck elevator" label="double-deck elevator"/>
<link wikidata="Q20861677" start="32047" end="32065" title="World Trade Center (2001–present)" label="World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q83063" start="32067" end="32087" title="Petronas Twin Towers" label="Petronas Twin Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q29294" start="32089" end="32101" title="Willis Tower" label="Willis Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q83101" start="32106" end="32116" title="Taipei 101" label="Taipei 101"/>
<link wikidata="Q18142" start="32194" end="32203" title="high-rise" label="high-rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501" start="32211" end="32224" title="swimming pool" label="swimming pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468524" start="32335" end="32346" title="city centre" label="city centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="32471" end="32479" title="economics" label="economic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333573" start="32710" end="32723" title="building code" label="building code"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537579" start="33493" end="33503" title="sky lobby" label="sky lobbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153531" start="33736" end="33751" title="embodied energy" label="embodied energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892" start="34141" end="34148" title="potable" label="potable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798773" start="34260" end="34283" title="HVAC" label="mechanically ventilated"/>
<link wikidata="Q12705" start="34544" end="34560" title="renewable energy" label="renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q106358009" start="34602" end="34626" title="greenhouse gas emissions" label="greenhouse gas emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798773" start="34704" end="34708" title="HVAC" label="HVAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q35473" start="34742" end="34748" title="window" label="window"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521623" start="34799" end="34844" title="Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design" label="Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q191161" start="35158" end="35169" title="The Gherkin" label="The Gherkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="35173" end="35179" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="35185" end="35199" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35517" end="35539" title="Skyscraper design and construction#The elevator conundrum" label="The elevator conundrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986607" start="35705" end="35722" title="Building services" label="Building services"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501558" start="35885" end="35892" title="chiller" label="chiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q11658" start="35895" end="35906" title="transformer" label="transformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195517" start="35909" end="35915" title="boiler" label="boiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q134574" start="35918" end="35922" title="pump" label="pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479079" start="35928" end="35945" title="air handling unit" label="air handling unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5567362" start="36731" end="36738" title="Glazing (window)" label="glazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q215108" start="36826" end="36838" title="microclimate" label="microclimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276699" start="36950" end="36970" title="Dry-bulb temperature" label="dry bulb temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q11245" start="37255" end="37268" title="Freedom Tower" label="Freedom Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q924713" start="37724" end="37744" title="energy use intensity" label="energy use intensity"/>
<link wikidata="Q132911" start="38767" end="38775" title="elevator" label="elevator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153531" start="38934" end="38949" title="embodied energy" label="embodied energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370001" start="40103" end="40118" title="Embodied carbon emissions" label="embodied carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19829510" start="40982" end="40991" title="pollutant" label="pollutant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462119" start="41605" end="41619" title="velocity field" label="velocity field"/>
<link wikidata="Q192042" start="42057" end="42069" title="urban sprawl" label="urban sprawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q498957" start="42282" end="42300" title="Particulates" label="particulate matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q207895" start="42393" end="42409" title="nitrogen dioxide" label="nitrogen dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q523256" start="42613" end="42631" title="sustainable design" label="sustainable design"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521623" start="42732" end="42784" title="Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design" label="Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6043060" start="42803" end="42820" title="integrated design" label="integrated design"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427418" start="43548" end="43567" title="Passive ventilation" label="natural ventilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709610" start="43676" end="43688" title="stack effect" label="stack effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064198" start="44594" end="44609" title="solar heat gain" label="solar heat gain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268134" start="44968" end="44992" title="Beaux-Arts architecture" label="Beaux-Arts architectural"/>
<link wikidata="Q572735" start="45054" end="45068" title="Stanford White" label="Stanford White"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045365" start="45073" end="45093" title="Carrere and Hastings" label="Carrere and Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589264" start="45445" end="45469" title="E. V. Haughwout Building" label="E. V. Haughwout Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272426" start="45585" end="45608" title="Equitable Life Building (Manhattan)" label="Equitable Life Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q944544" start="45690" end="45713" title="Home Insurance Building" label="Home Insurance Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q651362" start="45808" end="45823" title="Singer Building" label="Singer Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q11253" start="45866" end="45881" title="Lower Manhattan" label="Lower Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356309" start="45956" end="45968" title="Ernest Flagg" label="Ernest Flagg"/>
<link wikidata="Q652452" start="45989" end="46030" title="Metropolitan Life Insurance Company Tower" label="Metropolitan Life Insurance Company Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q110000" start="46039" end="46058" title="Madison Square Park" label="Madison Square Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q220728" start="46068" end="46085" title="Flatiron Building" label="Flatiron Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335958" start="46194" end="46209" title="Napoleon LeBrun" label="Napoleon LeBrun"/>
<link wikidata="Q217652" start="46243" end="46261" title="Woolworth Building" label="Woolworth Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065206" start="46322" end="46340" title="New York City Hall" label="New York City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q464603" start="46358" end="46370" title="Cass Gilbert" label="Cass Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q218305" start="46501" end="46515" title="40 Wall Street" label="40 Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="46529" end="46539" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="neo-Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124694" start="46558" end="46576" title="H. Craig Severance" label="H. Craig Severance"/>
<link wikidata="Q11274" start="46648" end="46665" title="Chrysler Building" label="Chrysler Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q706549" start="46793" end="46809" title="William Van Alen" label="William Van Alen"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="46814" end="46822" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q9188" start="46959" end="46980" title="Empire State Building" label="Empire State Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q617190" start="47157" end="47180" title="Shreve, Lamb and Harmon" label="Shreve, Lamb and Harmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="47201" end="47209" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q783822" start="47244" end="47252" title="List of U.S. state nicknames" label="nickname"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="47256" end="47270" title="New York State" label="New York State"/>
<link wikidata="Q11235" start="47395" end="47413" title="World Trade Center (1973–2001)" label="World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q29294" start="47696" end="47707" title="Willis Tower" label="Sears Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="47775" end="47795" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q29294" start="47835" end="47846" title="Sears Tower" label="Sears Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850763" start="47944" end="47956" title="Tube (structure)" label="bundled tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q62918" start="47994" end="48005" title="Fazlur Khan" label="Fazlur Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q83063" start="48041" end="48056" title="Petronas Towers" label="Petronas Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12495" start="48116" end="48128" title="Burj Khalifa" label="Burj Khalifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="48219" end="48232" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11245" start="48240" end="48262" title="One World Trade Center" label="One World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631701" start="48301" end="48319" title="Central Park Tower" label="Central Park Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="48323" end="48336" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q83063" start="48438" end="48458" title="Petronas Twin Towers" label="Petronas Twin Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q83101" start="48586" end="48596" title="Taipei 101" label="Taipei 101"/>
<link wikidata="Q12495" start="48799" end="48811" title="Burj Khalifa" label="Burj Khalifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q245188" start="49078" end="49087" title="Modern architecture" label="modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q124354" start="49109" end="49116" title="Bauhaus" label="Bauhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q47783" start="49357" end="49370" title="Postmodernism" label="postmodernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q199451" start="49564" end="49570" title="pagoda" label="pagoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q199451" start="49651" end="49657" title="pagoda" label="pagoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229071" start="49695" end="49701" title="Motif (visual arts)" label="motifs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448880" start="49714" end="49718" title="Ruyi (scepter)" label="ruyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q189594" start="49779" end="49790" title="Islamic art" label="Islamic art"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="50326" end="50332" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q335290" start="50337" end="50353" title="Azerbaijan Tower" label="Azerbaijan Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q9248" start="50357" end="50361" title="Baku" label="Baku"/>
<link wikidata="Q737945" start="50573" end="50585" title="Jeddah Tower" label="Jeddah Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q26793" start="50707" end="50721" title="Bergen" label="Bergen, Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q85749160" start="50903" end="50916" title="Brock Commons Tallwood House" label="Brock Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q847950" start="50937" end="50946" title="dormitory" label="dormitory"/>
<link wikidata="Q391028" start="50954" end="50984" title="University of British Columbia" label="University of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="50988" end="50994" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="51155" end="51172" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm, Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5818919" start="51593" end="51607" title="Perkins + Will" label="Perkins + Will"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="51616" end="51639" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q643284" start="51684" end="51697" title="Chicago River" label="Chicago River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="51701" end="51718" title="Chicago" label="Chicago, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q184190" start="51887" end="51906" title="Reinforced concrete" label="reinforced-concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q911043" start="52013" end="52035" title="Cross laminated timber" label="cross-laminated timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q11753260" start="52194" end="52216" title="CTBUH Skyscraper Award" label="CTBUH Skyscraper Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q121639225" start="52219" end="52231" title="Earthscraper" label="Earthscraper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339438" start="52234" end="52258" title="Emporis Skyscraper Award" label="Emporis Skyscraper Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611017" start="52261" end="52274" title="Groundscraper" label="Groundscraper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575895" start="52277" end="52317" title="List of cities with the most skyscrapers" label="List of cities with the most skyscrapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779466" start="52320" end="52345" title="List of tallest buildings" label="List of tallest buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q12234854" start="52348" end="52388" title="List of tallest buildings and structures" label="List of tallest buildings and structures"/>
<link wikidata="Q100989024" start="52391" end="52403" title="Pencil tower" label="Pencil tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q28455283" start="52406" end="52416" title="Plyscraper" label="Plyscraper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441812" start="52419" end="52429" title="Seascraper" label="Seascraper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7538019" start="52432" end="52466" title="Skyscraper design and construction" label="Skyscraper design and construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q932213" start="52469" end="52485" title="Skyscraper Index" label="Skyscraper Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915494" start="52488" end="52505" title="Skyscraper Museum" label="Skyscraper Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7538022" start="52515" end="52534" title="Skyscrapers in film" label="Skyscrapers in film"/>
<link wikidata="Q465837" start="52537" end="52544" title="Skyline" label="Skyline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070535" start="52547" end="52563" title="Vertical farming" label="Vertical farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343848" start="52592" end="52624" title="World&amp;#x27;s littlest skyscraper" label="World&amp;#x27;s littlest skyscraper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778961" start="52627" end="52643" title="Drag coefficient" label="drag-coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q507234" start="52646" end="52662" title="Fatigue (material)" label="material-fatigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q568491" start="52665" end="52675" title="Downforce" label="down-force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727909" start="52678" end="52689" title="Steel frame" label="Steel frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303365" start="52737" end="52749" title="Judith Dupré" label="Judith Dupré"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29486" wikidata="Q300" url="?curid=29486" title="Sagas of Icelanders">
<text>The sagas of Icelanders (, ), also known as family sagas, are a subgenre, or text group, of Icelandic sagas. They are prose narratives primarily based on historical events that mostly took place in Iceland in the ninth, tenth, and early eleventh centuries, during the so-called Saga Age. They were written in Old Icelandic, a western dialect of Old Norse. They are the best-known specimens of Icelandic literature.

They are focused on history, especially genealogical and family history. They reflect the struggle and conflict that arose within the societies of the early generations of Icelandic settlers. The Icelandic sagas are valuable and unique historical sources about medieval Scandinavian societies and kingdoms, in particular regarding pre-Christian religion and culture and the heroic age.

Eventually, many of these Icelandic sagas were recorded, mostly in the 13th and 14th centuries. The &#x27;authors&#x27;, or rather recorders, of these sagas are largely unknown. One saga, &quot;Egil&#x27;s Saga&quot;, is believed by some scholars to have been written by Snorri Sturluson, a descendant of the saga&#x27;s hero, but this remains uncertain. The standard modern edition of Icelandic sagas is produced by Hið íslenzka fornritafélag (&#x27;The Old Icelandic Text Society&#x27;), or Íslenzk fornrit for short.

== Historical time frame ==
Among the several literary reviews of the sagas is the &quot;Sagalitteraturen&quot; by Sigurður Nordal, which divides the sagas into five chronological groups (depending on when they were written not their subject matters) distinguished by the state of literary development:

* 1200 to 1230 – Sagas that deal with skalds (such as &quot;Fóstbrœðra saga&quot;)
* 1230 to 1280 – Family sagas (such as &quot;Laxdæla saga&quot;)
* 1280 to 1300 – Works that focus more on style and storytelling than just writing down history (such as &quot;Njáls saga&quot;)
* Early fourteenth century – Historical tradition
* Fourteenth century – Fiction

This framework has been severely criticised as based on a presupposed attitude to the fantastic and an over-estimation on the precedence of &quot;Landnámabók&quot;.

== List of sagas ==
* &quot;Atla saga Ótryggssonar&quot;
* &quot;Bandamanna saga&quot;
* &quot;Bárðar saga Snæfellsáss&quot;
* &quot;Bjarnar saga Hítdælakappa&quot;
* &quot;Droplaugarsona saga&quot;
* &quot;Egils saga Skalla-Grímssonar&quot; – Egil&#x27;s Saga
* &quot;Eiríks saga rauða&quot; – Saga of Erik the Red
* &quot;Eyrbyggja saga&quot;
* &quot;Færeyinga saga&quot;
* &quot;Finnboga saga ramma&quot;
* &quot;Fljótsdæla saga&quot;
* &quot;Flóamanna saga&quot;
* &quot;Fóstbræðra saga&quot; (two versions)
* &quot;Gísla saga Súrssonar&quot;, (two versions) of an outlaw poet – Gísla saga
* &quot;Grettis saga – Saga of Grettir the Strong&quot;
* &quot;Grænlendinga saga&quot; – Greenland saga
* &quot;Gull-Þóris saga&quot;
* &quot;Gunnars saga Keldugnúpsfífls&quot;
* &quot;Gunnlaugs saga ormstungu&quot;
* &quot;Hallfreðar saga&quot; (two versions)
* &quot;Harðar saga ok Hólmverja&quot;
* &quot;Hávarðar saga Ísfirðings&quot;
* &quot;Heiðarvíga saga&quot;
* &quot;Hrafnkels saga&quot;
* &quot;Hrana saga hrings&quot; (post-medieval)
* &quot;Hænsna-Þóris saga&quot;
* (One of the earliest sagas written about the founding of Iceland by a priest called Ari Þorgilsson working in the early 12th century)
* &quot;Kjalnesinga saga&quot;
* &quot;Kormáks saga&quot;
* &quot;Króka-Refs saga&quot;
* &quot;Laxdæla saga&quot;
* &quot;Ljósvetninga saga&quot; (two versions)
* &quot;Njáls saga&quot;
* &quot;Reykdæla saga ok Víga-Skútu&quot;
* &quot;Skáld-Helga saga&quot; (known only from &quot;rímur&quot; and later derivations of these)
* &quot;Svarfdæla saga&quot;
* &quot;Valla-Ljóts saga&quot;
* &quot;Vatnsdæla saga&quot;
* &quot;Víga-Glúms saga&quot;
* &quot;Víglundar saga&quot;
* &quot;Vápnfirðinga saga&quot;
* &quot;Þorsteins saga hvíta&quot;
* &quot;Þorsteins saga Síðu-Hallssonar&quot;
* &quot;Þórðar saga hreðu&quot;
* &quot;Ölkofra saga&quot;
It is thought that a number of sagas are now lost, including the supposed &quot;Gauks saga Trandilssonar&quot; – The saga of Gaukur á Stöng. In addition to these, the texts often referred to as the &quot;Tales of Icelanders&quot; (&quot;Íslendingaþættir&quot;) such as &quot;Hreiðars þáttr&quot; and &quot;Sneglu-Halla þáttr&quot; of the kings&#x27; saga &quot;Morkinskinna&quot; could be included in this corpus, as well as the contemporary sagas (written in the 13th century and dealing with the same period) incorporated into &quot;Sturlunga saga&quot;.

== See also ==
* Norse saga
* Family saga

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Arnold, Martin (2003). &quot;The Post-Classical Icelandic Family Saga.&quot; Lewiston, New York: Edwin Mellen Press
* Ármann Jakobsson (2013). &quot;Nine Saga Studies: The Critical Interpretation of the Icelandic Sagas&quot;. Reykjavík: University of Iceland Press. . 
* Bampi, Massimiliano, Carolyne Larrington and Sif Rikhardsdottir (eds.) &quot;A Critical Companion to Old Norse Literary Genre&quot;. Studies in Old Norse Literature 5. D. S. Brewer. Woodbridge, 2020
* Falk, Oren. 2021. &quot;&quot;. Oxford University Press.
* Karlsson, Gunnar (2000). &quot;The History of Iceland.&quot; Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press
* Liestøl, Knut (1930). &quot;The Origin of the Icelandic Family Sagas.&quot; Translated by Jayne, Arthur Garland. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. .
* Miller, William Ian (2009). &quot;Bloodtaking and Peacemaking: Feud, Law, and Society in Saga Iceland&quot;. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. . 
* Mundal, Else (ed.) &quot;Dating the Sagas: Reviews and Revisions.&quot; Museum Tusculanum, 2013.
* Smiley, Jane; Kellogg, Robert Leland (2001). &quot;The Sagas of Icelanders: a selection&quot;. New York: Penguin Books. . 
* Viðar Hreinsson (eds.) (1997). &quot;The Complete Sagas of Icelanders.&quot; 5 vols. Reykjavík: Leifur Eiriksson Publishing. . – see 

== External links ==
* Icelandic Saga Database – many sagas of Icelanders, along with some translations into English and other languages
*Proverbs and Proverbial Materials in the Old Icelandic Sagas from the University of Alaska
* Icelandic sagas – a selection in Old Norse
* Sagnanet – photographs of some of the original manuscripts
* Harmony of the Vinland voyages
* Icelandic Saga Map – an online digital map with the geo-referenced texts of all of the Íslendingasögur</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q300" start="4" end="23" title="Sagas of Icelanders" label="sagas of Icelanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q300" start="44" end="56" title="Sagas of Icelanders" label="family sagas"/>
<link wikidata="Q180494" start="102" end="107" title="Saga" label="sagas"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="198" end="205" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398898" start="278" end="286" title="Saga Age" label="Saga Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="309" end="322" title="Old Icelandic" label="Old Icelandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="345" end="354" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414023" start="393" end="413" title="Icelandic literature" label="Icelandic literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q827943" start="997" end="1013" title="Egil&amp;#x27;s Saga" label="Egil&amp;#x27;s Saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q102323" start="1074" end="1090" title="Snorri Sturluson" label="Snorri Sturluson"/>
<link wikidata="Q291843" start="1220" end="1246" title="Íslenzk fornrit" label="Hið íslenzka fornritafélag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469402" start="1439" end="1454" title="Sigurður Nordal" label="Sigurður Nordal"/>
<link wikidata="Q947305" start="1666" end="1672" title="Skald" label="skalds"/>
<link wikidata="Q723516" start="1688" end="1703" title="Fóstbrœðra saga" label="Fóstbrœðra saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q122708" start="1756" end="1768" title="Laxdæla saga" label="Laxdæla saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q844119" start="1887" end="1897" title="Njáls saga" label="Njáls saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373412" start="2181" end="2203" title="Atla saga Ótryggssonar" label="Atla saga Ótryggssonar"/>
<link wikidata="Q281969" start="2218" end="2233" title="Bandamanna saga" label="Bandamanna saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018855" start="2248" end="2271" title="Bárðar saga Snæfellsáss" label="Bárðar saga Snæfellsáss"/>
<link wikidata="Q879337" start="2286" end="2311" title="Bjarnar saga Hítdælakappa" label="Bjarnar saga Hítdælakappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260313" start="2326" end="2345" title="Droplaugarsona saga" label="Droplaugarsona saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q827943" start="2360" end="2388" title="Egils saga" label="Egils saga Skalla-Grímssonar"/>
<link wikidata="Q930237" start="2422" end="2439" title="Eiríks saga rauða" label="Eiríks saga rauða"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385875" start="2477" end="2491" title="Eyrbyggja saga" label="Eyrbyggja saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000933" start="2506" end="2520" title="Færeyinga saga" label="Færeyinga saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417685" start="2535" end="2554" title="Finnboga saga ramma" label="Finnboga saga ramma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429026" start="2569" end="2584" title="Fljótsdæla saga" label="Fljótsdæla saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q935010" start="2599" end="2613" title="Flóamanna saga" label="Flóamanna saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q723516" start="2628" end="2643" title="Fóstbræðra saga" label="Fóstbræðra saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426754" start="2673" end="2693" title="Gísla saga" label="Gísla saga Súrssonar"/>
<link wikidata="Q913267" start="2755" end="2767" title="Grettis saga" label="Grettis saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424005" start="2811" end="2828" title="Grænlendinga saga" label="Grænlendinga saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117976" start="2860" end="2875" title="Gull-Þóris saga" label="Gull-Þóris saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554808" start="2890" end="2918" title="Gunnars saga Keldugnúpsfífls" label="Gunnars saga Keldugnúpsfífls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361715" start="2933" end="2957" title="Gunnlaugs saga ormstungu" label="Gunnlaugs saga ormstungu"/>
<link wikidata="Q239544" start="2972" end="2987" title="Hallfreðar saga" label="Hallfreðar saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328775" start="3017" end="3041" title="Harðar saga ok Hólmverja" label="Harðar saga ok Hólmverja"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567304" start="3056" end="3080" title="Hávarðar saga Ísfirðings" label="Hávarðar saga Ísfirðings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567210" start="3095" end="3110" title="Heiðarvíga saga" label="Heiðarvíga saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479058" start="3125" end="3139" title="Hrafnkels saga" label="Hrafnkels saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641560" start="3154" end="3171" title="Hrana saga hrings" label="Hrana saga hrings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552304" start="3202" end="3219" title="Hænsna-Þóris saga" label="Hænsna-Þóris saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q355194" start="3312" end="3326" title="Ari Þorgilsson" label="Ari Þorgilsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356648" start="3370" end="3386" title="Kjalnesinga saga" label="Kjalnesinga saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248744" start="3401" end="3413" title="Kormáks saga" label="Kormáks saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1828486" start="3428" end="3443" title="Króka-Refs saga" label="Króka-Refs saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q122708" start="3458" end="3470" title="Laxdæla saga" label="Laxdæla saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604173" start="3485" end="3502" title="Ljósvetninga saga" label="Ljósvetninga saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q844119" start="3532" end="3542" title="Njáls saga" label="Njáls saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356238" start="3557" end="3584" title="Reykdæla saga ok Víga-Skútu" label="Reykdæla saga ok Víga-Skútu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12001294" start="3599" end="3615" title="Skáld-Helga saga" label="Skáld-Helga saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q723785" start="3697" end="3711" title="Svarfdæla saga" label="Svarfdæla saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356188" start="3726" end="3742" title="Valla-Ljóts saga" label="Valla-Ljóts saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q723362" start="3757" end="3771" title="Vatnsdæla saga" label="Vatnsdæla saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q723191" start="3786" end="3801" title="Víga-Glúms saga" label="Víga-Glúms saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356690" start="3816" end="3830" title="Víglundar saga" label="Víglundar saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604203" start="3845" end="3862" title="Vápnfirðinga saga" label="Vápnfirðinga saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356169" start="3877" end="3897" title="Þorsteins saga hvíta" label="Þorsteins saga hvíta"/>
<link wikidata="Q369029" start="3912" end="3942" title="Þorsteins saga Síðu-Hallssonar" label="Þorsteins saga Síðu-Hallssonar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604189" start="3957" end="3974" title="Þórðar saga hreðu" label="Þórðar saga hreðu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604196" start="3989" end="4001" title="Ölkofra saga" label="Ölkofra saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836955" start="4088" end="4112" title="Gauks saga Trandilssonar" label="Gauks saga Trandilssonar"/>
<link wikidata="Q180494" start="4583" end="4593" title="Norse saga" label="Norse saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q870452" start="4596" end="4607" title="Family saga" label="Family saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q985068" start="4727" end="4745" title="Lewiston, New York" label="Lewiston, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558777" start="4747" end="4765" title="Edwin Mellen Press" label="Edwin Mellen Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29489" wikidata="Q266496" url="?curid=29489" title="Staind">
<text>Staind ( ) is an American rock band from Springfield, Massachusetts, formed in 1995. The original lineup consisted of lead vocalist and rhythm guitarist Aaron Lewis, lead guitarist Mike Mushok, bassist and backing vocalist Johnny April, and drummer Jon Wysocki. The lineup has been stable outside of the 2011 departure of Wysocki, who was replaced by Sal Giancarelli. Staind has recorded and released eight studio albums: &quot;Tormented&quot; (1996), &quot;Dysfunction&quot; (1999), &quot;Break the Cycle&quot; (2001), &quot;14 Shades of Grey&quot; (2003), &quot;Chapter V&quot; (2005), &quot;The Illusion of Progress&quot; (2008), &quot;Staind&quot; (2011), and &quot;Confessions of the Fallen&quot; (2023). 

The band was most successful in the early 2000s, with &quot;Break the Cycle&quot; going five times platinum in the United States and producing a top-five &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 hit with its lead single &quot;It&#x27;s Been Awhile&quot;. &quot;Break the Cycle&quot;, along with the band&#x27;s following two full-length albums, also topped the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, and the two after peaked within the top five. Several of their other singles also became rock and crossover hits, including &quot;Fade&quot;, &quot;For You&quot;, &quot;Price to Play&quot;, &quot;So Far Away&quot;, and &quot;Right Here&quot;. The band&#x27;s activity became more sporadic into the 2010s, with Lewis pursuing a solo country music career and Mushok subsequently joining the band Saint Asonia.

==History==
===Early years and &quot;Tormented&quot; (1995–1998)===
In 1993, vocalist Aaron Lewis and guitarist Mike Mushok met at a Christmas party in Springfield, Massachusetts. Mushok introduced drummer Jon Wysocki while Lewis brought in bassist Johnny April to form the band in 1995. Their first public performance was in February 1995, playing a heavy, dark, and introspective style of metal. Extensive touring in the Northeast helped Staind acquire a regional following over the next few years.

The band started covering Korn, Rage Against the Machine, Pearl Jam, Tool, and Alice in Chains, among others, and played at local clubs (most commonly playing at Infinity, a live music venue located in Springfield) for a year and a half. Staind self-released their debut album, &quot;Tormented&quot;, in November 1996, citing Tool, Faith No More, and Pantera as their influences. In October 1997, Staind acquired a concert slot through Aaron&#x27;s cousin Justin Cantor with Limp Bizkit. Just prior to the performance, Limp Bizkit frontman Fred Durst was appalled by Staind&#x27;s grotesque album cover and unsuccessfully attempted to remove them from the bill. Durst thought that Staind were Theistic Satanists. After being persuaded to let them perform, however, Durst was so impressed that he signed them to Flip Records by February 1998.

===&quot;Dysfunction&quot; (1999–2000)===
On April 13, 1999, Staind released their major label debut &quot;Dysfunction&quot; on Flip Records. The album, which was co-produced by Fred Durst and Terry Date (who also produced acts like Soundgarden, Deftones, and Pantera), received comparisons to alternative metal giants Tool and Korn. In particular, Aaron Lewis was lauded for his vocals, which were likened to those of Pearl Jam&#x27;s Eddie Vedder.

The album achieved slow success, reaching the No. 1 spot on Billboard&#x27;s Heatseeker Charts almost six months after its debut. In the same week, the record jumped to No. 74 on Billboard&#x27;s Top 200 Album Charts. The nine-track LP (with one hidden track, &quot;Excess Baggage&quot;) produced three singles, &quot;Just Go&quot;, &quot;Mudshovel&quot;, and &quot;Home&quot;. &quot;Mudshovel&quot; and &quot;Home&quot; both received radio play, cracking the Top 20 of Billboard&#x27;s Modern Rock and Mainstream Rock charts. In promotion of &quot;Dysfunction&quot;, Staind went on several tours, including the Family Values Tour with acts like Limp Bizkit and The Crystal Method, as well as opening for Sevendust&#x27;s headlining tour.

===&quot;Break the Cycle&quot; (2001–2002)===
Staind toured with Limp Bizkit for the Family Values Tour during the fall of 1999, where Aaron Lewis performed an early version of &quot;Outside&quot; with Fred Durst at the Mississippi Coast Coliseum. Staind released their third studio album, &quot;Break the Cycle&quot;, on May 22, 2001. Propelled by the success of the first single, &quot;It&#x27;s Been Awhile&quot;, the album debuted at No. 1 on Billboard&#x27;s Top 200 Album charts, selling 716,000 copies in its first week. The record&#x27;s first-week sales were the second highest of any album that year, behind Creed&#x27;s &quot;Weathered&quot;.

&quot;Break the Cycle&quot; saw the band retaining the nu metal sound from their previous album. Despite this, the album saw the band going further into a post-grunge sound which is evident in the smash hit song &quot;It&#x27;s Been Awhile&quot;, and the song led critics to compare the band to several other post-grunge bands at the time. The record spawned the singles &quot;It&#x27;s Been Awhile&quot; (which hit the Billboard Top 10), &quot;Fade&quot;, &quot;Outside&quot;, &quot;For You&quot;, and the acoustic ballad &quot;Epiphany&quot;. &quot;It&#x27;s Been Awhile&quot; spent a total of 16 and 14 weeks on top of the modern and mainstream rock charts respectively, making it one of the highest joint numbers of all time. In 2001, &quot;Break the Cycle&quot; sold four million copies worldwide, making it one of the best selling albums that year. &quot;Break the Cycle&quot; would go on to sell seven million copies worldwide, making this Staind&#x27;s bestselling album.

===&quot;14 Shades of Grey&quot; (2003–2004)===
In early 2003, Staind embarked on a worldwide tour to promote the release of the follow-up to &quot;Break the Cycle&quot;, &quot;14 Shades of Grey&quot;, which sold two million copies and debuted at number 1 on the Billboard 200. The album saw a departure from their previous nu metal sound as it mostly contained a lighter and more melodic post-grunge sound. &quot;14 Shades of Grey&quot; produced two mainstream hits, &quot;Price to Play&quot; and &quot;So Far Away&quot;, which spent 14 weeks on top of the rock chart. In addition, two other singles were released: &quot;How About You&quot; and &quot;Zoe Jane&quot;. The band&#x27;s appearance at the Reading Festival during their 2003 tour had another impromptu acoustic set, this time due to equipment failure. The singles &quot;So Far Away&quot; and &quot;Price to Play&quot; came with two unreleased tracks, &quot;Novocaine&quot; and &quot;Let It Out&quot;, which were released for the special edition of the group&#x27;s subsequent album &quot;Chapter V&quot;, which came out in late 2005. In 2003, Staind unsuccessfully sued their logo designer Jon Stainbrook in New York Federal Court for attempting to re-use the logo he had sold to the band. They re-opened the case in mid-2005.

===&quot;Chapter V&quot; and &quot;The Singles&quot; (2005–2007)===
Staind&#x27;s fifth album, titled &quot;Chapter V&quot;, was released on August 9, 2005, and became their third consecutive album to top the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200. The album opened to sales of 185,000 and has since been certified platinum in the U.S. The first single, &quot;Right Here&quot;, was the biggest success from the album, garnering much mainstream radio play and peaking at number 1 on the mainstream rock chart. &quot;Falling&quot; was released as the second single, followed by &quot;Everything Changes&quot; and &quot;King of All Excuses&quot;. Staind went on the road when the album came out, doing live shows and promoting it for a full year, including participating in the Fall Brawl tour with P.O.D., Taproot, and Flyleaf; they also had a solo tour across Europe and a mini-promotional tour in Australia for the first time. Other live shows included a cover of Pantera&#x27;s &quot;This Love&quot;, a tribute to Dimebag Darrell. Staind appeared on &quot;The Howard Stern Show&quot; on August 10, 2005 to promote &quot;Chapter V&quot;. They performed acoustic renditions of the single &quot;Right Here&quot; and Beetlejuice&#x27;s song &quot;This is Beetle&quot;. In early November 2005, Staind released the limited edition 2-CD/DVD set of &quot;Chapter V&quot;. On September 6, 2006, they performed an acoustic show in the Hiro Ballroom, New York City, that was recorded for their singles collection. The band played sixteen songs, including three covers: Tool&#x27;s &quot;Sober&quot;, Pink Floyd&#x27;s &quot;Comfortably Numb&quot;, and Alice in Chains&#x27;s &quot;Nutshell&quot;.

The collection &quot;The Singles: 1996–2006&quot; was released on November 14, 2006. It included all the band&#x27;s singles, the three covers performed at the New York show, and a remastered version of &quot;Come Again&quot; from Staind&#x27;s first independent release &quot;Tormented&quot;.

===&quot;The Illusion of Progress&quot; (2008–2009)===
On August 19, 2008, Staind released their sixth album, &quot;The Illusion of Progress&quot;. Prior to the album&#x27;s release, the track &quot;This Is It&quot; was available for download on the iTunes Store, as well as for &quot;Rock Band&quot;. The album debuted at No. 3 on the U.S. Billboard 200, No. 1 on the Top Modern Rock/Alternative Albums Chart, No. 1 on the Top Digital Albums Chart, and also No. 1 on the Top Internet Albums Chart, with first-week sales of 91,800 units. The first single on the album, &quot;Believe&quot;, topped Billboard&#x27;s Top 10 Modern Rock Tracks on September 5, 2008. The band also supported Nickelback on their 2008 European tour. The second single was &quot;All I Want&quot;, and came out on November 24. The single also became Staind&#x27;s 13th top 20 hit on the rock charts. In Europe, the second single was &quot;The Way I Am&quot;, released on January 26, 2009. The final single released from the album, &quot;This Is It&quot;, was sent to radio stations across the country on May 4, 2009. The track was also included on the successful &quot;&quot; released in late June 2009. The same year, Staind embarked on a fall tour with the newly reunited Creed.

===&quot;Staind&quot; and departure of Jon Wysocki (2010–2012)===
In March 2010, Aaron Lewis stated the band would start working on their seventh studio album by the end of the year. Lewis had finished recording his country music solo EP and had started a nonprofit organization to reopen his daughter&#x27;s elementary school in Worthington, Massachusetts. Guitarist Mike Mushok stated in a Q&amp;A session with fans that the band was looking to make a heavy record, but still &quot;explore some of the things we did on the last record and take them somewhere new for us&quot;. In a webisode posted on the band&#x27;s website, Lewis stated that eight songs were written and that &quot;every one of them is as heavy or heavier than the heaviest song on the last record&quot;. The band originally planned on recording with Nick Raskulinecz, but ended up working with &quot;The Illusion of Progress&quot; producer Johnny K, much to Wysocki&#x27;s dismay.

In December 2010, Staind posted three webisodes from the studio, which featured the band members discussing the writing and recording process of their new album. They announced that as of April 20, they had completed the recording of their seventh and would release it later that year. Wysocki said that the album&#x27;s production was rushed as the band had waited until the last minute—before they would be in breach of their record contract—to record the album. He later said that whilst &quot;some [of the album&#x27;s] songs came out pretty good&quot;, it was not as well-rounded as the band&#x27;s previous efforts. Due to his frustration with the album&#x27;s production and &quot;distractions&quot; afflicting the band, Wysocki decided to quit Staind. &quot;I was very frustrated with it all, so I said to the guys, &#x27;As much as I love this band and I love you guys, I gotta go. This is not the Staind we started out being.&#x27;&quot; Staind announced Wysocki&#x27;s departure on May 20, 2011. Following his departure, Wysocki joined Soil.

Drummer Will Hunt filled in for a few dates, while Wysocki&#x27;s drum tech Sal Giancarelli filled in for the rest of the tour. On May 23, 2011, it was reported that Staind&#x27;s new album would be a self-titled release. It was released on September 13, 2011. The first single, &quot;Not Again&quot;, was released to active radio stations on July 18. The song &quot;The Bottom&quot; appeared on the &quot;&quot; soundtrack. On June 30, Staind released a song called &quot;Eyes Wide Open&quot; from their new record. &quot;Eyes Wide Open&quot; would later be released on November 29 as the album&#x27;s second single.

In November 2011, the band announced through their YouTube page that Sal Giancarelli was now an official member. The band continued to perform into 2012, embarking on an April and May tour with Godsmack and Halestorm, and they played the Uproar Festival in August and September with Shinedown and a number of other artists.

It was announced in July 2012 that the band was to be taking a hiatus. In an interview with Billboard, Aaron Lewis stated that &quot;We&#x27;re not breaking up. We&#x27;re not gonna stop making music. We&#x27;re just going to take a little hiatus that really hasn&#x27;t ever been taken in our career. We put out seven records in 14 years. We&#x27;ve been pretty busy.&quot; Lewis also had plans to release his first solo album &quot;The Road&quot;. During this time, Mike Mushok auditioned, and was selected, to play guitar for former Metallica bassist Jason Newsted&#x27;s new band Newsted. He featured on their debut album &quot;Heavy Metal Music&quot;.

===Hiatus, &quot;Confessions of the Fallen&quot; and death of Jon Wysocki (2013–present)===
Staind played their first show in two years at the Welcome to Rockville festival on April 27, 2014. They also played the Carolina Rebellion and Rock on the Range festivals in May 2014.

In late 2014, the band went on a hiatus. Aaron Lewis continued to play solo shows and work on his next solo album. He also confirmed that the hiatus would last &quot;for a while&quot;. Mike Mushok teamed up with former Three Days Grace singer Adam Gontier, former Finger Eleven drummer Rich Beddoe, and Eye Empire bassist Corey Lowery to form Saint Asonia.

On August 4, 2017, the band performed for the first time since November 2014 for an acoustic performance at Aaron Lewis&#x27; 6th annual charity golf tournament and concert when bassist Johnny April and drummer Sal Giancarelli joined Aaron Lewis and Mike Mushok to perform &quot;Outside&quot;, &quot;Something to Remind You&quot;, and &quot;It&#x27;s Been Awhile&quot;. Three days later, Lewis announced that Staind would never tour extensively again, with Lewis explaining:

In April 2019, the band announced they would reform in September 2019 for some live performances. The band was scheduled to play at Epicenter Festival on May 3, 2020 at Charlotte Motor Speedway, but the COVID-19 pandemic led to the festival being cancelled. Amid the pandemic, the band released a live album titled &quot;Live: It&#x27;s Been Awhile&quot; on May 7, 2021. The recorded performance took place at the Foxwoods Resort Casino in Mashantucket, Connecticut.

In April 2022, the band announced a September tour, dubbed the Evening with Staind tour. In September, Mushok confirmed that a new Staind album would be released in 2023.

&quot;Confessions of the Fallen&quot; was released in September 2023. The album&#x27;s lead single was &quot;Lowest in Me&quot;.

Original Staind drummer Jon Wysocki died on May 18, 2024, at the age of 53, due to &quot;issues with his liver that required him to be under the care of medical professionals&quot;.

==Musical style, influences, and lyrical themes==
The topics of Staind&#x27;s lyrics cover issues of depression, relationships, death, addiction, finding one&#x27;s self, betrayal, and Lewis&#x27;s thoughts about becoming a father in the song &quot;Zoe Jane&quot; from &quot;14 Shades of Grey&quot;, as well as reflecting on his upbringing in the song &quot;The Corner&quot; from &quot;The Illusion of Progress&quot;. Also from &quot;14 Shades of Grey&quot;, the track titled &quot;Layne&quot; was written about Alice in Chains frontman Layne Staley in response to his death in 2002. The song is also about Staley&#x27;s legacy and the effect his music had on the members of Staind, especially Aaron Lewis. Staind has been categorized as alternative metal, nu metal, post-grunge, and hard rock. 

In 2001, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; outlined the band&#x27;s relationship to the nu metal label:
Staind&#x27;s influences include Pantera, the Doors, Suicidal Tendencies, Kiss, Van Halen, Slayer, Led Zeppelin, Sepultura, Whitesnake, the Beatles, Alice in Chains, Faith No More, Deftones, Black Sabbath, Pearl Jam, Tool, Rage Against the Machine, Nirvana, Stone Temple Pilots, James Taylor, Korn, and Crosby, Stills &amp; Nash.

==Band members==
Current line-up
* Aaron Lewis – lead vocals, rhythm guitar (1995–2012, 2014, 2017, 2019–present)
* Mike Mushok – lead guitar (1995–2012, 2014, 2017, 2019–present)
* Johnny April – bass, backing vocals (1995–2012, 2014, 2017, 2019–present)
* Sal Giancarelli – drums (2011–2012, 2014, 2017, 2019–present)

Former members
* Pete McEwan – bass (1995; died 2022)
* Jon Wysocki – drums (1995–2011; died 2024)

===Timeline===
== Discography ==

Studio albums
*&quot;Tormented&quot; (1996)
*&quot;Dysfunction&quot; (1999)
*&quot;Break the Cycle&quot; (2001)
*&quot;14 Shades of Grey&quot; (2003)
*&quot;Chapter V&quot; (2005)
*&quot;The Illusion of Progress&quot; (2008)
*&quot;Staind&quot; (2011)
*&quot;Confessions of the Fallen&quot; (2023)

==References==
==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q266496" start="0" end="6" title="Staind" label="Staind"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="26" end="30" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="41" end="67" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q302280" start="153" end="164" title="Aaron Lewis" label="Aaron Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9297280" start="181" end="192" title="Mike Mushok" label="Mike Mushok"/>
<link wikidata="Q686081" start="428" end="437" title="Tormented (Staind album)" label="Tormented"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534690" start="458" end="469" title="Dysfunction (album)" label="Dysfunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470344" start="490" end="505" title="Break the Cycle" label="Break the Cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607840" start="526" end="543" title="14 Shades of Grey" label="14 Shades of Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534677" start="564" end="573" title="Chapter V (Staind album)" label="Chapter V"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569217" start="594" end="618" title="The Illusion of Progress" label="The Illusion of Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068601" start="639" end="645" title="Staind (album)" label="Staind"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509324" start="670" end="695" title="Confessions of the Fallen" label="Confessions of the Fallen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503026" start="800" end="819" title="RIAA certification" label="five times platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="866" end="895" title="Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q6089941" start="927" end="948" title="It&amp;#x27;s Been Awhile" label="It&amp;#x27;s Been Awhile"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="1062" end="1087" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429161" start="1219" end="1223" title="Fade (Staind song)" label="Fade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5466950" start="1237" end="1244" title="For You (Staind song)" label="For You"/>
<link wikidata="Q3911370" start="1258" end="1271" title="Price to Play" label="Price to Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q3963149" start="1285" end="1296" title="So Far Away (Staind song)" label="So Far Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333522" start="1314" end="1324" title="Right Here (Staind song)" label="Right Here"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="1421" end="1434" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q19922002" start="1483" end="1495" title="Saint Asonia" label="Saint Asonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q302280" start="1584" end="1595" title="Aaron Lewis" label="Aaron Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="1650" end="1676" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q80304" start="2026" end="2030" title="Korn" label="Korn"/>
<link wikidata="Q72092" start="2032" end="2056" title="Rage Against the Machine" label="Rage Against the Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q142701" start="2058" end="2067" title="Pearl Jam" label="Pearl Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q184827" start="2069" end="2073" title="Tool (band)" label="Tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q484255" start="2079" end="2094" title="Alice in Chains" label="Alice in Chains"/>
<link wikidata="Q686081" start="2284" end="2293" title="Tormented (Staind album)" label="Tormented"/>
<link wikidata="Q320499" start="2332" end="2345" title="Faith No More" label="Faith No More"/>
<link wikidata="Q180880" start="2351" end="2358" title="Pantera" label="Pantera"/>
<link wikidata="Q240767" start="2475" end="2486" title="Limp Bizkit" label="Limp Bizkit"/>
<link wikidata="Q44707" start="2540" end="2550" title="Fred Durst" label="Fred Durst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478965" start="2693" end="2710" title="Theistic Satanist" label="Theistic Satanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3746620" start="2811" end="2823" title="Flip Records (1994)" label="Flip Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534690" start="2950" end="2961" title="Dysfunction (album)" label="Dysfunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3746620" start="2971" end="2983" title="Flip Records (1994)" label="Flip Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q44707" start="3021" end="3031" title="Fred Durst" label="Fred Durst"/>
<link wikidata="Q30567" start="3036" end="3046" title="Terry Date" label="Terry Date"/>
<link wikidata="Q174817" start="3076" end="3087" title="Soundgarden" label="Soundgarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q485039" start="3089" end="3097" title="Deftones" label="Deftones"/>
<link wikidata="Q20378" start="3137" end="3154" title="alternative metal" label="alternative metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q142701" start="3262" end="3271" title="Pearl Jam" label="Pearl Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q221535" start="3279" end="3291" title="Eddie Vedder" label="Eddie Vedder"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="3354" end="3363" title="Billboard.com" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6316023" start="3612" end="3619" title="Just Go (Staind song)" label="Just Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q6931873" start="3633" end="3642" title="Mudshovel" label="Mudshovel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534690" start="3660" end="3664" title="Home (Staind song)" label="Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q240767" start="3940" end="3951" title="Limp Bizkit" label="Limp Bizkit"/>
<link wikidata="Q50975" start="3956" end="3974" title="The Crystal Method" label="The Crystal Method"/>
<link wikidata="Q741801" start="3999" end="4008" title="Sevendust" label="Sevendust"/>
<link wikidata="Q2521928" start="4119" end="4137" title="Family Values Tour" label="Family Values Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879090" start="4254" end="4280" title="Mississippi Coast Coliseum" label="Mississippi Coast Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470344" start="4330" end="4345" title="Break the Cycle" label="Break the Cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6089941" start="4422" end="4443" title="It&amp;#x27;s Been Awhile" label="It&amp;#x27;s Been Awhile"/>
<link wikidata="Q308816" start="4652" end="4657" title="Creed (band)" label="Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321182" start="4671" end="4680" title="Weathered" label="Weathered"/>
<link wikidata="Q263734" start="4744" end="4752" title="nu metal" label="nu metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q379671" start="4844" end="4855" title="post-grunge" label="post-grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6089941" start="4907" end="4928" title="It&amp;#x27;s Been Awhile" label="It&amp;#x27;s Been Awhile"/>
<link wikidata="Q379671" start="4998" end="5009" title="post-grunge" label="post-grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6089941" start="5066" end="5087" title="It&amp;#x27;s Been Awhile" label="It&amp;#x27;s Been Awhile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429161" start="5134" end="5138" title="Fade (Staind song)" label="Fade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112937" start="5152" end="5159" title="Outside (Staind song)" label="Outside"/>
<link wikidata="Q5466950" start="5173" end="5180" title="For You (Staind song)" label="For You"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607840" start="5847" end="5864" title="14 Shades of Grey" label="14 Shades of Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q263734" start="5994" end="6002" title="nu metal" label="nu metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q379671" start="6059" end="6070" title="post-grunge" label="post-grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3911370" start="6144" end="6157" title="Price to Play" label="Price to Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q3963149" start="6174" end="6185" title="So Far Away (Staind song)" label="So Far Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q3787157" start="6292" end="6305" title="How About You (Staind song)" label="How About You"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137962" start="6372" end="6388" title="Reading Festival" label="Reading Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534677" start="6720" end="6729" title="Chapter V (Staind album)" label="Chapter V"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534677" start="7068" end="7077" title="Chapter V (Staind album)" label="Chapter V"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="7169" end="7194" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333522" start="7307" end="7317" title="Right Here (Staind song)" label="Right Here"/>
<link wikidata="Q30599639" start="7529" end="7547" title="Everything Changes (Staind song)" label="Everything Changes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412198" start="7564" end="7583" title="King of All Excuses" label="King of All Excuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q494743" start="7743" end="7749" title="P.O.D." label="P.O.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q1501614" start="7751" end="7758" title="Taproot (band)" label="Taproot"/>
<link wikidata="Q215125" start="7764" end="7771" title="Flyleaf (band)" label="Flyleaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q180880" start="7911" end="7918" title="Pantera" label="Pantera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090890" start="7932" end="7941" title="This Love (Pantera song)" label="This Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q311050" start="7962" end="7977" title="Dimebag Darrell" label="Dimebag Darrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987626" start="8004" end="8025" title="The Howard Stern Show" label="The Howard Stern Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q286080" start="8100" end="8108" title="Acoustic music" label="acoustic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4559551" start="8161" end="8172" title="Beetlejuice (entertainer)" label="Beetlejuice"/>
<link wikidata="Q184827" start="8506" end="8510" title="Tool (band)" label="Tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q527131" start="8524" end="8529" title="Sober (Tool song)" label="Sober"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306" start="8537" end="8547" title="Pink Floyd" label="Pink Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q643167" start="8561" end="8577" title="Comfortably Numb" label="Comfortably Numb"/>
<link wikidata="Q484255" start="8589" end="8604" title="Alice in Chains" label="Alice in Chains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070555" start="8618" end="8626" title="Nutshell (song)" label="Nutshell"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8656" end="8678" title="The Singles: 1996–2006" label="The Singles: 1996–2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q686081" start="8912" end="8921" title="Tormented (Staind album)" label="Tormented"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569217" start="9046" end="9070" title="The Illusion of Progress" label="The Illusion of Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q9593" start="9180" end="9192" title="iTunes Store" label="iTunes Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323659" start="9215" end="9224" title="Rock Band" label="Rock Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q3637628" start="9505" end="9512" title="Believe (Staind song)" label="Believe"/>
<link wikidata="Q483802" start="9616" end="9626" title="Nickelback" label="Nickelback"/>
<link wikidata="Q308816" start="10178" end="10183" title="Creed (band)" label="Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q302280" start="10267" end="10278" title="Aaron Lewis" label="Aaron Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549311" start="10516" end="10542" title="Worthington, Massachusetts" label="Worthington, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q963020" start="11008" end="11024" title="Nick Raskulinecz" label="Nick Raskulinecz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964732" start="11098" end="11106" title="Johnny K" label="Johnny K"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425700" start="12187" end="12191" title="Soil (American band)" label="Soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775478" start="12202" end="12211" title="Will Hunt" label="Will Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q207306" start="13007" end="13015" title="Godsmack" label="Godsmack"/>
<link wikidata="Q935503" start="13020" end="13029" title="Halestorm" label="Halestorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q15632588" start="13051" end="13066" title="Uproar Festival" label="Uproar Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063812" start="13096" end="13105" title="Shinedown" label="Shinedown"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="13230" end="13239" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q17062019" start="13566" end="13586" title="The Road (Aaron Lewis album)" label="&amp;quot;The Road&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920" start="13674" end="13683" title="Metallica" label="Metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q221546" start="13692" end="13705" title="Jason Newsted" label="Jason Newsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q6041623" start="13722" end="13729" title="Newsted" label="Newsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q13419955" start="13770" end="13787" title="Heavy Metal Music (Newsted album)" label="Heavy Metal Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044885" start="14009" end="14027" title="Carolina Rebellion" label="Carolina Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354863" start="14032" end="14049" title="Rock on the Range" label="Rock on the Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q486825" start="14293" end="14309" title="Three Days Grace" label="Three Days Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q349551" start="14317" end="14329" title="Adam Gontier" label="Adam Gontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071154" start="14338" end="14351" title="Finger Eleven" label="Finger Eleven"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422614" start="14377" end="14387" title="Eye Empire" label="Eye Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170391" start="14396" end="14408" title="Corey Lowery" label="Corey Lowery"/>
<link wikidata="Q19922002" start="14417" end="14429" title="Saint Asonia" label="Saint Asonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5382496" start="15040" end="15058" title="Epicenter (music festival)" label="Epicenter Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067286" start="15077" end="15101" title="Charlotte Motor Speedway" label="Charlotte Motor Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="15111" end="15128" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8565258" start="15322" end="15344" title="Foxwoods Resort Casino" label="Foxwoods Resort Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783082" start="15348" end="15373" title="Mashantucket, Connecticut" label="Mashantucket, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509324" start="15554" end="15579" title="Confessions of the Fallen" label="Confessions of the Fallen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607840" start="16136" end="16153" title="14 Shades of Grey" label="14 Shades of Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569217" start="16247" end="16271" title="The Illusion of Progress" label="The Illusion of Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q484255" start="16373" end="16388" title="Alice in Chains" label="Alice in Chains"/>
<link wikidata="Q309838" start="16398" end="16410" title="Layne Staley" label="Layne Staley"/>
<link wikidata="Q20378" start="16599" end="16616" title="alternative metal" label="alternative metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q263734" start="16618" end="16626" title="nu metal" label="nu metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q379671" start="16628" end="16639" title="post-grunge" label="post-grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q83270" start="16645" end="16654" title="hard rock" label="hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="16673" end="16686" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q180880" start="16787" end="16794" title="Pantera" label="Pantera"/>
<link wikidata="Q45354" start="16796" end="16805" title="the Doors" label="the Doors"/>
<link wikidata="Q899341" start="16807" end="16826" title="Suicidal Tendencies" label="Suicidal Tendencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q124179" start="16828" end="16832" title="Kiss (band)" label="Kiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q190155" start="16834" end="16843" title="Van Halen" label="Van Halen"/>
<link wikidata="Q131231" start="16845" end="16851" title="Slayer" label="Slayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="16853" end="16865" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q239074" start="16867" end="16876" title="Sepultura" label="Sepultura"/>
<link wikidata="Q189965" start="16878" end="16888" title="Whitesnake" label="Whitesnake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="16890" end="16901" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q484255" start="16903" end="16918" title="Alice in Chains" label="Alice in Chains"/>
<link wikidata="Q320499" start="16920" end="16933" title="Faith No More" label="Faith No More"/>
<link wikidata="Q485039" start="16935" end="16943" title="Deftones" label="Deftones"/>
<link wikidata="Q47670" start="16945" end="16958" title="Black Sabbath" label="Black Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q142701" start="16960" end="16969" title="Pearl Jam" label="Pearl Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q184827" start="16971" end="16975" title="Tool (band)" label="Tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q72092" start="16977" end="17001" title="Rage Against the Machine" label="Rage Against the Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="17003" end="17010" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q329270" start="17012" end="17031" title="Stone Temple Pilots" label="Stone Temple Pilots"/>
<link wikidata="Q310300" start="17033" end="17045" title="James Taylor" label="James Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q80304" start="17047" end="17051" title="Korn" label="Korn"/>
<link wikidata="Q10461933" start="17057" end="17082" title="Crosby, Stills &amp;amp; Nash" label="Crosby, Stills &amp;amp; Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q302280" start="17120" end="17131" title="Aaron Lewis" label="Aaron Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9297280" start="17201" end="17212" title="Mike Mushok" label="Mike Mushok"/>
<link wikidata="Q686081" start="17561" end="17570" title="Tormented (Staind album)" label="Tormented"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534690" start="17591" end="17602" title="Dysfunction (album)" label="Dysfunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470344" start="17623" end="17638" title="Break the Cycle" label="Break the Cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607840" start="17659" end="17676" title="14 Shades of Grey" label="14 Shades of Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534677" start="17697" end="17706" title="Chapter V (Staind album)" label="Chapter V"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569217" start="17727" end="17751" title="The Illusion of Progress" label="The Illusion of Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068601" start="17772" end="17778" title="Staind (album)" label="Staind"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509324" start="17799" end="17824" title="Confessions of the Fallen" label="Confessions of the Fallen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29490" wikidata="Q1316" url="?curid=29490" title="Saddam Hussein">
<text>Saddam Hussein (28 April 1937 – 30 December 2006) was an Iraqi politician and revolutionary who served as the fifth president of Iraq from 1979 until his overthrow in 2003. He previously served as the vice president of Iraq from 1968 to 1979 and also served as prime minister from 1979 to 1991 and later from 1994 to 2003. He was a leading member of the revolutionary Arab Socialist Ba&#x27;ath Party and later its Iraqi regional branch. Ideologically, he espoused Ba&#x27;athism, a mix of Arab nationalism and Arab socialism, while the policies and political ideas he championed are collectively known as Saddamism.

Saddam was born in the village of Al-Awja, near Tikrit in northern Iraq, to a Sunni Arab family. He joined the Ba&#x27;ath Party in 1957, and later in 1966 the Iraqi and Baghdad-based Ba&#x27;ath parties. He played a key role in the 17 July Revolution and was appointed vice president by Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr. During his tenure as vice president, Saddam nationalized the Iraq Petroleum Company, diversifying the Iraqi economy. He presided over the Second Iraqi–Kurdish War (1974–1975) and the Algiers Agreement which settled territorial disputes along the Iran–Iraq border. Following al-Bakr&#x27;s resignation in 1979, Saddam formally took power, although he had already been the &quot;de facto&quot; head of Iraq for several years. Positions of power in the country were mostly filled with Sunni Arabs, a minority that made up about a fifth of the population.

In 1979, upon taking office, Saddam purged the Ba&#x27;ath Party. He ordered the invasion of Iran in 1980 in a purported effort to capture Iran&#x27;s Arab-majority Khuzestan province, and end Iranian attempts to export its 1979 revolution to the Arab world and overthrow his regime. The Iran–Iraq War ended in 1988 in a stalemate, after a million people were killed and Iran suffered economic losses of $561 billion. At the end of the war, Saddam ordered the Anfal campaign against Kurdish rebels who sided with Iran, recognized as an act of genocide by Human Rights Watch. Later, Saddam accused his former ally Kuwait of slant-drilling Iraq&#x27;s oil reserves and invaded the country, initiating the Gulf War (1990–1991), which ended in Iraq&#x27;s defeat by a United States-led multinational coalition. The United Nations subsequently placed sanctions against Iraq. Saddam brutally suppressed the 1991 Iraqi uprisings of the Kurds and Shias, which sought to gain independence or overthrow the government. Saddam adopted an anti-American stance and established the Faith Campaign, pursuing an Islamist agenda in Iraq.

In 2003, a US-led coalition invaded Iraq, falsely accusing Saddam of developing weapons of mass destruction and of having ties with al-Qaeda. After the quick coalition victory in the war, the Ba&#x27;ath Party was banned and Saddam went into hiding. After his capture on 13 December 2003, his trial took place under the Iraqi Interim Government. On 5 November 2006, Saddam was convicted by the Iraqi High Tribunal of crimes against humanity related to the 1982 Dujail massacre of over 140 Shia Muslims and sentenced to death by hanging. He was executed on 30 December 2006.

A highly polarizing and controversial figure, Saddam dominated Iraqi politics for 35 years and was the subject of a cult of personality. Many Arabs regard Saddam as a resolute leader who challenged Western imperialism, opposed the Israeli occupation of Palestine, and resisted foreign intervention in the region. Conversely, many Iraqis, particularly Shias and Kurds, perceive him negatively as a dictator responsible for severe authoritarianism, repression, and numerous injustices. Human Rights Watch estimated that Saddam&#x27;s regime was responsible for the murder or disappearance of 250,000 to 290,000 Iraqis. Saddam&#x27;s government has been described by several analysts as authoritarian and totalitarian, and by some as fascist, although the applicability of those labels has been contested.

== Early life and education ==
Saddam Hussein Al-Majid Al-Tikriti was born on 28 April 1937, in al-Awja, a small village near Tikrit, to Hussein Abid Al-Majid and Subha Tulfah Al-Mussallat. They were both from the &quot;Al-Bejat&quot; clan of the &quot;Al-Bu Nasir&quot; tribe, which was descended from &quot;Sayyid&quot; Ahmed &quot;Nasiruddin&quot; bin Hussein, a descendant of Husayn ibn Ali. His father Hussein was from the &quot;Al-Majid&quot; branch of the &quot;Al-Bejat&quot; clan, his mother Subha was granddaughter of Mussallat bin Omar Al-Nasiri, a tribal leader of the &quot;Al-Bu Nasir&quot; tribe and an opponent of the Ottoman rule in Iraq. His &quot;Al-Bejat&quot; clan descended from Omar Bey bin Shabib Al-Nasiri who was appointed as a &quot;Bey&quot; by the ruling Ottomans over the region of Tikrit. The majority of the &quot;Al-Bu Nasir&quot; led a &quot;Bedouin&quot; life in Tikrit, Saddam&#x27;s own father Hussein Al-Majid being a shepherd Bedouin. His Husaynid &quot;Bedouin Al-Bu Nasir&quot; originally been settled in Yemen, migrated to Syria settling in Aleppo and Harran, later settling in Tikrit in Iraq under Ottoman rule. Saddam&#x27;s name means &quot;the fighter who stands steadfast&quot;. His father died before his birth. This made Saddam&#x27;s mother, Subha, so depressed that she unsuccessfully attempted to abort her pregnancy and commit suicide. His mother was saved by a Jewish family. Subha &quot;would have nothing to do with him&quot;, and Saddam was eventually taken in by an uncle. His mother remarried, and Saddam gained three half-brothers through this marriage. His stepfather, Ibrahim al-Hassan, treated Saddam harshly after his return, and (according to a psychological profile created by the CIA) beat him regularly, sometimes to wake him up. At around the age of 10, Saddam fled the family and returned to live in Baghdad with his uncle Khairallah Talfah, who became a fatherly figure to Saddam. Talfah, the father of Saddam&#x27;s future wife, was a devout Sunni Muslim and a veteran of the 1941 Anglo-Iraqi War between Iraqi nationalists and the United Kingdom, which remained a major colonial power in the region. Talfah was appointed the mayor of Baghdad during Saddam&#x27;s time in power, until his notorious corruption compelled Saddam to force him out of office.

Later in his life, relatives from his native city became some of his closest advisors and supporters. Under the guidance of his uncle, he attended a nationalistic high school in Baghdad. After secondary school, Saddam studied at an Iraqi law school for three years, dropping out in 1957 at the age of 20 to join the revolutionary pan-Arab Ba&#x27;ath Party, of which his uncle was a supporter. During this time, Saddam apparently supported himself as a secondary school teacher. Ba&#x27;athist ideology originated in Syria and the Ba&#x27;ath Party had a large following in Syria at the time, but in 1955 there were fewer than 300 Ba&#x27;ath Party members in Iraq, and it is believed that Saddam&#x27;s primary reason for joining the party as opposed to the more established Iraqi nationalist parties was his familial connection to Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr and other leading Ba&#x27;athists through his uncle.

Revolutionary sentiment was characteristic of the era in Iraq and throughout the Middle East. In Iraq, progressives and socialists assailed traditional political elites (colonial-era bureaucrats and landowners, wealthy merchants and tribal chiefs, and monarchists). Moreover, the pan-Arab nationalism of Gamal Abdel Nasser in Egypt profoundly influenced young Ba&#x27;athists like Saddam. The rise of Nasser foreshadowed a wave of revolutions throughout the Middle East in the 1950s and 1960s, with the collapse of the monarchies of Iraq, Egypt, Yemen and Libya. Nasser inspired nationalists throughout the Middle East by fighting the British and the French during the Suez Crisis of 1956, modernizing Egypt, and uniting the Arab world politically. Saddam&#x27;s father-in-law, Khairallah Talfah, was reported to have served five years in prison for his role in fighting against Great Britain in the 1941 Iraqi coup d&#x27;état and Anglo-Iraqi War, and often mentored and told tales of his exploits to the young Saddam.

In 1958, a year after Saddam had joined the Ba&#x27;ath party, army officers led by General Abd al-Karim Qasim overthrew Faisal II of Iraq in the 14 July Revolution.

== Rise to power ==

The Ba&#x27;ath Party was originally represented in Qasim&#x27;s cabinet; however, Qasim—reluctant to join Nasser&#x27;s newly formed union between Egypt and Syria—sided with various groups within Iraq (notably the social democrats and the Iraqi Communist Party) that told him such an action would be dangerous. Instead, Qasim adopted a &quot;wataniyah&quot; policy of &quot;Iraq First&quot;. To strengthen his own position within the government, Qasim also had an alliance with the Iraqi Communist Party (ICP), which was opposed to the notion of pan-Arabism. His policies angered several pan-Arab organisations, including the Ba&#x27;ath Party, which later began plotting to assassinate Qasim at Al-Rashid Street on 7 October 1959 and take power. Saddam was recruited to the assassination conspiracy by its ring-leader, Abdul Karim al-Shaikhly, after one of the would-be assassins left. During the ambush, Saddam (who was only supposed to provide cover) began shooting prematurely, which disorganised the whole operation. Qasim&#x27;s chauffeur was killed and Qasim was hit in the arm and shoulder. The assassins thought they had killed Qasim and quickly retreated to their headquarters, but Qasim survived. Saddam himself is not believed to have received any training outside of Iraq, as he was a late addition to the assassination team.

Richard Sale of &quot;United Press International&quot; (UPI), citing former United States diplomat and intelligence officials, Adel Darwish, and other experts, reported that the unsuccessful assassination attempt on Qasim was a collaboration between the United States Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) and Egyptian intelligence. Pertinent contemporary records relating to CIA operations in Iraq have remained classified or heavily redacted, thus &quot;allow[ing] for plausible deniability.&quot; It is generally accepted that Egypt, in some capacity, was involved in the assassination attempt, and that &quot;[t]he United States was working with Nasser on some level.&quot; Sale and Darwish&#x27;s account has been disputed by historian Bryan R. Gibson who concludes that available U.S. declassified documents show that &quot;while the United States was aware of several plots against Qasim, it had still adhered to [a] nonintervention policy.&quot; On the other hand, historian Kenneth Osgood writes that &quot;the circumstantial evidence is such that the possibility of US–UAR collaboration with Ba&#x27;ath Party activists cannot be ruled out,&quot; concluding that &quot;[w]hatever the validity of [Sale&#x27;s] charges, at the very least currently declassified documents reveal that US officials were actively considering various plots against Qasim and that the CIA was building up assets for covert operations in Iraq.&quot;

At the time of the attack, the Ba&#x27;ath Party had fewer than 1,000 members; however, the failed assassination attempt led to widespread exposure for Saddam and the Ba&#x27;ath within Iraq, where both had previously languished in obscurity, and later became a crucial part of Saddam&#x27;s public image during his tenure as president of Iraq. Kanan Makiya recounts:

The man and the myth merge in this episode. His biography—and Iraqi television, which stages the story ad nauseam—tells of his familiarity with guns from the age of ten; his fearlessness and loyalty to the party during the 1959 operation; his bravery in saving his comrades by commandeering a car at gunpoint; the bullet that was gouged out of his flesh under his direction in hiding; the iron discipline that led him to draw a gun on weaker comrades who would have dropped off a seriously wounded member of the hit team at a hospital; the calculating shrewdness that helped him save himself minutes before the police broke in leaving his wounded comrades behind; and finally the long trek of a wounded man from house to house, city to town, across the desert to refuge in Syria.

Michel Aflaq, the leader of the Ba&#x27;athist movement, organized the expulsion of leading Iraqi Ba&#x27;athist members, such as Fuad al-Rikabi, on the grounds that the party should not have initiated the attempt on Qasim&#x27;s life. At the same time, Aflaq secured seats in the Iraqi Ba&#x27;ath leadership for his supporters, one of them being Saddam. 
The assassins, including Saddam, all eventually escaped to Cairo, Egypt &quot;where they enjoyed Nasser&#x27;s protection for the remainder of Qasim&#x27;s tenure in power.&quot; Saddam initially escaped to Syria and then to Egypt itself in February 1960, and he continued to live there until 1963, graduating from high school in 1961 and unsuccessfully pursuing a law degree at Cairo Law School (1962–1963). It is possible that Saddam visited the U.S. embassy in Cairo during his exile, and some evidence suggests that he was &quot;in frequent contact with US officials and intelligence agents.&quot; A former high-ranking U.S. official told historians Marion Farouk–Sluglett and Peter Sluglett that Iraqi Ba&#x27;athists, including Saddam, &quot;had made contact with the American authorities in the late 1950s and early 1960s.&quot;

Army officers with ties to the Ba&#x27;ath Party overthrew and killed Qasim in the Ramadan Revolution coup of February 1963; long suspected to be supported by the CIA, however, pertinent contemporary documents relating to the CIA&#x27;s operations in Iraq have remained classified by the U.S. government, although the Ba&#x27;athists are documented to have maintained supportive relationships with U.S. officials before, during, and after the coup. Ba&#x27;athist leaders were appointed to the cabinet and Abdul Salam Arif became president. Arif dismissed and arrested the Ba&#x27;athist leaders later that year in the November 1963 Iraqi coup d&#x27;état. Being exiled in Egypt at the time, Saddam played no role in the 1963 coup or the brutal anti-communist purge that followed; although he returned to Iraq after the coup, becoming a key organizer within the Ba&#x27;ath Party&#x27;s civilian wing upon his return. Unlike during the Qasim years, Saddam remained in Iraq following Arif&#x27;s anti-Ba&#x27;athist purge in November 1963, and became involved in planning to assassinate Arif. In marked contrast to Qasim, Saddam knew that he faced no death penalty from Arif&#x27;s government and knowingly accepted the risk of being arrested rather than fleeing to Syria again. Saddam was arrested in October 1964 and served approximately two years in prison before escaping in 1966. In 1966, Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr appointed him Deputy Secretary of the Regional Command. Saddam, who would prove to be a skilled organizer, revitalized the party. He was elected to the Regional Command, as the story goes, with help from Michel Aflaq—the founder of Ba&#x27;athist thought. In September 1966, Saddam initiated an extraordinary challenge to Syrian domination of the Ba&#x27;ath Party in response to the Marxist takeover of the Syrian Ba&#x27;ath earlier that year, resulting in the Party&#x27;s formalized split into two separate factions. Saddam then created a Ba&#x27;athist security service, which he alone controlled.

== Vice Presidency (1968–1979) ==

In July 1968, Saddam participated in a bloodless coup led by Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr that overthrew Abdul Rahman Arif, Salam Arif&#x27;s brother and successor. While Saddam&#x27;s role in the coup was not hugely significant (except in the official account), Saddam planned and carried out the subsequent purge of the non-Ba&#x27;athist faction led by Prime Minister Abdul Razzaq an-Naif, whose support had been essential to the coup&#x27;s success. According to a semi-official biography, Saddam personally led Naif at gunpoint to the plane that escorted him out of Iraq. Arif was given refuge in London and then Istanbul. Al-Bakr was named president and Saddam was named his deputy, and deputy chairman of the Ba&#x27;athist Revolutionary Command Council. According to biographers, Saddam never forgot the tensions within the first Ba&#x27;athist government, which formed the basis for his measures to promote Ba&#x27;ath party unity as well as his resolve to maintain power and programs to ensure social stability. Although Saddam was al-Bakr&#x27;s deputy, he was a strong behind-the-scenes party politician. Al-Bakr was the older and more prestigious of the two, but by 1969 Saddam had become the moving force behind the party.

=== Political program ===
In the late 1960s and early 1970s, as vice chairman of the Revolutionary Command Council, formally al-Bakr&#x27;s second-in-command, Saddam built a reputation as a progressive, effective politician. At this time, Saddam moved up the ranks in the new government by aiding attempts to strengthen and unify the Ba&#x27;ath party and taking a leading role in addressing the country&#x27;s major domestic problems and expanding the party&#x27;s following.

Saddam actively fostered the modernization of the Iraqi economy and created a strong security apparatus to prevent coups within the power structure and insurrections apart from it. Ever concerned with broadening his base of support among the diverse elements of Iraqi society and mobilizing mass support, he closely followed the administration of state welfare and development programs.

At the center of this strategy was Iraq&#x27;s oil. On 1 June 1972, Saddam oversaw the seizure of international oil interests, which, at the time, dominated the country&#x27;s oil sector. A year later, world oil prices rose dramatically as a result of the 1973 energy crisis, and skyrocketing revenues enabled Saddam to expand his agenda.

==== Economic Reforms ====
With the help of increasing oil revenues, Saddam diversified the largely oil-based Iraqi economy. Saddam implemented a national infrastructure campaign that made great progress in building roads, promoting mining, and developing other industries. The campaign helped Iraq&#x27;s energy industries. Electricity was brought to nearly every city in Iraq, and many outlying areas. Before the 1970s, most of Iraq&#x27;s people lived in the countryside and roughly two-thirds were peasants. This number would decrease quickly during the 1970s as global oil prices helped revenues to rise from less than a half billion dollars to tens of billions of dollars and the country invested into industrial expansion. He nationalized independent banks, eventually leaving the banking system insolvent due to inflation and bad loans.

Saddam focused on fostering loyalty to the Ba&#x27;athists in the rural areas. After nationalizing foreign oil interests, Saddam supervised the modernization of the countryside, mechanizing agriculture on a large scale, and distributing land to peasant farmers. The Ba&#x27;athists established farm cooperatives and the government also doubled expenditures for agricultural development in 1974–1975. Saddam&#x27;s welfare programs were part of a combination of &quot;carrot and stick&quot; tactics to enhance support for Saddam. The state-owned banks were put under his thumb. Lending was based on cronyism.

Saddam also pursued to beautify the cities of Iraq. Many monuments were constructed in Baghdad, and the city&#x27;s Airport was inaugurated in 1982, bearing his name &quot;Saddam International Airport&quot;. He also proposed the Baghdad Metro project in 1980, though it did not ultimately come to fruition, due to troubles concerning the Iran-Iraq War. Throughout the 24 years of his presidency, Saddam built more than 100 palaces across the country.

By the late 1970s, Iraq had experienced significant economic growth, with a budget reserve surpassing US$35 billion. The value of 1 Iraqi dinar was worth more than 3 dollars, making it one of the most notable economic expansions in the region. Saddam Hussein&#x27;s regime aimed to diversify the Iraqi economy beyond oil. The government invested in various industries, including petrochemicals, fertilizer production, and textile manufacturing, to reduce dependence on oil revenues and promote economic self-sufficiency.

The oil revenue benefited Saddam politically. According to &quot;The Economist&quot;, &quot;Much as Adolf Hitler won early praise for galvanizing German industry, ending mass unemployment and building autobahns, Saddam earned admiration abroad for his deeds. He had a good instinct for what the &quot;Arab street&quot; demanded, following the decline in Egyptian leadership brought about by the trauma of Israel&#x27;s six-day victory in the 1967 war, the death of the pan-Arabist hero, Gamal Abdul Nasser, in 1970, and the &quot;traitorous&quot; drive by his successor, Anwar Sadat, to sue for peace with the Jewish state. Saddam&#x27;s self-aggrandizing propaganda, with himself posing as the defender of Arabism against Zionist or Persian intruders, was heavy-handed, but consistent as a drumbeat. It helped, of course, that his mukhabarat (secret police) put dozens of Arab news editors, writers and artists on the payroll.&quot;

==== Socio-Economic Reforms ====
Under his tenure, Iraq was providing unprecedented social services among Middle Eastern countries. Saddam established and controlled the &quot;National Campaign for the Eradication of Illiteracy&quot; and the campaign for &quot;Compulsory Free Education in Iraq&quot;. Largely under his auspices, the government established universal free schooling up to the highest education levels; hundreds of thousands learned to read in the years following the initiation of the program, with punishments for not attending consisting of heavy fines, and even jail time. By 1979 alone, over 2 million Iraqi adults were studying in more than 28,735 literacy schools, with over 75,000 teachers.

He also introduced social security programs, with the notable parts of the program consisting of disability benefits, with disabled people in Iraq becoming eligible for financial assistance. It also introduced healthcare coverage, ensuring Iraqi citizens had access to healthcare and medication when needed. The government supported families of soldiers and gave subsidies to farmers. Iraq created one of the most modernized public health systems in the Middle East. These efforts at building welfare in Iraq earned Saddam an award from the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO).

Saddam also took steps to promote women&#x27;s rights within Iraq. By the late 1970s, women in Iraq held significant roles in society, representing 46% of all teachers, 29% of all doctors, 46% of all dentists and 70% of all pharmacists. These advancements signaled progress in women&#x27;s participation in various professional fields. Women also saw drastic increase in rights in other-aspects of life, with women being given equal-rights in marriage, divorce, inheritance, and custody. Women in Iraq also had the ability to pass their citizenship down to their children even if they married a non-Iraqi. Women&#x27;s education no longer was a luxury, with women having the same opportunities as men in higher education.

====Ethnicity and religion====
With a Muslim majority, Iraq consists of a multi-ethnic, multi-religious and multi-sectarian population. After the Ba&#x27;athists took power in 1968, Saddam focused on attaining stability in a nation riddled with profound tensions. Long before him, Iraq had been split along social, ethnic, religious, and economic fault lines: Sunni versus Shi&#x27;ite, Arab versus Kurd, tribal chief versus urban merchant, nomad versus peasant and Jews versus Muslims. The desire for stable rule in a country rife with factionalism led Saddam to pursue both massive repression and the improvement of living standards. During his rule, numerous religious and ethnic groups existed in the country.

Following the end of the First Iraqi–Kurdish War in November 1970, Saddam signed a peace treaty with Mustafa Barzani, which agreement granted autonomy to the Kurds. They were now allowed to speak Kurdish language in schools, on television, and in newspapers, with textbooks being translated for the Kurdish regions. Iraqi Kurds were also able to elect a Kurdish representative to Baghdad with the KDP being legitimized as a legal, progressive party in Iraq. However the failure of the agreement and Arabization program in oil-rich regions around Kirkuk and Khanaqin in Northern Iraq, led to the Second Iraqi–Kurdish War. During this time, Feyil Kurds were systemically persecuted.

During his rule, Iraq retained a substantial Jewish community, around 15,000. During the early years of the Ba&#x27;ath rule, Jews were initially oppressed under the government. Saddam was given the charge of publicly hanging 13 men, including many Jews. They were accused by the government of spying for Israel. However, according to several reports, this was lesser than the harsh treatment by previous regimes. Later government abolished its repressive policies on Jews. In November 1975, the government issued a decree inviting Jews back to Iraq, who were expelled. The Israeli government panned the decree by calling it political propaganda. Only a few Jewish families returned to Iraq. Treatment later improved, and the Jews were protected and treated well by Saddam.. He reportedly helped an estimated 150 remaining Jews to leave the country. 

==== Paramilitary and police organizations ====


Iraqi society fissures along lines of language, religion and ethnicity. The Ba&#x27;ath Party, secular by nature, adopted Pan-Arab ideologies which in turn were problematic for significant parts of the population. Following the Iranian Revolution of 1979, Iraq faced the prospect of régime change from two Shi&#x27;ite factions (Dawa and SCIRI) which aspired to model Iraq on its neighbour Iran as a Shia theocracy. A separate threat to Iraq came from parts of the ethnic Kurdish population of northern Iraq which opposed being part of an Iraqi state and favored independence (an ongoing ideology which had preceded Ba&#x27;ath Party rule). To alleviate the threat of revolution, Saddam afforded certain benefits to the potentially hostile population. Membership in the Ba&#x27;ath Party remained open to all Iraqi citizens regardless of background, and repressive measures were taken against its opponents.

The major instruments for accomplishing this control were the paramilitary and police organizations. Beginning in 1974, Taha Yassin Ramadan (himself a Kurdish Ba&#x27;athist), a close associate of Saddam, commanded the People&#x27;s Army, which had responsibility for internal security. As the Ba&#x27;ath Party&#x27;s paramilitary, the People&#x27;s Army acted as a counterweight against any coup attempts by the regular armed forces. In addition to the People&#x27;s Army, the Department of General Intelligence was the most notorious arm of the state-security system, feared for its use of torture and assassination. Barzan Ibrahim al-Tikriti, Saddam&#x27;s younger half-brother, commanded Mukhabarat. Foreign observers believed that from 1982 this department operated both at home and abroad in its mission to seek out and eliminate Saddam&#x27;s perceived opponents.

Saddam was notable for using terror against his own people. &quot;The Economist&quot; described Saddam as &quot;one of the last of the 20th century&#x27;s great dictators, but not the least in terms of egotism, or cruelty, or morbid will to power.&quot; Saddam&#x27;s regime brought about the deaths of at least 250,000 Iraqis and committed war crimes in Iran, Kuwait, and Saudi Arabia. Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International issued regular reports of widespread imprisonment and torture. Conversely, Saddam used Iraq&#x27;s oil wealth to develop an extensive patronage system for the regime&#x27;s supporters.

Although Saddam is often described as a totalitarian leader, Joseph Sassoon notes that there are important differences between Saddam&#x27;s repression and the totalitarianism practiced by Adolf Hitler and Joseph Stalin, particularly with regard to freedom of movement and freedom of religion.

=== Foreign relations ===
==== Foreign affairs ====
In foreign affairs, Saddam sought to have Iraq play a leading role in the Middle East.

In 1972, Saddam signed a 15-year Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation with the Soviet Union. Arms were sent along with several thousand advisers. According to historian Charles R. H. Tripp, the treaty upset &quot;the US-sponsored security system established as part of the Cold War in the Middle East. It appeared that any enemy of the Baghdad regime was a potential ally of the United States.&quot; In response, the US covertly financed Kurdish rebels led by Mustafa Barzani during the Second Iraqi–Kurdish War; the Kurds were defeated in 1975, leading to the forcible relocation of hundreds of thousands of Kurdish civilians. A 1978 crackdown on Iraqi Communists and a shift of trade toward the West strained Iraqi relations with the Soviet Union; Iraq then took on a more Western orientation until the Gulf War in 1991. 

Saddam&#x27;s rare trips abroad included two Western countries. The first visit took place in December 1974, when the Caudillo of Spain, Francisco Franco, invited him to Madrid and he visited Granada, Córdoba and Toledo. In September 1975 he met with Prime Minister Jacques Chirac in Paris, France. After the oil crisis of 1973, France had changed to a more pro-Arab policy and was accordingly rewarded by Saddam with closer ties. Saddam&#x27;s 1975 visit further cemented close ties with French business and ruling political circles.Iraq&#x27;s relations with the Arab world have been extremely varied. Relations between Iraq and Egypt violently ruptured in 1977, when the two nations broke relations with each other following Iraq&#x27;s criticism of Egyptian President Anwar Sadat&#x27;s peace initiatives with Israel. In 1978, Baghdad hosted an Arab League summit that condemned and ostracized Egypt for accepting the Camp David Accords. Saddam led Arab opposition to the Camp David Accords.

==== Peace treaty with Iran ====

Iran and Iraq had been engaged in a long-standing territorial dispute over the Shatt al-Arab waterway, which serves as the border between the two countries. Iran had backed Kurdish separatists in northern Iraq. A peace treaty, which aimed to address the Shatt al-Arab dispute, was signed in 1975. The 1975 Algiers Agreement, also known as the Algiers Accord, was a significant diplomatic agreement signed between Iran and Iraq on 6 March 1975, to settle border disputes and improve bilateral relations. It was mediated by the then president of Algeria, Houari Boumediene. Thus Algeria played a crucial role in mediating the negotiations between Iran and Iraq, with Boumediene acting as the chief mediator. Under the accord, Iraq was granted sovereignty over the eastern bank of the waterway, while Iran retained control over the western bank. The agreement also allowed for joint navigation and other provisions. 

The agreement was based on the principles of territorial integrity, respect for sovereignty, non-interference in internal affairs, and the peaceful resolution of disputes. The agreement established a new border line along the Shatt al-Arab, dividing the waterway equally between Iran and Iraq up to the midpoint. Iran made significant concessions in the agreement, including relinquishing its claims on the eastern bank of the Shatt al-Arab, which had been under Iranian control. They also pledged to withdraw support for the Kurds. Saddam aimed to secure Iraq&#x27;s territorial claims, particularly regarding the Shatt al-Arab waterway, which had been a longstanding source of contention between Iran and Iraq.

Both parties recognized each other&#x27;s sovereignty and territorial integrity, affirming the principle of non-aggression. The agreement called for the restoration of full diplomatic relations between Iran and Iraq, including the exchange of ambassadors. The agreement emphasized the importance of economic cooperation between the two countries, particularly in areas such as trade, transport, and joint development projects. The signing of the Algiers Agreement occurred during a period of relative stability in Iraq, with Saddam gradually consolidating power within the ruling Ba&#x27;ath Party. Saddam played a pivotal role in the negotiations leading up to the Algiers Agreement, representing Iraq&#x27;s interests. Saddam&#x27;s growing influence within the government allowed him to shape Iraq&#x27;s approach and stance during the negotiation process. 

Following the agreement, Iraq and Iran restored full diplomatic relations and exchanged ambassadors, representing a significant diplomatic breakthrough. The Shah withdrew support of the Kurds, who were promptly defeated by the Iraqis. The agreement emphasized the importance of economic cooperation between Iraq and Iran, particularly in areas like trade and joint development projects. This agreement, while ultimately unable to prevent future hostilities, remained a notable diplomatic achievement for Iraq during Saddam&#x27;s early political career.

=== Succession ===

In 1976, Saddam rose to the position of general in the Iraqi armed forces, and rapidly became the strongman of the government. As the ailing, elderly al-Bakr became unable to execute his duties, Saddam took on an increasingly prominent role as the face of the government both internally and externally.

He soon became the architect of Iraq&#x27;s foreign policy and represented the nation in all diplomatic situations. He was the &quot;de facto&quot; leader of Iraq some years before he formally came to power in 1979. He slowly began to consolidate his power over Iraq&#x27;s government and the Ba&#x27;ath party. Relationships with fellow party members were carefully cultivated, and Saddam soon accumulated a powerful circle of support within the party.

In 1979, al-Bakr started to make treaties with Syria, also under Ba&#x27;athist leadership, that would lead to unification between the two countries. Syrian President Hafez al-Assad would become deputy leader in a union, and this would drive Saddam to obscurity. Saddam acted to secure his grip on power. He forced the ailing al-Bakr to resign on 16 July 1979, and formally assumed the presidency.

== Presidency (1979–2003) ==

=== Domestic policies ===

==== Religion and sectarianism ====
Saddam, contrary to popular belief, was not inherently sectarian. While he did place his close relatives in key security and military positions, he also promoted individuals from other communities and minorities to the highest levels of power in Iraq. His primary criterion for these appointments was unwavering loyalty to him and his regime. To gain support from different communities, Saddam made generous contribution and had personal relations with other religious groups. It can be seen as a result of Saddam&#x27;s overthrow, religious minorities of Iraq have faced significant hardships.
Before 2003, more than 1.2 million Christians lived in Iraq. Tariq Aziz, an ethnic Iraqi Assyrian and a Chaldean Catholic, was selected by Saddam to serve as Iraq&#x27;s Deputy Prime Minister from 1979 to 2003 and Foreign Minister from 1983 to 1991. A close advisor to him, Aziz was also appointed as a member of the Revolutionary Command Council and the Regional Command of the Iraqi Branch of the Ba&#x27;ath Party. Georges Sada, another Christian was a top advisor to Saddam. Michel Aflaq, the founder of Ba&#x27;athism, was also a Christian. Cardinal Fernando Filoni, who was Vatican&#x27;s ambassador to Iraq, stated that under his regime, Christians were free to practice their faith in the majority-Muslim country.

Under Saddam, Mandaeans were given state protection. As a sign of respect, the Mandaean Book of John&#x27;s first copy translation into Arabic was given to Saddam. After this he vowed to construct temples for the Mandaeans, with quoting, &quot;Iraqis have religious freedom, whether they are Muslims, Christians or Sabaeans&quot;. A large number of Mandeans also worked in numerous positions, such as poet Abdul Razzaq, the cultural advisor to the Ministry of Culture and Information and Lamia Abbas, a cultural attaché and deputy permanent representative of Iraq to UNESCO in Paris for the period 1973-1975. They were some of the best goldsmiths and jewelers in Iraq, with Saddam&#x27;s personal jeweler being of Mandaean background. However, after his downfall, Mandaeans faced severe persecution, and constant kidnappings. They often expressed that they were better under Saddam&#x27;s rule, and praise him for the protection they received.

During Iran–Iraq War, Saddam sought to gain support from the Shi&#x27;ite community. He adopted new policies that improved the living standards of Shi&#x27;as. A large number of Shi&#x27;a were invited to the ruling party. As a result, Shi&#x27;as began to play an important role in the society of Iraq. Shi&#x27;as were majority in the party governing body and 40% of the National Assembly. Majority of the Iraqi Armed Forces were Shi&#x27;a, which comprised 80%. Some of them held top key positions, such as Abdul Ghani al-Asadi, Talib Shaghati, Abu Tahsin al-Salihi and Abboud Qanbar. Saddam also appointed some of the Shi&#x27;as on ministerial positions, such as Muhammad Saeed al-Sahhaf and Sadun Hammadi, with Hammadi being regarded as one of the respected and educated political figures.

The Jews in Iraq were granted protection by Saddam. In the government and military, some prominent civil officers, doctors, and engineers were Jews, such as Shaul Sassoon and Dr. Eliyahu. There was a Jewish representative in his government. A Jewish chemist, from Basra, Ibrahim Hesqel was sent by Saddam on a trade mission to China in 1988. Saddam helped in the restoration of Meir Taweig Synagogue and construction a new cemetery for Jews in Baghdad. In 1998, on the day of Jewish festival of Sukkot, a Palestinian entered the Baghdad synagogue and shot four people to death, including two Jews. The attacker was arrested and executed in 1999. A cabinet meeting chaired by Saddam condemned the attack. He also said that: &quot;Anyone who hurt the Jews in Baghdad would pay a heavy price&quot;. According to the chairman of the Institute for Babylonian Jewish Heritage Mordechai Ben-Porat, &quot;Saddam is fond of the remaining of Jews in his country&quot;. According to Baghdad synagogue caretaker, “Saddam has given Jews liberty to do business again, to become doctors, engineers. There is no problem for Jews in Iraq,”

==== Ethnic rights and autonomy ====
Saddam&#x27;s position on Kurdish politics is debated, with events such as the Anfal Campaign leading many critics to denounce Saddam. Despite this, Saddam&#x27;s government had a higher tolerance of Iraqi Kurds than in countries such as Syria and Turkey, with partial autonomy being granted to them and Kurdish being recognized as an official language that was freely spoken.

As a result of the 1970 agreement that came out of the First Iraqi–Kurdish War, Saddam granted autonomy to Kurds to an extent. The Kurds were allowed to speak Kurdish in schools, on television, and in newspapers, with textbooks being translated for the Kurdish regions. Kurds in Iraq were able to elect a Kurdish representative to Baghdad with the KDP being legitimized as a legal, progressive party in Iraq. Two Kurdish vice-presidents, Taha Yassin Ramadan and Taha Muhie-eldin Marouf were appointed in Saddam&#x27;s government as a result of the agreements. In Iraq, especially compared to other middle-eastern countries such as Iran, Turkey, and Syria, Iraqi Kurds were treated well under Saddam when compared to their conditions in the neighboring countries, with the Kurdish language being tolerated under Saddam&#x27;s regime in education, and media, and spoken as an official language.Saddam also had multiple Kurdish ministers and generals, with the highest ranking one being Taha Yassin Ramadan, an Iraqi Kurd —was appointed by Saddam, largely due to his loyalty, as one of Iraq&#x27;s three Vice Presidents. He was also made Deputy Secretary of the Regional Command of the Iraqi Branch of the Ba&#x27;ath Party and commander of the People&#x27;s Army. Taha Muhie-eldin Marouf, another Kurd, was one of the three vice presidents from 1974 to 2003 and served as ambassador to Italy, Malta, and Albania. Saddam himself personally enjoyed Kurdish culture, often wearing traditional Kurdish clothing in state visits to northern Iraq. He expressed personal admiration for the Kurdish people.

Iraqi Christians are predominantly native Assyrians, followed by Armenians and Arabs. In 1972, the government issued a decree, recognizing the cultural rights of Assyrian people in Iraq. However, the decree did not take in-effect. Though Assyrians had cultural centers, programs on televisions and magazines. Despite imposition of Arab nationalism, they often enjoyed broad religious rights under Saddam. Tariq Aziz and Georges Sada were ethnically Assyrians. Armenians in Iraq were fairly treated by Saddam. As a result of his modernization efforts, the Armenian community flourished and prospered. Before 2003, there were 100,000 Armenians in Iraq. Saddam&#x27;s nanny was an Armenian, along with one of his body guards, his jeweler, tailor, and housestaff. During the war with Iran, when the Kurds fled to avoid military service, Armenians went to fight for Iraq. Many Armenians also fought for Saddam during the Gulf War, where three of them were killed.

Despite tense relations, Saddam provided the Turkmen community with opportunities to contribute to Iraq. Multiple Turkmen were in the army. Some of them hold positions of generals and commanders, such as Fadel Ahmed Abdullah al-Hiyali (Abu Muslim al-Turkmani) and Abd al-Rahman Mustafa al-Qaduli (Abu Ali al-Anbari). Later, many of them joined Islamic State. Rifat Chadirji, an ethnic Turkmen and architect by profession, was selected by Saddam to oversee the preparations for an international conference to be held in Baghdad in 1983 and to assist with general plans to give Baghdad a facelift. He was Saddam&#x27;s architectural consultant for Baghdad City Planning. Chadirji became Councillor to the Mayor, a role that found him overseeing all the reconstruction projects in Baghdad. Chadirji was often referred to as the father of modern Iraqi architecture.

=== 1979 Ba&#x27;ath Party Purge ===
Saddam convened an assembly of Ba&#x27;ath party leaders on 22 July 1979. During the assembly, which he ordered videotaped, Saddam claimed to have found a fifth column within the Ba&#x27;ath Party and directed Muhyi Abdul-Hussein to read out a confession and the names of 68 alleged co-conspirators. These members were labelled &quot;disloyal&quot; and were removed from the room one by one and taken into custody. After the list was read, Saddam congratulated those still seated in the room for their past and future loyalty. The 68 people arrested at the meeting were subsequently tried together and found guilty of treason; 22 were sentenced to execution. Other high-ranking members of the party formed the firing squad.

=== Iran–Iraq War: 1980–1988 ===

In early 1979, Iran&#x27;s Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi&#x27;s Pahlavi dynasty were overthrown by the Islamic Revolution, thus giving way to an Islamic republic led by Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. The influence of revolutionary Shi&#x27;ite Islam grew apace in the region, particularly in countries with large Shi&#x27;ite populations, especially Iraq. Saddam feared that radical Islamic ideas—hostile to his secular rule—were rapidly spreading inside his country among the majority Shi&#x27;ite population. Despite Saddam&#x27;s fears of massive unrest, Iran&#x27;s attempts to export its Islamic Revolution were largely unsuccessful in rallying support from Shi&#x27;ites in Iraq and the Gulf states. Most Iraqi Shi&#x27;ites, who comprised the majority of the Iraqi Armed Forces, chose their own country over their Shi&#x27;ite Iranian coreligionists during the war that ensued. There had also been bitter enmity between Saddam and Khomeini since the 1970s. Khomeini, having been exiled from Iran in 1964, took up residence in Iraq, at the Shi&#x27;ite holy city of Najaf. There he involved himself with Iraqi Shi&#x27;ites and developed a strong religious and political following against the Iranian Government, which Saddam tolerated. When Khomeini began to urge the Shi&#x27;ites there to overthrow Saddam and under pressure from the Shah, who had agreed to a rapprochement between Iraq and Iran in 1975, Saddam agreed to expel Khomeini in 1978 to France. Here, Khomeini gained media connections and collaborated with a much larger Iranian community, to his advantage. After Khomeini gained power, skirmishes between Iraq and revolutionary Iran occurred for ten months over the sovereignty of the disputed Shatt al-Arab waterway, which divides the two countries. During this period, Saddam publicly maintained that it was in Iraq&#x27;s interest not to engage with Iran, and that it was in the interests of both nations to maintain peaceful relations.

In the coming months before the official start of the Iran-Iraq war, Saddam Hussein had on multiple occasions attempted to convey his support of Khomeini, which Khomeini responded with by calling for Iraqi Shias to uprise and overthrow the &quot;Infidels&quot;. Iranian forces also engaged in countless skirmishes on the Iraqi border, as well as the shelling of the cities Khanaqin and Mendeli on 4 September.

After Iranian aggression and ideological sabre-rattling, Iraq invaded Iran on 22 September 1980, first launching airstrikes on numerous targets in Iran, including the Mehrabad Airport of Tehran, before occupying the oil-rich Iranian province of Khuzestan, which also has a sizable Arab minority. The invasion was initially successful, as Iraq captured more than 25,900 km2 of Iranian territory by 5 December 1980. With the support of other Arab states, the United States, and Europe, and heavily financed by the Arab states of the Persian Gulf, Saddam Hussein had become &quot;the defender of the Arab world&quot; against a revolutionary, fundamentalist and Shia Islamist Iran. The only exception was the Soviet Union, which initially refused to supply Iraq on the basis of neutrality in the conflict, although in his memoirs, Mikhail Gorbachev claimed that Leonid Brezhnev refused to aid Saddam over infuriation of Saddam&#x27;s treatment of Iraqi communists. Consequently, many viewed Iraq as &quot;an agent of the civilized world.&quot; The blatant disregard of international law and violations of international borders were ignored. Instead Iraq received economic and military support from its allies, who overlooked Saddam&#x27;s use of chemical warfare against the Kurds and the Iranians, in addition to Iraq&#x27;s efforts to develop nuclear weapons.

In the first days of the war, there was heavy ground fighting around strategic ports as Iraq launched an attack on Khuzestan. After making some initial gains, Iraq&#x27;s troops began to suffer losses from human wave attacks by Iran. Meanwhile, Saddam&#x27;s efforts to develop nuclear weapons faced a setback when Iraq&#x27;s nuclear reactor was destroyed on 7 June 1981 by an Israeli air strike. By 1982, Iraq was on the defensive and looking for ways to end the war. Middle East special envoy Donald Rumsfeld met Saddam Hussein on 19–20 December 1983. Iraq quickly found itself bogged down in one of the longest and most destructive wars of attrition of the 20th century. During the war, Iraq used chemical weapons against Iranian forces fighting on the southern front and Kurdish separatists who were attempting to open up a northern front in Iraq with the help of Iran. Iraqi Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz later acknowledged Iraq&#x27;s use of chemical weapons against Iran, but said that Iran had used them against Iraq first. These chemical weapons were developed by Iraq from materials and technology supplied primarily by West German companies as well as using dual-use technology imported following the Reagan administration&#x27;s lifting of export restrictions. The United States government also supplied Iraq with &quot;satellite photos showing Iranian deployments.&quot; This satellite imagery may have played a crucial role in blocking the Iranian invasion of Iraq in 1982. However, Saddam&#x27;s government later blamed the Iraqi defeat in the First Battle of al-Faw in February 1986 on &quot;misinformation from the U.S.&quot;

In a US bid to open full diplomatic relations with Iraq, the country was removed from the US list of State Sponsors of Terrorism in February 1982. Ostensibly, this was because of improvement in the regime&#x27;s record, although former US Assistant Secretary of Defense Noel Koch later stated, &quot;No one had any doubts about [the Iraqis&#x27;] continued involvement in terrorism ... The real reason was to help them succeed in the war against Iran.&quot; The Soviet Union, France, and China together accounted for over 90% of the value of Iraq&#x27;s arms imports between 1980 and 1988. While the United States supplied Iraq with arms, dual-use technology and economic aid, it was also involved in a covert and illegal arms deal, providing sanctioned Iran with weaponry. This political scandal became known as the Iran–Contra affair. Saddam reached out to other Arab governments for cash and political support during the war, particularly after Iraq&#x27;s oil industry severely suffered at the hands of the Iranian navy in the Persian Gulf. Iraq successfully gained some military and financial aid, as well as diplomatic and moral support, from the Soviet Union, China, France, and the United States, which together feared the prospects of the expansion of revolutionary Iran&#x27;s influence in the region.

The Iranians, demanding that the international community should force Iraq to pay war reparations to Iran, refused any suggestions for a cease-fire. Despite several calls for a ceasefire by the United Nations Security Council, hostilities continued until 20 August 1988. The bloody eight-year war ended in a stalemate. Encyclopædia Britannica states: &quot;Estimates of total casualties range from 1,000,000 to twice that number. The number killed on both sides was perhaps 500,000, with Iran suffering the greatest losses.&quot; Neither side had achieved what they had originally desired and the borders were left nearly unchanged. The southern, oil rich and prosperous Khuzestan and Basra area (the main focus of the war, and the primary source of their economies) were almost completely destroyed and were left at the pre-1979 border, while Iran managed to make some small gains on its borders in the Northern Kurdish area. Both economies, previously healthy and expanding, were left in ruins. Saddam borrowed tens of billions of dollars from other Arab states and a few billions from elsewhere during the 1980s to fight Iran, mainly to prevent the expansion of Shi&#x27;a radicalism. This backfired on Iraq and the Arab states, for Khomeini was widely perceived as a hero for managing to defend Iran and maintain the war with little foreign support against the heavily backed Iraq and only managed to boost Islamic radicalism not only within the Arab states, but within Iraq itself, creating new tensions between the Sunni Ba&#x27;ath Party and the majority Shi&#x27;a population. Faced with rebuilding Iraq&#x27;s infrastructure and internal resistance, Saddam desperately re-sought cash, this time for postwar reconstruction.

=== Anfal campaign: 1986–1989 ===
The Anfal campaign was a genocidal campaign that took place during the Iran–Iraq War against the Kurdish people (and many others) in Kurdish regions of Iraq led by the government of Saddam Hussein and headed by Ali Hassan al-Majid. The campaign takes its name from Qur&#x27;anic chapter 8 (&quot;al-ʾanfāl&quot;), which was used as a code name by the former Iraqi Ba&#x27;athist administration for a series of attacks against the &quot;peshmerga&quot; rebels and the mostly Kurdish civilian population of rural Northern Iraq, conducted between 1986 and 1989 culminating in 1988. This campaign also targeted Shabaks and Yazidis, Assyrians, Turkoman people and many villages belonging to these ethnic groups were also destroyed. Human Rights Watch estimates that between 50,000 and 100,000 people were killed. Some Kurdish sources put the number higher, estimating that 182,000 Kurds were killed.

On 16 March 1988, the Kurdish town of Halabja was attacked with a mix of mustard gas and nerve agents, killing between 3,200 and 5,000 people, and injuring 7,000 to 10,000 more, mostly civilians. The attack occurred in conjunction with the Anfal campaign designed to reassert central control of the mostly Kurdish population of areas of northern Iraq and defeat the Kurdish peshmerga rebel forces. Following the incident, The U.S. State Department took the official position that Iran was partly to blame for the Halabja massacre. A study by the Defense Intelligence Agency held Iran responsible for the attack. This assessment was subsequently used by the Central Intelligence Agency for much of the early 1990s. Despite this, few observers today doubt that it was Iraq that executed the Halabja massacre and believe Iran was behind the attacks.

=== Tensions with Kuwait: 1988–1990 ===
The end of the war with Iran served to deepen latent tensions between Iraq and its wealthy neighbor Kuwait. Saddam urged the Kuwaitis to waive the Iraqi debt accumulated in the war, some $30 billion, but they refused. Saddam pushed oil-exporting countries to raise oil prices by cutting back production; Kuwait refused, then led the opposition in OPEC to the cuts that Saddam had requested. Kuwait was pumping large amounts of oil, and thus keeping prices low, when Iraq needed to sell high-priced oil from its wells to pay off its huge debt.

Saddam had consistently argued that Kuwait had historically been an integral part of Iraq, and had only come into being as a result of interference from the British government; echoing a belief that Iraqi nationalists had supported for the past fifty years. This belief was one of the few articles of faith uniting the political scene in a nation rife with sharp social, ethnic, religious, and ideological divides. The extent of Kuwaiti oil reserves also intensified tensions in the region. The oil reserves of Kuwait (with a population of 2 million next to Iraq&#x27;s 25) were roughly equal to those of Iraq. Taken together, Iraq and Kuwait sat on top of some 20 percent of the world&#x27;s known oil reserves; Saudi Arabia held another 25 percent. Saddam still had an experienced and well-equipped army, which he used to influence regional affairs. He later ordered troops to the Iraq–Kuwait border.

As Iraq–Kuwait relations rapidly deteriorated, Saddam was receiving conflicting information about how the US would respond to the prospects of an invasion. For one, Washington had been taking measures to cultivate a constructive relationship with Iraq for roughly a decade. The Reagan administration gave Iraq roughly $4 billion in agricultural credits to bolster it against Iran. Saddam&#x27;s Iraq became &quot;the third-largest recipient of US assistance.&quot;

Reacting to Western criticism in April 1990, Saddam threatened to destroy half of Israel with chemical weapons if it moved against Iraq. In May 1990 he criticized US support for Israel warning that &quot;the US cannot maintain such a policy while professing friendship towards the Arabs.&quot; In July 1990 he threatened force against Kuwait and the UAE saying &quot;The policies of some Arab rulers are American ... They are inspired by America to undermine Arab interests and security.&quot; The US sent warplanes and combat ships to the Persian Gulf in response to these threats.
The US ambassador to Iraq, April Glaspie, met with Saddam in an emergency meeting on 25 July 1990, where the Iraqi leader attacked American policy with regards to Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates (UAE):

Glaspie replied:

Saddam stated that he would attempt last-ditch negotiations with the Kuwaitis but Iraq &quot;would not accept death.&quot; US officials attempted to maintain a conciliatory line with Iraq, indicating that while George H. W. Bush and James Baker did not want force used, they would not take any position on the Iraq–Kuwait boundary dispute and did not want to become involved. Later, Iraq and Kuwait met for a final negotiation session, which failed. Saddam then sent his troops into Kuwait. As tensions between Washington and Saddam began to escalate, the Soviet Union, under Mikhail Gorbachev, strengthened its military relationship with the Iraqi leader, providing him military advisers, arms and aid.

=== Gulf War: 1990–1991 ===

On 2 August 1990, Saddam invaded Kuwait, initially claiming assistance to &quot;Kuwaiti revolutionaries&quot;, thus sparking an international crisis. On 4 August an Iraqi-backed &quot;Provisional Government of Free Kuwait&quot; was proclaimed, but a total lack of legitimacy and support for it led to an 8 August announcement of a &quot;merger&quot; of the two countries. On 28 August Kuwait formally became the 19th Governorate of Iraq. Just two years after the 1988 Iraq and Iran truce, &quot;Saddam did what his Gulf patrons had earlier paid him to prevent.&quot; Having removed the threat of Iranian fundamentalism he &quot;overran Kuwait and confronted his Gulf neighbors in the name of Arab nationalism and Islam.&quot; Saddam justified the invasion of Kuwait in 1990 by claiming that Kuwait had always been an integral part of Iraq and only became an independent nation due to the interference of the British Empire.

When later asked why he invaded Kuwait, Saddam first claimed that it was because Kuwait was rightfully Iraq&#x27;s 19th province and then said &quot;When I get something into my head I act. That&#x27;s just the way I am.&quot; Saddam Hussein could pursue such military aggression with a &quot;military machine paid for in large part by the tens of billions of dollars Kuwait and the Gulf states had poured into Iraq and the weapons and technology provided by the Soviet Union, Germany, and France.&quot; It was revealed during his 2003–2004 interrogation that in addition to economic disputes, an insulting exchange between the Kuwaiti emir Al Sabah and the Iraqi foreign minister – during which Saddam claimed that the emir stated his intention to turn &quot;every Iraqi woman into a $10 prostitute&quot; by ruining Iraq financially – was a decisive factor in triggering the Iraqi invasion. Shortly before he invaded Kuwait, he shipped 100 new Mercedes 200 Series cars to top editors in Egypt and Jordan. Two days before the first attacks, Saddam reportedly offered Egypt&#x27;s Hosni Mubarak 50 million dollars in cash, &quot;ostensibly for grain.&quot;

George H. W. Bush responded cautiously for the first several days. On one hand, Kuwait, prior to this point, had been a virulent enemy of Israel and was the Persian Gulf monarchy that had the most friendly relations with the Soviets. On the other hand, Washington foreign policymakers, along with Middle East experts, military critics, and firms heavily invested in the region, were extremely concerned with stability in this region. The invasion immediately triggered fears that the world&#x27;s price of oil, and therefore control of the world economy, was at stake. Britain profited heavily from billions of dollars of Kuwaiti investments and bank deposits. Bush was perhaps swayed while meeting with British prime minister Margaret Thatcher, who happened to be in the US at the time.

Cooperation between the United States and the Soviet Union made possible the passage of resolutions in the United Nations Security Council giving Iraq a deadline to leave Kuwait and approving the use of force if Saddam did not comply with the timetable. The United States officials feared Iraqi retaliation against oil-rich Saudi Arabia, since the 1940s a close ally of Washington, for the Saudis&#x27; opposition to the invasion of Kuwait. Accordingly, the United States and a group of allies, including countries as diverse as Egypt, Syria and Czechoslovakia, deployed a massive number of troops along the Saudi border with Kuwait and Iraq in order to encircle the Iraqi army, the largest in the Middle East. Saddam&#x27;s officers looted Kuwait, stripping even the marble from its palaces to move it to Saddam&#x27;s own palace.

During the period of negotiations and threats following the invasion, Saddam focused renewed attention on the Palestinian problem by promising to withdraw his forces from Kuwait if Israel would relinquish the occupied territories in the West Bank, the Golan Heights, and the Gaza Strip. Saddam&#x27;s proposal further split the Arab world, pitting US- and Western-supported Arab states against the Palestinians. The allies ultimately rejected any linkage between the Kuwait crisis and Palestinian issues.

Saddam ignored the Security Council deadline. Backed by the Security Council, a US-led coalition launched round-the-clock missile and aerial attacks on Iraq, beginning 16 January 1991. Israel, though subjected to attack by Iraqi missiles, refrained from retaliating in order not to provoke Arab states into leaving the coalition. A ground force consisting largely of US and British armored and infantry divisions ejected Saddam&#x27;s army from Kuwait in February 1991 and occupied the southern portion of Iraq as far as the Euphrates. On 6 March 1991, Bush announced &quot;What is at stake is more than one small country, it is a big idea—a new world order, where diverse nations are drawn together in common cause to achieve the universal aspirations of mankind: peace and security, freedom, and the rule of law.&quot; In the end, the Iraqi army proved unable to compete on the battlefield with the highly mobile coalition land forces and their overpowering air support. Some 175,000 Iraqis were taken prisoner and casualties were estimated at over 85,000. As part of the cease-fire agreement, Iraq agreed to scrap all poison gas and germ weapons and allow UN observers to inspect the sites. UN trade sanctions would remain in effect until Iraq complied with all terms. Saddam publicly claimed victory at the end of the war.

=== Uprisings ===
Iraq&#x27;s ethnic and religious divisions, together with the brutality of the conflict that this had engendered, laid the groundwork for postwar rebellions. In the aftermath of the fighting, social and ethnic unrest among Shi&#x27;ite Muslims, Kurds, and dissident military units threatened the stability of Saddam&#x27;s government. Uprisings erupted in the Kurdish north and Shi&#x27;a southern and central parts of Iraq, but were ruthlessly repressed. Uprisings in 1991 led to the death of 100,000–180,000 people, mostly civilians.

The U.S, which had urged Iraqi people to rise up against Saddam, did nothing to assist the rebellions. The Iranians, despite the widespread Shi&#x27;ite rebellions, had no interest in provoking another war, while Turkey opposed any prospect of Kurdish independence, and the Saudis and other conservative Arab states feared an Iran-style Shi&#x27;ite revolution. Saddam, having survived the immediate crisis in the wake of defeat, was left firmly in control of Iraq, although the country never recovered either economically or militarily from the Gulf War.

=== Later years: 1990s to 2003 ===
Saddam routinely cited his survival as &quot;proof&quot; that Iraq had in fact won the war against the U.S. This message earned Saddam a great deal of popularity in many sectors of the Arab world. John Esposito wrote, &quot;Arabs and Muslims were pulled in two directions. That they rallied not so much to Saddam Hussein as to the bipolar nature of the confrontation (the West versus the Arab Muslim world) and the issues that Saddam proclaimed: Arab unity, self-sufficiency, and social justice.&quot; As a result, Saddam appealed to many people for the same reasons that attracted more and more followers to Islamic revivalism and also for the same reasons that fueled anti-Western feelings.

One U.S Muslim observer noted: &quot;People forgot about Saddam&#x27;s record and concentrated on America ... Saddam Hussein might be wrong, but it is not America who should correct him.&quot; A significant shift became visible among many Islamic movements in the post war period, &quot;from an initial Islamic ideological rejection of Saddam Hussein, the secular persecutor of Islamic movements, and his invasion of Kuwait to a more populist Arab nationalist, anti-imperialist support for Saddam (or more precisely those issues he represented or championed) and the condemnation of foreign intervention and occupation.&quot;

Some elements of Sharia law were re-introduced, and the phrase &quot;Allahu Akbar&quot; (&quot;God is great&quot;), in Saddam&#x27;s handwriting, was added to the national flag. Saddam also commissioned the production of a &quot;Blood Qur&#x27;an&quot;, written using 27 litres of his own blood, to thank God for saving him from various dangers and conspiracies.

The United Nations-placed sanctions against Iraq for invading Kuwait were not lifted, blocking Iraqi oil exports. Economic hardship followed within the country as GDP plummeted from US$44.36 billion in 1990 to US$9 billion by 1995. Iraq had lost around US$170 billion of oil revenues. Sanctions also restricted basic-medical equipment and supplies from getting into Iraq. During the mid 1990s, the UN considered relaxing the sanctions imposed because of the hardships suffered by ordinary Iraqis. Studies dispute the number of people who died in south and central Iraq during the years of the sanctions. On 9 December 1996, Saddam&#x27;s government accepted the Oil-for-Food Programme that the UN had first offered in 1992.

Relations between the U.S and Iraq remained tense following the Gulf War. The U.S launched a missile attack aimed at Iraq&#x27;s intelligence headquarters in Baghdad on 26 June 1993, citing evidence of repeated Iraqi violations of the &quot;no fly zones&quot; imposed after the Gulf War and for incursions into Kuwait. American officials continued to accuse Saddam of violating the terms of the Gulf War&#x27;s cease fire, by developing weapons of mass destruction and other banned weaponry, and violating the UN-imposed sanctions. Also during the 1990s, President Bill Clinton maintained sanctions and ordered air strikes in the &quot;Iraqi no-fly zones&quot; (Operation Desert Fox), in the hope that Saddam would be overthrown by political enemies inside Iraq. Western charges of Iraqi resistance to UN access to suspected weapons were the pretext for crises between 1997 and 1998, culminating in intensive US and British missile strikes on Iraq, 16–19 December 1998. After two years of intermittent activity, US and British warplanes struck harder at sites near Baghdad in February 2001. Former CIA case officer Robert Baer reports that he &quot;tried to assassinate&quot; Saddam in 1995, amid &quot;a decade-long effort to encourage a military coup in Iraq.&quot;

Saddam continued involvement in politics abroad. Video tapes retrieved after show his intelligence chiefs meeting with Arab journalists, including a meeting with the former managing director of Al-Jazeera, Mohammed Jassem al-Ali, in 2000. In the video Saddam&#x27;s son Uday advised al-Ali about hires in Al-Jazeera: &quot;During your last visit here along with your colleagues we talked about a number of issues, and it does appear that you indeed were listening to what I was saying since changes took place and new faces came on board such as that lad, Mansour.&quot; He was later sacked by Al-Jazeera.

By then, diplomatic isolation of Iraq with Arab states were gradually disappearing, and the economy of Iraq had improved by 2000, with its GDP increasing to U$23.73 billion. On 25 April 2001, the British government started investigation on alleged war crimes done by Saddam. On 28 April 2001, Saddam celebrated his birthday, in form of a mega event.In October 2000, Saddam was visited by Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi&#x27;s daughter Ayesha Gaddafi. Saddam later decided to use Euro, instead of Dollars for Iraqi oil. Almost all of Iraq&#x27;s oil exports under the United Nations oil-for-food program were paid in euros since 2001. Approximately 26 billion euros (£17.4bn) was paid for 3.3 billion barrels of oil into an escrow account in New York. Internally Saddam continued authoritarian way of governance and suppressed political opponents.

In May 2001, the Iraqi Ba&#x27;ath Party held its 12th Regional Congress. Saddam commenced the congress with a speech advising the more than 300 delegates on how to vote. After the speech, the elections took place, and Saddam was reelected as party general secretary at the Ba&#x27;ath congress in Baghdad, with every delegate in the hall rising to their feet. State television reported that 24 candidates stood, and eight new members were elected for positions in the Ba&#x27;ath&#x27;s 18-member executive, known as the Iraqi Regional Command. The deputy secretary general of the command, Izzat Ibrahim, was re-elected, and according to the constitution, he would become the interim president in the event of Saddam&#x27;s sudden death. Saddam&#x27;s youngest son and heir apparent Qusay was elected for the first time into the Command. A surprise was the election of Huda Saleh Mehdi Ammash, the first woman to win a seat on the party executive. Saddam had recently encouraged women to play a greater role in Iraq. Among those who lost their executive seats was the deputy prime minister, Mohammed Hamza al-Zubaidi.

Saddam also invited Kurds to the negotiation table. A foreign coup d&#x27;état was planned to overthrow Saddam, but dropped following the September 11 attacks.

In 2002, Austrian prosecutors investigated Saddam government&#x27;s transactions with Fritz Edlinger that possibly violated Austrian money laundering and embargo regulations. Fritz Edlinger, president of the &quot;General Secretary of the Society for Austro-Arab relations&quot; (GÖAB) and a former member of Socialist International&#x27;s Middle East Committee, was an outspoken supporter of Saddam Hussein. In 2005, an Austrian journalist revealed that Fritz Edlinger&#x27;s GÖAB had received $100,000 from an Iraqi front company as well as donations from Austrian companies soliciting business in Iraq. In 2002, a resolution sponsored by the European Union was adopted by the Commission for Human Rights, which stated that there had been no improvement in the human rights crisis in Iraq. The statement condemned Saddam&#x27;s government for its &quot;systematic, widespread and extremely grave violations of human rights and international humanitarian law.&quot; The resolution demanded that Iraq immediately put an end to its &quot;summary and arbitrary executions ... the use of rape as a political tool and all enforced and involuntary disappearances.&quot;

=== Foreign Affairs ===

In foreign affairs, Saddam sought to have Iraq play a leading role in the Middle East. Saddam rarely left Iraq and had Tariq Aziz, one of his deputies, travel abroad extensively and represent Iraq at many diplomatic meetings. Saddam enjoyed a close relationship with Russian intelligence agent Yevgeny Primakov that dated back to the 1960s; Primakov may have helped Saddam to stay in power in 1991. In July 2001, Russian president Vladimir Putin sent a message to Saddam, seeking to improve diplomatic relations between Iraq and Russia. Saddam also opposed Chechen separatism in Russia.

Iraq&#x27;s relations with the Arab world have been extremely varied. Egypt&#x27;s strong material and diplomatic support for Iraq in the war with Iran led to warmer relations and numerous contacts between senior officials, despite the continued absence of ambassadorial-level representation. Since 1983, Iraq has repeatedly called for restoration of Egypt&#x27;s &quot;natural role&quot; among Arab countries.

==== Arab–Israeli conflict ====

Relations between Iraq and Egypt deteriorated in 1977, as a result of Egyptian President Anwar Sadat&#x27;s peace initiatives with Israel. Saddam also had close relations with Muhammad Hassan Abd al-Rahman Melhem and Yasser Arafat and invited them to Baghdad. In May 2000, Saddam and his representatives had secret meetings with the Israeli government. He offered that Iraq will end its anti–Israel foreign policy, if Israel will resolve Palestinian refugees issue in Lebanon.

Following the outbreak of the Second Intifada in the Palestinian territories, Saddam openly expressed solidarity with the Palestinians, and established the Jerusalem Army, a volunteer force in solidarity with the Palestinians. Saddam also provided financial assistance from Iraq&#x27;s oil revenue, to the families of the Palestinian victims and militants. Around 20% of Iraq&#x27;s oil revenue, by the oil-for-food program was for donating to the Palestinians. Contrary to the claims of the United States and the Israelis, not all the money was sent to support suicide bombing. On eve of Christmas in 2000, Saddam wrote a public letter, calling for Christians and Muslims, to lead jihad against the Zionist movement. In 2001, Saddam declared on the state Iraqi television:

In 2002, the Arab League summit was held in Beirut, Lebanon, where the Arab Peace Initiative was proposed, calling for an end of the Arab-Israeli conflict if Israel withdrew from territory they occupied beyond the 1967 lines. Izzat Ibrahim al-Douri represented Iraq at the summit. Al-Douri did not oppose the plan. At the summit, the League also rejected any attack on Iraq. Following an Israeli offensive into Palestinian territory, Saddam stopped supplying oil to Western countries in order to force Israel to abandon its offensive, a move supported by Iran and Libya.

==== Visit by Hugo Chavez ====
In August 2000, Venezuelan president Hugo Chávez made a visit to Iraq and met Saddam. He was first leader of a foreign state to visit the country, since the Gulf War. His meeting with Saddam was criticized by the United States, a major importer of Venezuela&#x27;s oil. During the tour to invite the leaders of 10 OPEC member states to a summit the following month, Chávez expressed that he had engaged in &quot;fruitful&quot; discussions with Saddam regarding the future role of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries and the defense of reasonable oil prices. He emphasized the significance of bilateral cooperation between their nations in these matters. The discussions between Chávez and Saddam took place in the past, during a period when both leaders were active. Chávez sought to strengthen ties and foster collaboration among OPEC member states, focusing on the organization&#x27;s future trajectory and the importance of maintaining oil prices at a reasonable level. The aim was to ensure stability and fairness in the global oil market.

==== Relations with France ====
Saddam had friendly relations with Jacques Chirac. Several Iraqi leaders, Lebanese arms merchant Sarkis Soghanalian and others have claimed that Saddam financed Chirac&#x27;s party. After France participated in the Gulf War against Iraq, Saddam threatened to expose those who had taken largesse from him: &quot;From Mr. Chirac to Mr. Chevènement, politicians and economic leaders were in open competition to spend time with us and flatter us. We have now grasped the reality of the situation. If the trickery continues, we will be forced to unmask them, all of them, before the French public.&quot; France armed Saddam and it was Iraq&#x27;s largest trade partner throughout Saddam&#x27;s rule. Seized documents show how French officials and businessmen close to Chirac, including Charles Pasqua, his former interior minister, personally benefitted from the deals with Saddam. Later, France opposed the invasion of Iraq by the United States, which would topple Saddam.

== 2003 invasion of Iraq and Iraq War ==

===Invasion and overthrow===
Many members of the international community, especially the US, continued to view Saddam as a bellicose tyrant who was a threat to the stability of the region. In his January 2002 state of the union address to Congress, President George W. Bush spoke of an &quot;axis of evil&quot; consisting of Iran, North Korea, and Iraq. Moreover, Bush announced that he would possibly take action to topple the Iraqi government, because of the threat of its weapons of mass destruction. Bush stated that &quot;The Iraqi regime has plotted to develop anthrax, and nerve gas, and nuclear weapons for over a decade ... Iraq continues to flaunt its hostility toward America and to support terror.&quot;

After the passing of UNSC Resolution 1441, which demanded that Iraq give &quot;immediate, unconditional and active cooperation&quot; with UN and IAEA inspections, Saddam allowed U.N. weapons inspectors led by Hans Blix to return to Iraq. During the renewed inspections beginning in November 2002, Blix found no stockpiles of WMD and noted the &quot;proactive&quot; but not always &quot;immediate&quot; Iraqi cooperation as called for by Resolution 1441.

With war still looming on 24 February 2003, Saddam took part in an interview with CBS News reporter Dan Rather. Talking for more than three hours, he denied possessing any weapons of mass destruction, or any other weapons prohibited by UN guidelines. He also expressed a wish to have a live televised debate with George W. Bush, which was declined. It was his first interview with an American reporter in over a decade. CBS aired the taped interview later that week. Saddam later told an FBI interviewer that he once left open the possibility that Iraq possessed weapons of mass destruction in order to appear strong against Iran.

The United States-led coalition forces launched invasion of Iraq on 20 March 2003. The Iraqi government and military collapsed within three weeks of the beginning of the invasion. By the beginning of April, the coalition forces occupied much of Iraq. The resistance of the much-weakened Iraqi Armed Forces either crumbled or shifted to guerrilla tactics, and it appeared that Saddam had lost control of Iraq. He was last seen in a video which purported to show him in the Baghdad suburbs surrounded by supporters. In July 2003, his sons Uday and Qusay and 14-year-old grandson Mustafa were killed in a three-hour gunfight with US forces in Mosul. Upon their deaths, he commemorated them as &quot;martyrs&quot; on radio. When Baghdad fell to US-led forces on 9 April, marked symbolically by the toppling of his statue, Saddam was nowhere to be found and his government was completely overthrown.

=== Capture and interrogation ===


In April 2003, Saddam&#x27;s whereabouts remained in question during the weeks following the fall of Baghdad and the conclusion of the major fighting of the war. Various sightings of Saddam were reported in the weeks following the war, but none were authenticated. At various times Saddam released audio tapes promoting popular resistance to his ousting. Saddam was placed at the top of the US list of most-wanted Iraqis, which included officials of his government and the party members.

On 13 December 2003, in Operation Red Dawn, Saddam was captured by American forces after being found hiding in a hole in the ground near a farmhouse in ad-Dawr, near Tikrit. Following his capture, Saddam was transported to a US base near Tikrit, and later taken to the American base near Baghdad Airport. Documents obtained and released by the National Security Archive detail FBI interviews and conversations with Saddam while he was in US custody. On 14 December, US administrator in Iraq Paul Bremer confirmed that Saddam had indeed been captured at a farmhouse in ad-Dawr near Tikrit. Bremer presented video footage of Saddam in custody. Saddam was shown with a full beard and hair longer than his familiar appearance. He was described by US officials as being in good health. Bremer reported plans to put Saddam on trial, but claimed that the details of such a trial had not yet been determined. Iraqis and Americans who spoke with Saddam after his capture generally reported that he remained self-assured, describing himself as a &quot;firm, but just leader.&quot;

British tabloid newspaper &quot;The Sun&quot; posted a picture of Saddam wearing white briefs on the front cover of a newspaper. Other photographs inside the paper show Saddam washing his trousers, shuffling, and sleeping. The US government stated that it considered the release of the pictures a violation of the Geneva Convention and that it would investigate the photographs. During this period Saddam was interrogated by FBI agent George Piro.

The guards at the Baghdad detention facility called their prisoner &quot;Vic&quot;, which stands for &quot;Very Important Criminal&quot; and let him plant a small garden near his cell. The nickname and the garden are among the details about the former Iraqi leader that emerged during a March 2008 tour of the Baghdad prison and cell where Saddam slept, bathed, kept a journal, and wrote poetry in the final days before his execution; he was concerned to ensure his legacy and how the history would be told. The tour was conducted by US Marine Maj. Gen. Doug Stone, overseer of detention operations for the US military in Iraq at the time. During his imprisonment he exercised and was allowed to have his personal garden; he also smoked his cigars and wrote his diary in the courtyard of his cell.

=== Trial ===

On 30 June 2004, Saddam Hussein, held in custody by US forces at the US base &quot;Camp Cropper&quot;, along with 11 other senior Ba&#x27;athist leaders, was handed over to the interim Iraqi government to stand trial for crimes against humanity and other offences.

A few weeks later, he was charged by the Iraqi Special Tribunal with crimes committed against residents of Dujail in 1982, following a failed assassination attempt against him. Specific charges included the murder of 148 people, torture of women and children and the illegal arrest of 399 others.
Among the many challenges of the trial were:
* Saddam and his lawyers contesting the court&#x27;s authority and maintaining that he was still the President of Iraq.
* The assassinations and attempted assassinations of several of Saddam&#x27;s lawyers.
* The replacement of the chief presiding judge midway through the trial.

On 5 November 2006, Saddam was found guilty of crimes against humanity and sentenced to death by hanging. Saddam&#x27;s half-brother, Barzan Ibrahim, and Awad Hamed al-Bandar, head of Iraq&#x27;s Revolutionary Court in 1982, were convicted of similar charges. The verdict and sentencing were both appealed, but subsequently affirmed by Iraq&#x27;s Supreme Court of Appeals.

=== Execution ===
Saddam was executed by hanging on the first day of Eid ul-Adha, 30 December 2006, despite his wish to be executed by firing squad (which he argued was the lawful military capital punishment, citing his military position as the commander-in-chief of the Iraqi military). The execution was carried out at Camp Justice, an Iraqi army base in Kadhimiya, a neighborhood of northeast Baghdad.

Saudi Arabia condemned Iraqi authorities for carrying out the execution on a holy day. A presenter from the Al-Ikhbariya television station officially stated: &quot;There is a feeling of surprise and disapproval that the verdict has been applied during the holy months and the first days of Eid al-Adha. Leaders of Islamic countries should show respect for this blessed occasion ... not demean it.&quot;

Video of the execution was recorded on a mobile phone and his captors could be heard insulting Saddam. The video was leaked to electronic media and posted on the Internet within hours, becoming the subject of global controversy. It was later claimed by the head guard at the tomb where his remains lay that Saddam&#x27;s body had been stabbed six times after the execution. Saddam&#x27;s demeanor while being led to the gallows has been discussed by two witnesses, Iraqi Judge Munir Haddad and Iraqi national security adviser Mowaffak al-Rubaie. The accounts of the two witnesses are contradictory as Haddad describes Saddam as being strong in his final moments whereas al-Rubaie says Saddam was clearly afraid, but the common view is not of the latter.

Saddam spoke his last words during the execution, &quot;May God&#x27;s blessings be upon Muhammad and his household. And may God hasten their appearance and curse their enemies.&quot; Then one of the crowd repeatedly said the name of the Iraqi Shiite cleric Moqtada Al-Sadr. Saddam laughed and later said, &quot;Do you consider this manhood?&quot; The crowd shouted, &quot;go to Hell.&quot; Saddam replied, &quot;To the hell that is Iraq!?&quot; Again, one of the crowd asked those who shouted to keep quiet for God. Saddam Hussein started recitation of final Muslim prayers, &quot;I bear witness that there is no god but Allah and I testify that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah.&quot; One of the crowd shouted, &quot;The tyrant [dictator] has collapsed!&quot; Saddam said, &quot;May God&#x27;s blessings be upon Muhammad and his household (family)&quot;. He recited the shahada one and a half times, as while he was about to say &#x27;Muhammad&#x27; on the second shahada, the trapdoor opened, cutting him off mid-sentence. The rope broke his neck, killing him instantly.

Not long before the execution, Saddam&#x27;s lawyers released his last letter.

A second unofficial video, apparently showing Saddam&#x27;s body on a trolley, emerged several days later. It sparked speculation that the execution was carried out incorrectly as Saddam Hussein had a gaping hole in his neck.

Saddam was buried at his birthplace of Al-Awja in Tikrit, Iraq, on 31 December 2006. He was buried from his sons Uday and Qusay Hussein. His tomb was reported to have been destroyed in March 2015. Before it was destroyed, a Sunni tribal group reportedly removed his body to a secret location, fearful of what might happen.

==Personal life and family ==


* Saddam married his first wife and cousin Sajida Talfah (or Tulfah/Tilfah) in 1963 in an arranged marriage. Sajida is the daughter of Khairallah Talfah, Saddam&#x27;s uncle and mentor; the two were raised as brother and sister. Their marriage was arranged for Saddam at age five when Sajida was seven. They became engaged in Egypt during his exile, and married in Iraq after Saddam&#x27;s 1963 return. The couple had five children.
** Uday Hussein (1964–2003), who was Saddam&#x27;s oldest son, who ran the Iraqi Football Association, Fedayeen Saddam, and several media corporations in Iraq including Iraqi TV and the newspaper &quot;Babel&quot;. Uday, while originally Saddam&#x27;s favorite son and likely successor, eventually fell out of favor with his father due to his erratic behavior; he was responsible for many car crashes and rapes around Baghdad, constant feuds with other members of his family, and killing his father&#x27;s favorite valet and food taster Kamel Hana Gegeo at a party in Egypt honoring Egyptian first lady Suzanne Mubarak. He became well known in the west for his involvement in looting Kuwait during the Gulf War, allegedly taking millions of dollars worth of gold, cars, and medical supplies (which were in short supply at the time) for himself and close supporters. He was widely known for his paranoia and his obsession with torturing people who disappointed him in any way, which included tardy girlfriends, friends who disagreed with him and, most notoriously, Iraqi athletes who performed poorly. He was briefly married to Izzat Ibrahim ad-Douri&#x27;s daughter, but later divorced her. The couple had no children.
** Qusay Hussein (1966–2003), who was Saddam&#x27;s second—and, after the mid-1990s, his favorite—son. Qusay was believed to have been Saddam&#x27;s later intended successor, as he was less erratic than his older brother and kept a low profile. He was second in command of the military (behind his father) and ran the elite Iraqi Republican Guard and the SSO. He was believed to have ordered the army to kill thousands of rebelling Marsh Arabs and was instrumental in suppressing Shi&#x27;ite rebellions in the mid-1990s. He was married once and had three children.
** Raghad Hussein (1968), who is Saddam&#x27;s oldest daughter. After the 2003 invasion of Iraq, Raghad fled to Amman, Jordan where she received sanctuary from the royal family. She is currently wanted by the Iraqi Government for allegedly financing and supporting the insurgency of the now banned Iraqi Ba&#x27;ath Party. The Jordanian royal family refused to hand her over. She was married to Hussein Kamel al-Majid and has had five children from this marriage.
** Rana Hussein (1969), who is Saddam&#x27;s second daughter. She, like her sister, fled to Jordan and has stood up for her father&#x27;s rights. She was married to Saddam Kamel and has had four children from this marriage.
** Hala Hussein (1972), who is Saddam&#x27;s third and youngest daughter. Very little information is known about her. Her father arranged for her to marry General Kamal Mustafa Abdallah Sultan al-Tikriti in 1998. She fled with her children and sisters to Jordan. In June 2021, an Iraqi court ordered the release of her husband after 18 years in prison.
* Saddam met his second wife, Samira Shahbandar, in 1979 and married her in 1986. She was originally the wife of an Iraqi Airways executive, but later became the mistress of Saddam. Eventually, Saddam forced Samira&#x27;s husband to divorce her so he could marry her. After the war, Samira fled to Beirut, Lebanon.
** Ali Saddam Hussein (), who is believed to be Saddam&#x27;s youngest child. He is listed on United States&#x27; Treasury sanctions list. Not very much is known about him other than the fact that his mother is Samira Shahbandar. His existence was repeatedly denied by Saddam&#x27;s family.

* Saddam had allegedly married a third wife, Nidal al-Hamdani, the general manager of the Solar Energy Research Center in the Council of Scientific Research.
* Wafa Mullah Huwaysh is rumored to have married Saddam as his fourth wife in 2002. There is no firm evidence for this marriage. Wafa is the daughter of Abd al-Tawab Mullah Huwaysh, a former minister of military industry in Iraq and Saddam&#x27;s last deputy Prime Minister.

In August 1995, Raghad and her husband, Hussein Kamel al-Majid, and Rana and her husband, Saddam Kamel al-Majid, defected to Jordan, taking their children with them. They returned to Iraq when they received assurances that Saddam would pardon them. Within three days of their return in February 1996, both of the Kamel brothers were attacked and killed in a gunfight with other clan members who considered them traitors.

In August 2003, Saddam&#x27;s daughters Raghad and Rana received sanctuary in Amman, Jordan. That month, they spoke with CNN and the Arab satellite station Al-Arabiya in Amman. When asked about her father, Raghad told CNN, &quot;He was a very good father, loving, has a big heart.&quot; Asked if she wanted to give a message to her father, she said: &quot;I love you and I miss you.&quot; Her sister Rana also remarked, &quot;He had so many feelings and he was very tender with all of us.&quot;

Saddam developed a reputation for liking expensive goods, such as his diamond-coated Rolex wristwatch, and sent copies of them to his friends around the world.

== Philanthropy ==
In 1979, Jacob Yasso of Sacred Heart Chaldean Church in Detroit, Michigan congratulated Saddam Hussein on his presidency. In return, Yasso said that Saddam Hussein donated US$250,000 to his church, which is made up of at least 1,200 families of Middle Eastern descent. In 1980, Detroit Mayor Coleman Young allowed Yasso to present the key to the city of Detroit to Saddam Hussein. At the time, Saddam then asked Yasso, &quot;I heard there was a debt on your church. How much is it?&quot; After the inquiry, Saddam then donated another $200,000 to Chaldean Sacred Heart Church. Yasso said that Saddam made donations to Chaldean churches all over the world, and even went on record as saying &quot;He&#x27;s very kind to Christians.&quot;

== Honors and awards ==
In 1991, the Iraqi government awarded Saddam the &quot;Rafidain&quot; medal, also known as Order of the Two Rivers, the country&#x27;s highest honor, as a recognition of his &quot;historic role&quot; and &quot;noble services to Iraq&quot;. This announcement was made following a Cabinet meeting, and Information Minister Hamid Youssef Hummadi stated that the decision was unanimous. The award was bestowed on Saddam Hussein, during his 54th birthday, in appreciation of his exceptional contributions and significant impact on Iraq.

He was honored by titles such as &quot;Field Marshal&quot; and &quot;Comrade&quot;. Saddam Hussein is one of the recipients of the Key to the City. In 1980, Saddam Hussein was awarded a key to the city of Detroit after he donated almost half a million dollars to a church in the city. The Ba&#x27;ath government led by Saddam Hussein successfully turned Iraq into a leading hub for healthcare and education. This improved quality of life in Iraq. For improving quality of life of Iraqis, Saddam was honored by an award from UNESCO.

Saddam received a number of medals, which were displayed at a museum in Johannesburg, South Africa. He received the Order of Merit (&quot;Wisam al-Jadara&quot;), which is rare and was awarded to only a few Iraqi rulers. Order of the Mother of Battles was awarded to Saddam Hussein for his role in the 1991 Gulf War against Kuwait and the United States. Saddam received medals for the 1948–&#x27;49 Palestinian War, crushing the Kurdish rebellion, the 1963 and 1968 revolutions, cooperation with Syria, peace in 1970, and the 1973 war with Israel.

== Political and cultural image ==

The political ideas and politics pursued by Saddam Hussein became known as Saddamism. This doctrine was officially endorsed by his government and promoted by the Iraqi daily newspaper Babil owned by his son Uday Hussein.

During his leadership, Saddam promoted the idea of dual nationalism which combines Iraqi nationalism and Arab nationalism, a much broader form of ethnic nationalism which supports Iraqi nationalism and links it to matters that impact Arabs as a whole. Saddam Hussein believed that the recognition of the ancient Mesopotamian origins and heritage of Iraqi Arabs was complementary to supporting Arab nationalism.

It is believed that Saddam had a soft spot for Jews because his mother was saved by her Jewish neighbors.

Saddam&#x27;s Bedouin tribal nature often carried a sense of nobility, reflected in certain aspects of his character and behavior. A notable example occurred upon the death of Ayatollah Khomeini, his long-time adversary. Addressing his cabinet after receiving the news, Saddam said: 

In the course of his reign, the Ba&#x27;athist regime officially included the historic Kurdish Muslim leader Saladin as a patriotic symbol in Iraq, while Saddam called himself son of the Babylonian King Nebuchadnezzar and had stamped the bricks of ancient Babylon with his name and titles next to him. During the Gulf War, Saddam claimed the historic roles of Nebuchadnezzar, Saladin and Gamal Abdel Nasser.

He also conducted two show elections, in 1995 and 2002. In the 1995 referendum, conducted on 15 October, he reportedly received 99.96% of the votes in a 99.47% turnout, getting 3,052 negative votes among an electorate of 8.4 million.

In the 15 October 2002 referendum he officially achieved 100% of approval votes and 100% turnout, as the electoral commission reported the next day that every one of the 11,445,638 eligible voters cast a &quot;Yes&quot; vote for the president.

He erected statues around the country, which Iraqis toppled after his fall.

The popular cartoon South Park satirized Hussein on several different occasions. He first appeared in the episode Terrance and Phillip in Not Without My Anus. The show incorporates a running gag where Saddam finds a love interest in a cartoon version of Satan.

== Reception and legacy ==
Many Arabs praise Saddam as a true leader who stood up to Western imperialism, Israeli occupation of Palestine, and foreign intervention in the region, while many Iraqis, especially Shias and Kurds, view him negatively as a dictator responsible for brutal authoritarianism, repression and injustices.

Supporters noted that under Saddam, the government invested heavily in infrastructure projects, such as roads, bridges, and public buildings. This development contributed to the modernization of Iraq&#x27;s cities and improved the country&#x27;s overall infrastructure. Under Saddam&#x27;s regime, there was an emphasis on improving access to education and healthcare. The government invested in building schools and hospitals, and literacy rates in Iraq increased significantly during his rule. He implemented policies aimed at advancing women&#x27;s rights in Iraq. Women were encouraged to participate in education and the workforce, and many held high-ranking positions in government and public institutions. For his policies, Saddam is remembered well among Iraqi women. Saddam&#x27;s regime had a secular character, which meant that religion did not play a dominant role in the government&#x27;s policies. This allowed for a degree of religious diversity and tolerance within Iraq. Still today, many Iraqi Jews respect Saddam, for his fair treatment of Jews. This was also seen for the Iraqi Mandaeans, with many Iraqi Mandaeans holding strong-respect for Saddam&#x27;s protection of the Mandaeans; Saddam even constructed temples for the Mandaean people. Saddam&#x27;s regime later placed greater emphasis on Islam in all sectors of Iraqi life from 1993 through the Faith Campaign. In 1977, Saddam stated &quot;our Party does not take a neutral stance between faith and atheism; it is always on the side of faith.&quot;

By contrast, critics have condemned Saddam as a repressive totalitarian leader. His regime was notorious for its repressive tactics, including widespread surveillance, torture, and extrajudicial killings. Human rights organizations documented numerous cases of human rights abuses committed by his government. Saddam&#x27;s regime suppressed political dissent and opposition through a combination of violence, intimidation, and censorship. Freedom of speech and freedom of the press were severely curtailed, and political opponents were often executed or imprisoned. He initiated three military conflicts, including the Iran-Iraq War, Invasion of Kuwait and the Gulf War. These actions resulted in significant loss of life and destabilized the region. While there were economic development initiatives, Saddam&#x27;s regime was also marked by mismanagement and widespread corruption, particularly during the final years of his regime. The economic sanctions imposed on Iraq during his rule further exacerbated hardships for the country&#x27;s population. Saddamism has been described by critics as a mix of &quot;Sunni Arab nationalism, confused Stalinism, and fascist zeal for the fatherland and its leader&quot;.

In the Arab world, Saddam is well-regarded, especially for his support of the Palestinian cause. A memorial dedicated to Saddam was built in Qalqilya, Palestine. Additionally, many portraits and other forms of memorials are found throughout Palestine. During his regime, Iraq and India shared a strong relationship. Even today, Saddam has a huge fan following in India. Indian singer Sidhu Moose Wala mentioned Saddam in his song &quot;Bambiha Bole&quot;, stating that he was a well-reputed person. Saddam was an admirer of Indira Gandhi, whom he met in 1974 during an international trip to India. In July 2016, then US presidential candidate Donald Trump praised Saddam for militant suppression and stability during his presidency in Iraq. A beach near the Indian city of Malappuram has been named Saddam Beach. Saddam is still loved by many Jordanians. Despite having tense relations with Kurdish separatists, Saddam developed good relations with some Kurds who supported him. Libyan politician and commander of the Libyan National Arab Army, Khalifa Haftar, named his son Saddam Haftar after Saddam Hussein.

Cultural depictions of Saddam can be found in various movies, including three documentary movies made on Saddam. Saddam&#x27;s Tribe, released in 2007, explores the complex relationship between Saddam Hussein and the Al-Bu Nasir, a powerful tribal group in Iraq to which Saddam belongs. In 2008, a TV series based on his life — House of Saddam was released. Irish actor Barry Keoghan will appear in a new movie about Saddam which was announced in 2024.

== See also ==

* Modern history of Iraq
* Saddam Beach
* Saddam Hussein Nagar, Sri Lanka
* Saddam Hussein&#x27;s novels
*US list of most-wanted Iraqis
*Most-wanted Iraqi playing cards

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==

* (2000–2003)
* Saddam Hussein Profile by BBC News
* The Saddam Hussein Sourcebook. . National Security Archive at The George Washington University.
* Saddam Hussein and the Iran–Iraq War from the Dean Peter Krogh Foreign Affairs Digital Archives
* Federal Bureau of Investigation Records: The Vault – Saddam Hussein (226 pages)





|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="0" end="14" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q889817" start="116" end="133" title="president of Iraq" label="president of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451242" start="150" end="163" title="Saddam Hussein statue destruction" label="his overthrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117119" start="201" end="223" title="Vice President of Iraq" label="vice president of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476165" start="261" end="275" title="prime minister of Iraq" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q179933" start="368" end="400" title="Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party" label="Arab Socialist Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878844" start="415" end="436" title="Arab Socialist Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party – Iraq Region" label="Iraqi regional branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582421" start="465" end="479" title="Ba&amp;#x27;athism" label="Ba&amp;#x27;athism"/>
<link wikidata="Q114213" start="490" end="506" title="Arab nationalism" label="Arab nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q624284" start="511" end="525" title="Arab socialism" label="Arab socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q126943948" start="606" end="615" title="Saddamism" label="Saddamism"/>
<link wikidata="Q311336" start="652" end="659" title="Al-Awja" label="Al-Awja"/>
<link wikidata="Q165444" start="666" end="672" title="Tikrit" label="Tikrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="685" end="689" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="696" end="701" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="702" end="706" title="Arabs" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q179933" start="729" end="746" title="Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party" label="Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120226" start="851" end="869" title="17 July Revolution" label="17 July Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117119" start="888" end="902" title="vice president of Iraq" label="vice president"/>
<link wikidata="Q238046" start="906" end="926" title="Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr" label="Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748814" start="989" end="1011" title="Iraq Petroleum Company" label="Iraq Petroleum Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087476" start="1030" end="1043" title="Economy of Iraq" label="Iraqi economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116897" start="1066" end="1090" title="Second Iraqi–Kurdish War" label="Second Iraqi–Kurdish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q321865" start="1111" end="1128" title="1975 Algiers Agreement" label="Algiers Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2682071" start="1174" end="1190" title="Iran–Iraq border" label="Iran–Iraq border"/>
<link wikidata="Q20419160" start="1455" end="1478" title="Sunni Islam in Iraq" label="fifth of the population"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324200" start="1517" end="1545" title="1979 Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party Purge" label="purged the Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5941438" start="1562" end="1578" title="Iraqi invasion of Iran" label="invasion of Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="1620" end="1624" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q241119" start="1646" end="1664" title="Khuzestan province" label="Khuzestan province"/>
<link wikidata="Q5863813" start="1694" end="1720" title="The policy of exporting the Islamic Revolution" label="export its 1979 revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="1728" end="1738" title="Arab world" label="Arab world"/>
<link wikidata="Q82664" start="1769" end="1782" title="Iran–Iraq War" label="Iran–Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359436" start="1802" end="1811" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 598" label="stalemate"/>
<link wikidata="Q529723" start="1941" end="1955" title="Anfal campaign" label="Anfal campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q12223" start="1964" end="1971" title="Kurds" label="Kurdish"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="2024" end="2032" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="2036" end="2054" title="Human Rights Watch" label="Human Rights Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="2094" end="2100" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422489" start="2104" end="2118" title="Directional drilling" label="slant-drilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081444" start="2119" end="2143" title="oil reserves in Iraq" label="Iraq&amp;#x27;s oil reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q856650" start="2148" end="2167" title="Iraqi invasion of Kuwait" label="invaded the country"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="2184" end="2192" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2245" end="2258" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115894" start="2263" end="2286" title="Coalition of the Gulf War" label="multinational coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="2292" end="2306" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099093" start="2327" end="2349" title="International sanctions against Iraq" label="sanctions against Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q760002" start="2382" end="2402" title="1991 Iraqi uprisings" label="1991 Iraqi uprisings"/>
<link wikidata="Q12180107" start="2410" end="2415" title="Kurds in Iraq" label="Kurds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4166018" start="2420" end="2425" title="Shia Islam in Iraq" label="Shias"/>
<link wikidata="Q574827" start="2508" end="2521" title="Anti-Americanism" label="anti-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q19904136" start="2549" end="2563" title="Faith Campaign" label="Faith Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q189746" start="2577" end="2585" title="Islamism" label="Islamist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963018" start="2621" end="2630" title="Multi-National Force – Iraq" label="coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="2631" end="2643" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="invaded Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790993" start="2683" end="2710" title="Iraq and weapons of mass destruction" label="weapons of mass destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397667" start="2718" end="2743" title="Saddam Hussein and al-Qaeda link allegations" label="having ties with al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243806" start="2795" end="2823" title="De-Ba&amp;#x27;athification" label="Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party was banned"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780506" start="2859" end="2870" title="Capture of Saddam Hussein" label="his capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306581" start="2892" end="2901" title="trial of Saddam Hussein" label="his trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q187332" start="2923" end="2947" title="Iraqi Interim Government" label="Iraqi Interim Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475666" start="2997" end="3016" title="Supreme Iraqi Criminal Tribunal" label="Iraqi High Tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q173462" start="3020" end="3043" title="crimes against humanity" label="crimes against humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810109" start="3059" end="3079" title="Dujail massacre" label="1982 Dujail massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q175111" start="3131" end="3138" title="hanging" label="hanging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193136" start="3143" end="3155" title="execution of Saddam Hussein" label="was executed"/>
<link wikidata="Q192914" start="3294" end="3313" title="cult of personality" label="cult of personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="3320" end="3325" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="3376" end="3383" title="Western world" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260" start="3384" end="3395" title="imperialism" label="imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q575187" start="3409" end="3440" title="Israeli-occupied territories" label="Israeli occupation of Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q183318" start="3575" end="3583" title="dictator" label="dictator"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229" start="3607" end="3623" title="authoritarianism" label="authoritarianism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3741" end="3793" title="Human rights in Ba&amp;#x27;athist Iraq#Number of victims" label="murder or disappearance of 250,000 to 290,000 Iraqis"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="3880" end="3892" title="Totalitarianism" label="totalitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q125881435" start="3909" end="3916" title="Arab fascism" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q311336" start="4078" end="4085" title="al-Awja" label="al-Awja"/>
<link wikidata="Q165444" start="4108" end="4114" title="Tikrit" label="Tikrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4702306" start="4229" end="4252" title="Al-Bu Nasir (Iraqi tribe)" label="&amp;quot;Al-Bu Nasir&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q305198" start="4291" end="4297" title="Sayyid" label="Sayyid"/>
<link wikidata="Q112128" start="4362" end="4376" title="Husayn ibn Ali" label="Husayn ibn Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="4616" end="4623" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q181217" start="4742" end="4745" title="Bey" label="Bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q165444" start="4794" end="4800" title="Tikrit" label="Tikrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4702306" start="4828" end="4839" title="Al-Bu Nasir (Iraqi tribe)" label="Al-Bu Nasir"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="4858" end="4865" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q69981407" start="4960" end="4968" title="Husaynids" label="Husaynid"/>
<link wikidata="Q805" start="5028" end="5033" title="Yemen" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="5047" end="5052" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q41183" start="5065" end="5071" title="Aleppo" label="Aleppo"/>
<link wikidata="Q199547" start="5076" end="5082" title="Harran" label="Harran"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="5112" end="5116" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="5331" end="5336" title="Abortion" label="abort"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="5362" end="5369" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="5729" end="5732" title="CIA" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="5852" end="5859" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430773" start="5875" end="5892" title="Khairallah Talfah" label="Khairallah Talfah"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="5996" end="6001" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q696848" start="6035" end="6050" title="Anglo-Iraqi War" label="Anglo-Iraqi War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6068152" start="6059" end="6077" title="Iraqi nationalists" label="Iraqi nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="6086" end="6100" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625157" start="6542" end="6558" title="Iraqi law school" label="Iraqi law school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878844" start="6649" end="6666" title="Arab Socialist Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party – Iraq Region" label="Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="6827" end="6832" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q238046" start="7143" end="7163" title="Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr" label="Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr"/>
<link wikidata="Q821102" start="7321" end="7333" title="progressivism" label="progressives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="7338" end="7348" title="socialists" label="socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q39524" start="7522" end="7540" title="Gamal Abdel Nasser" label="Gamal Abdel Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q149805" start="7751" end="7755" title="Kingdom of Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q124943" start="7757" end="7762" title="Kingdom of Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q580188" start="7764" end="7769" title="Kingdom of Yemen" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q31454" start="7774" end="7779" title="Kingdom of Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="7853" end="7860" title="British Army" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076619" start="7869" end="7875" title="French Army" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="7887" end="7906" title="Suez Crisis" label="Suez Crisis of 1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="7943" end="7953" title="Arab world" label="Arab world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430773" start="7996" end="8013" title="Khairallah Talfah" label="Khairallah Talfah"/>
<link wikidata="Q641205" start="8118" end="8145" title="1941 Iraqi coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1941 Iraqi coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q696848" start="8150" end="8165" title="Anglo-Iraqi War" label="Anglo-Iraqi War"/>
<link wikidata="Q299732" start="8331" end="8349" title="Abd al-Karim Qasim" label="Abd al-Karim Qasim"/>
<link wikidata="Q149724" start="8360" end="8377" title="Faisal II of Iraq" label="Faisal II of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988530" start="8385" end="8403" title="14 July Revolution" label="14 July Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q170468" start="8561" end="8590" title="United Arab Republic" label="union between Egypt and Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q16120805" start="8642" end="8658" title="National Democratic Party (Iraq, 1946)" label="social democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672366" start="8667" end="8688" title="Iraqi Communist Party" label="Iraqi Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q123135523" start="9103" end="9114" title="Attempted assassination of Abdul-Karim Qasim" label="assassinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328860" start="9768" end="9780" title="Richard Sale (journalist)" label="Richard Sale"/>
<link wikidata="Q493845" start="9790" end="9816" title="United Press International" label="United Press International"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681552" start="9895" end="9907" title="Adel Darwish" label="Adel Darwish"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="10036" end="10063" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q630014" start="10074" end="10095" title="General Intelligence Directorate (Egypt)" label="Egyptian intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q14864393" start="11527" end="11544" title="List of presidents of Iraq" label="president of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897015" start="11546" end="11558" title="Kanan Makiya" label="Kanan Makiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="12343" end="12348" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q355416" start="12351" end="12363" title="Michel Aflaq" label="Michel Aflaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472422" start="12481" end="12495" title="Fuad al-Rikabi" label="Fuad al-Rikabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="12767" end="12772" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q194445" start="13087" end="13103" title="Cairo Law School" label="Cairo Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="13172" end="13177" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578241" start="13628" end="13646" title="Ramadan Revolution" label="Ramadan Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q307494" start="14051" end="14067" title="Abdul Salam Arif" label="Abdul Salam Arif"/>
<link wikidata="Q449436" start="14164" end="14200" title="November 1963 Iraqi coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="November 1963 Iraqi coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q238046" start="14938" end="14958" title="Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr" label="Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560385" start="15343" end="15385" title="1966 Syrian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="Marxist takeover of the Syrian Ba&amp;#x27;ath"/>
<link wikidata="Q797513" start="15461" end="15469" title="Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party (Syrian-dominated faction)" label="separate"/>
<link wikidata="Q14150312" start="15470" end="15478" title="Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party (Iraqi-dominated faction)" label="factions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120226" start="15637" end="15651" title="17 July Revolution" label="bloodless coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q238046" start="15659" end="15679" title="Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr" label="Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr"/>
<link wikidata="Q307393" start="15695" end="15712" title="Abdul Rahman Arif" label="Abdul Rahman Arif"/>
<link wikidata="Q14865005" start="15946" end="15960" title="List of Prime Ministers of Iraq" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q307469" start="15961" end="15981" title="Abdul Razzaq an-Naif" label="Abdul Razzaq an-Naif"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="16208" end="16216" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404717" start="16321" end="16350" title="Iraqi Revolutionary Command Council" label="Revolutionary Command Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="17950" end="17968" title="1973 energy crisis" label="1973 energy crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087476" start="18144" end="18157" title="economy of Iraq" label="Iraqi economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="18854" end="18863" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q82664" start="19827" end="19840" title="Iran-Iraq War" label="Iran-Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359379" start="20017" end="20031" title="Bank reserves" label="budget reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="20528" end="20541" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="20563" end="20575" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783295" start="20764" end="20775" title="Arab street" label="Arab street"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="21197" end="21204" title="Iran" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164304" start="21295" end="21305" title="Iraqi Intelligence Service" label="mukhabarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="22654" end="22718" title="UNESCO" label="United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582421" start="23599" end="23614" title="Ba&amp;#x27;athists" label="Ba&amp;#x27;athists"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="23826" end="23838" title="Shia Islam" label="Shi&amp;#x27;ite"/>
<link wikidata="Q12223" start="23852" end="23856" title="Kurds" label="Kurd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393724" start="23990" end="24002" title="Political faction" label="factionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q809687" start="24193" end="24216" title="First Iraqi–Kurdish War" label="First Iraqi–Kurdish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q368858" start="24269" end="24284" title="Mustafa Barzani" label="Mustafa Barzani"/>
<link wikidata="Q781221" start="24565" end="24568" title="Kurdistan Democratic Party" label="KDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q20987749" start="24667" end="24686" title="Ba&amp;#x27;athist Arabization campaigns in northern Iraq" label="Arabization program"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116897" start="24763" end="24787" title="Second Iraqi–Kurdish War" label="Second Iraqi–Kurdish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q56587" start="24807" end="24818" title="Feyli (tribe)" label="Feyil Kurds"/>
<link wikidata="Q30325275" start="24824" end="24847" title="Persecution of Feyli Kurds under Saddam Hussein" label="systemically persecuted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517398" start="24883" end="24911" title="History of the Jews in Iraq" label="substantial Jewish community"/>
<link wikidata="Q19893649" start="25059" end="25082" title="1969 Baghdad hangings" label="publicly hanging 13 men"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="25980" end="25998" title="Iranian Revolution" label="Iranian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048242" start="26081" end="26085" title="Islamic Dawa Party" label="Dawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q718723" start="26090" end="26095" title="Islamic Supreme Council of Iraq" label="SCIRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q66711956" start="26246" end="26259" title="Iraqi Kurdistan" label="northern Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q359319" start="26781" end="26800" title="Taha Yassin Ramadan" label="Taha Yassin Ramadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6723231" start="26880" end="26898" title="Popular Army (Iraq)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q132781" start="27254" end="27261" title="torture" label="torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q342263" start="27281" end="27306" title="Barzan Ibrahim al-Tikriti" label="Barzan Ibrahim al-Tikriti"/>
<link wikidata="Q31184" start="27330" end="27342" title="Sibling" label="half-brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="27875" end="27884" title="war crime" label="war crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="27921" end="27939" title="Human Rights Watch" label="Human Rights Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="27944" end="27965" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q841236" start="28003" end="28015" title="imprisonment" label="imprisonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q265939" start="28100" end="28109" title="patronage" label="patronage"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="28192" end="28204" title="Totalitarianism" label="totalitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="28341" end="28353" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="28358" end="28371" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344824" start="28401" end="28420" title="freedom of movement" label="freedom of movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="28425" end="28444" title="freedom of religion" label="freedom of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="28666" end="28678" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081843" start="28756" end="28775" title="Charles R. H. Tripp" label="Charles R. H. Tripp"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="28860" end="28868" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q368858" start="29047" end="29062" title="Mustafa Barzani" label="Mustafa Barzani"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116897" start="29074" end="29098" title="Second Iraqi–Kurdish War" label="Second Iraqi–Kurdish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672366" start="29235" end="29251" title="Iraqi Communist Party" label="Iraqi Communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="29392" end="29400" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q973658" start="29530" end="29538" title="Caudillo" label="Caudillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="29549" end="29565" title="Francisco Franco" label="Francisco Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="29582" end="29588" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8810" start="29604" end="29611" title="Granada" label="Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5818" start="29613" end="29620" title="Córdoba, Spain" label="Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5836" start="29625" end="29631" title="Toledo, Spain" label="Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105" start="29678" end="29692" title="Jacques Chirac" label="Jacques Chirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="29696" end="29701" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="29721" end="29731" title="1973 oil crisis" label="oil crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q42013" start="30184" end="30195" title="Anwar Sadat" label="Anwar Sadat"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="30226" end="30232" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578053" start="30261" end="30279" title="1978 Arab League summit" label="Arab League summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q309204" start="30334" end="30352" title="Camp David Accords" label="Camp David Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q310855" start="30996" end="31013" title="Houari Boumediene" label="Houari Boumediene"/>
<link wikidata="Q648198" start="33607" end="33616" title="Strongman (politics)" label="strongman"/>
<link wikidata="Q118725" start="34435" end="34449" title="Hafez al-Assad" label="Hafez al-Assad"/>
<link wikidata="Q650875" start="35390" end="35414" title="Christianity in Iraq" label="Christians lived in Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q315214" start="35416" end="35426" title="Tariq Aziz" label="Tariq Aziz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376604" start="35438" end="35452" title="Iraqi Assyrians" label="Iraqi Assyrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q64868" start="35459" end="35476" title="Chaldean Catholics" label="Chaldean Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q877955" start="35525" end="35546" title="Deputy Prime Minister" label="Deputy Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867009" start="35569" end="35585" title="Minister of Foreign Affairs (Iraq)" label="Foreign Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404717" start="35672" end="35701" title="Revolutionary Command Council (Iraq)" label="Revolutionary Command Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628129" start="35710" end="35726" title="Regional Command of the Arab Socialist Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party – Iraq Region" label="Regional Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878844" start="35734" end="35746" title="Iraqi Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party" label="Iraqi Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q179933" start="35754" end="35771" title="Arab Socialist Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party" label="Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q355416" start="35834" end="35846" title="Michel Aflaq" label="Michel Aflaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582421" start="35863" end="35877" title="Ba&amp;#x27;athism" label="Ba&amp;#x27;athism"/>
<link wikidata="Q653388" start="35890" end="35899" title="Christianity in Syria" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q680013" start="35910" end="35925" title="Fernando Filoni" label="Fernando Filoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q6580333" start="36157" end="36185" title="Mandaean Book of John" label="Mandaean Book of John&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q205754" start="36393" end="36401" title="Mandaeism" label="Sabaeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q45006821" start="37533" end="37553" title="Abdul Ghani al-Asadi" label="Abdul Ghani al-Asadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q28716061" start="37555" end="37569" title="Talib Shaghati" label="Talib Shaghati"/>
<link wikidata="Q41490645" start="37571" end="37591" title="Abu Tahsin al-Salihi" label="Abu Tahsin al-Salihi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4664414" start="37596" end="37609" title="Abboud Qanbar" label="Abboud Qanbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q360015" start="37691" end="37715" title="Muhammad Saeed al-Sahhaf" label="Muhammad Saeed al-Sahhaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q711468" start="37720" end="37733" title="Sadun Hammadi" label="Sadun Hammadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11771944" start="37919" end="37933" title="Civil service" label="civil officers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37977" end="37990" title="Shaoul Sassoon" label="Shaul Sassoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131625727" start="37995" end="38006" title="Eliyahu Basrawi" label="Dr. Eliyahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q48195" start="38084" end="38089" title="Basra" label="Basra"/>
<link wikidata="Q131406890" start="38091" end="38105" title="Ibrahim Hesqel" label="Ibrahim Hesqel"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="38147" end="38152" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5274677" start="38198" end="38219" title="Meir Taweig Synagogue" label="Meir Taweig Synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q130218654" start="38237" end="38251" title="Al-Habibiyah Jewish Cemetery" label="a new cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q182242" start="38315" end="38321" title="Sukkot" label="Sukkot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911774" start="38690" end="38709" title="Mordechai Ben-Porat" label="Mordechai Ben-Porat"/>
<link wikidata="Q529723" start="39060" end="39074" title="Anfal Campaign" label="Anfal Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q12180107" start="39181" end="39192" title="Kurds in Iraq" label="Iraqi Kurds"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39219" end="39224" title="Kurds in Syria#History" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5938547" start="39229" end="39235" title="Human rights of Kurdish people in Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q809687" start="39414" end="39437" title="First Iraqi–Kurdish War" label="First Iraqi–Kurdish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q781221" start="39707" end="39710" title="Kurdistan Democratic Party" label="KDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q359319" start="39797" end="39816" title="Taha Yassin Ramadan" label="Taha Yassin Ramadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349332" start="39821" end="39844" title="Taha Muhie-eldin Marouf" label="Taha Muhie-eldin Marouf"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="39990" end="39994" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5938547" start="39996" end="40002" title="Human rights of Kurdish people in Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="40008" end="40013" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12180107" start="40015" end="40026" title="Iraqi Kurds" label="Iraqi Kurds"/>
<link wikidata="Q359319" start="40343" end="40362" title="Taha Yassin Ramadan" label="Taha Yassin Ramadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12180107" start="40367" end="40377" title="Iraqi Kurd" label="Iraqi Kurd"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628129" start="40518" end="40534" title="Regional Command of the Arab Socialist Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party – Iraq Region" label="Regional Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878844" start="40542" end="40554" title="Arab Socialist Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party – Iraq Region" label="Iraqi Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q179933" start="40562" end="40579" title="Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party" label="Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6723231" start="40601" end="40619" title="Popular Army (Iraq)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349332" start="40621" end="40644" title="Taha Muhie-eldin Marouf" label="Taha Muhie-eldin Marouf"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="40743" end="40748" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="40750" end="40755" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="40761" end="40768" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793323" start="41416" end="41433" title="Armenians in Iraq" label="Armenians in Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q18193734" start="42120" end="42150" title="Abu Muslim al-Turkmani" label="Fadel Ahmed Abdullah al-Hiyali"/>
<link wikidata="Q18193736" start="42180" end="42211" title="Abu Ali al-Anbari" label="Abd al-Rahman Mustafa al-Qaduli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="42260" end="42273" title="Islamic State" label="Islamic State"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333210" start="42275" end="42289" title="Rifat Chadirji" label="Rifat Chadirji"/>
<link wikidata="Q191594" start="42971" end="42983" title="fifth column" label="fifth column"/>
<link wikidata="Q110998461" start="43026" end="43045" title="Muhyi Abdul-Hussein Mashhadi" label="Muhyi Abdul-Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="43434" end="43441" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q128245" start="43607" end="43628" title="Mohammad Reza Pahlavi" label="Mohammad Reza Pahlavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q207991" start="43636" end="43651" title="Pahlavi dynasty" label="Pahlavi dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="43675" end="43693" title="Iranian Revolution" label="Islamic Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q38823" start="43751" end="43768" title="Ruhollah Khomeini" label="Ruhollah Khomeini"/>
<link wikidata="Q5863813" start="44152" end="44181" title="The policy of exporting the Islamic Revolution" label="export its Islamic Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218629" start="44263" end="44274" title="Arab states of the Persian Gulf" label="Gulf states"/>
<link wikidata="Q168193" start="44642" end="44647" title="Najaf" label="Najaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q166966" start="45285" end="45298" title="Shatt al-Arab" label="Shatt al-Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q5941438" start="46000" end="46017" title="Iraqi invasion of Iran" label="Iraq invaded Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q116233989" start="46046" end="46094" title="22 September 1980 Iraqi airstrike on Iran" label="launching airstrikes on numerous targets in Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q513684" start="46110" end="46126" title="Mehrabad Airport" label="Mehrabad Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616" start="46130" end="46136" title="Tehran" label="Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q241119" start="46188" end="46197" title="Khuzestan province" label="Khuzestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014472" start="46224" end="46237" title="Khuzestani Arabs" label="Arab minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="46383" end="46394" title="Arab world" label="Arab states"/>
<link wikidata="Q112114970" start="46601" end="46614" title="Shia Islamism" label="Shia Islamist"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="46770" end="46787" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q765165" start="46801" end="46816" title="Leonid Brezhnev" label="Leonid Brezhnev"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448030" start="47508" end="47525" title="human wave attack" label="human wave attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q4841818" start="47629" end="47644" title="Osirak Nuclear Reactor" label="nuclear reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q725043" start="47688" end="47698" title="Operation Opera" label="air strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q184650" start="47798" end="47813" title="Donald Rumsfeld" label="Donald Rumsfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q831550" start="47938" end="47955" title="Attrition warfare" label="wars of attrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3639228" start="48003" end="48018" title="chemical weapon" label="chemical weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q315214" start="48200" end="48210" title="Tariq Aziz" label="Tariq Aziz"/>
<link wikidata="Q24083363" start="48230" end="48278" title="Iraqi chemical attacks against Iran" label="Iraq&amp;#x27;s use of chemical weapons against Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="48431" end="48442" title="West Germany" label="West German"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824573" start="48513" end="48534" title="Presidency of Ronald Reagan" label="Reagan administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="48578" end="48602" title="Federal government of the United States" label="United States government"/>
<link wikidata="Q919834" start="48755" end="48779" title="Operation Ramadan" label="Iranian invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q83002" start="48860" end="48882" title="First Battle of al-Faw" label="First Battle of al-Faw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195557" start="49035" end="49073" title="State Sponsors of Terrorism (U.S. list)" label="US list of State Sponsors of Terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q623179" start="49317" end="49326" title="State terrorism" label="terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="49407" end="49419" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="49433" end="49438" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q273659" start="49762" end="49780" title="Iran–Contra affair" label="Iran–Contra affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408298" start="49956" end="49968" title="Islamic Republic of Iran Navy" label="Iranian navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="49976" end="49988" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q18642282" start="50423" end="50444" title="United Nations Security Council Resolutions concerning Iraq" label="calls for a ceasefire"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="50452" end="50483" title="United Nations Security Council" label="United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="50577" end="50600" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q529723" start="52029" end="52043" title="Anfal campaign" label="Anfal campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q12223" start="52122" end="52136" title="Kurds" label="Kurdish people"/>
<link wikidata="Q214955" start="52236" end="52255" title="Ali Hassan al-Majid" label="Ali Hassan al-Majid"/>
<link wikidata="Q219720" start="52290" end="52313" title="Qur&amp;#x27;anic chapter 8" label="Qur&amp;#x27;anic chapter 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q590490" start="52359" end="52368" title="code name" label="code name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878844" start="52389" end="52403" title="Arab Socialist Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party – Iraq Region" label="Ba&amp;#x27;athist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515909" start="52632" end="52639" title="Shabak people" label="Shabaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q200885" start="52644" end="52650" title="Yazidi" label="Yazidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q377085" start="52653" end="52662" title="Assyrian people" label="Assyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165171" start="52664" end="52679" title="Iraqi Turkmen" label="Turkoman people"/>
<link wikidata="Q605544" start="52959" end="52966" title="Halabja" label="Halabja"/>
<link wikidata="Q579179" start="52971" end="52979" title="Halabja massacre" label="attacked"/>
<link wikidata="Q81166" start="52994" end="53005" title="mustard gas" label="mustard gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612896" start="53010" end="53021" title="nerve agent" label="nerve agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q932728" start="53295" end="53304" title="peshmerga" label="peshmerga"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="53347" end="53368" title="United States Department of State" label="U.S. State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q612276" start="53467" end="53494" title="Defense Intelligence Agency" label="Defense Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="53578" end="53605" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795" start="54156" end="54160" title="OPEC" label="OPEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="54510" end="54528" title="Government of the United Kingdom" label="British government"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="55066" end="55078" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="55535" end="55556" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Reagan administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q460207" start="56333" end="56346" title="April Glaspie" label="April Glaspie"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="56742" end="56759" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q223151" start="56764" end="56775" title="James Baker" label="James Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q868942" start="57449" end="57486" title="Republic of Kuwait" label="Provisional Government of Free Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q6448838" start="57677" end="57701" title="Kuwait Governorate" label="19th Governorate of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q856650" start="58012" end="58030" title="Iraqi invasion of Kuwait" label="invasion of Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="58056" end="58062" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="58173" end="58187" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q841753" start="58310" end="58318" title="Governorates of Iraq" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q166382" start="58826" end="58830" title="emir" label="emir"/>
<link wikidata="Q217194" start="58831" end="58839" title="Jaber Al-Ahmad Al-Sabah" label="Al Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q36008" start="59135" end="59143" title="Mercedes-Benz" label="Mercedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q34105" start="59270" end="59283" title="Hosni Mubarak" label="Hosni Mubarak"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="59347" end="59364" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59844" end="59856" title="Crude oil#Pricing" label="price of oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="60074" end="60091" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="60682" end="60696" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q219060" start="61079" end="61090" title="State of Palestine" label="Palestinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36678" start="61206" end="61215" title="West Bank" label="West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q83210" start="61221" end="61234" title="Golan Heights" label="Golan Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q39760" start="61244" end="61254" title="Gaza Strip" label="Gaza Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q97860712" start="61675" end="61712" title="Iraqi rocket attacks on Israel" label="subjected to attack by Iraqi missiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q34589" start="62000" end="62009" title="Euphrates" label="Euphrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472670" start="62117" end="62132" title="New world order (politics)" label="new world order"/>
<link wikidata="Q8242560" start="62611" end="62623" title="biological warfare" label="germ weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q760002" start="63277" end="63294" title="1991 Iraqi uprisings" label="Uprisings in 1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="63571" end="63577" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q19606413" start="64620" end="64632" title="Anti-Western sentiment" label="anti-Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="65288" end="65294" title="Sharia" label="Sharia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191811" start="65340" end="65352" title="Allahu Akbar" label="Allahu Akbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927669" start="65500" end="65517" title="Blood Qur&amp;#x27;an" label="Blood Qur&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="65639" end="65653" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099093" start="65661" end="65683" title="sanctions against Iraq" label="sanctions against Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q296745" start="66297" end="66319" title="Oil-for-Food Programme" label="Oil-for-Food Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189962" start="66453" end="66467" title="1993 cruise missile strikes on Iraq" label="missile attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q49394" start="66797" end="66824" title="weapons of mass destruction" label="weapons of mass destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="66925" end="66937" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327861" start="67022" end="67042" title="1998 bombing of Iraq" label="Operation Desert Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q107610542" start="67397" end="67403" title="February 2001 airstrike in Iraq" label="struck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322900" start="67475" end="67486" title="Robert Baer" label="Robert Baer"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878" start="68638" end="68653" title="Muammar Gaddafi" label="Muammar Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q231552" start="68670" end="68684" title="Ayesha Gaddafi" label="Ayesha Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="68714" end="68718" title="Euro" label="Euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q14083" start="68731" end="68738" title="Dollars" label="Dollars"/>
<link wikidata="Q336347" start="69867" end="69872" title="Qusay Hussein" label="Qusay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164449" start="69953" end="69976" title="Huda Salih Mahdi Ammash" label="Huda Saleh Mehdi Ammash"/>
<link wikidata="Q958345" start="70175" end="70200" title="Mohammed Hamza Zubeidi" label="Mohammed Hamza al-Zubaidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="70265" end="70281" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="70341" end="70361" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2172571" start="70450" end="70464" title="Fritz Edlinger" label="Fritz Edlinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q151900" start="70497" end="70513" title="money laundering" label="money laundering"/>
<link wikidata="Q159454" start="70673" end="70696" title="Socialist International" label="Socialist International"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="71009" end="71023" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q381148" start="71293" end="71323" title="international humanitarian law" label="international humanitarian law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408310" start="71438" end="71473" title="War rape" label="the use of rape as a political tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q315214" start="71674" end="71684" title="Tariq Aziz" label="Tariq Aziz"/>
<link wikidata="Q270529" start="71849" end="71865" title="Yevgeny Primakov" label="Yevgeny Primakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="71986" end="72000" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42013" start="72677" end="72688" title="Anwar Sadat" label="Anwar Sadat"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="72719" end="72725" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q49106" start="73096" end="73111" title="Second Intifada" label="Second Intifada"/>
<link wikidata="Q48973505" start="73222" end="73236" title="Jerusalem Army" label="Jerusalem Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="73655" end="73664" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172" start="73854" end="73865" title="Arab League" label="Arab League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888835" start="73866" end="73872" title="2002 Arab League summit" label="summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820" start="73885" end="73891" title="Beirut" label="Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="73893" end="73900" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q867313" start="73912" end="73933" title="Arab Peace Initiative" label="Arab Peace Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q8669" start="73974" end="73995" title="Arab–Israeli conflict" label="Arab-Israeli conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q462061" start="74067" end="74089" title="Izzat Ibrahim al-Douri" label="Izzat Ibrahim al-Douri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276724" start="74229" end="74246" title="Operation Defensive Shield" label="Israeli offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="74396" end="74400" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="74405" end="74410" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q8440" start="74481" end="74492" title="Hugo Chávez" label="Hugo Chávez"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="74601" end="74609" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="74657" end="74670" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795" start="74928" end="74973" title="OPEC" label="Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395229" start="75050" end="75093" title="Foreign relations of Venezuela" label="bilateral cooperation between their nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105" start="75570" end="75584" title="Jacques Chirac" label="Jacques Chirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q7424225" start="75632" end="75650" title="Sarkis Soghanalian" label="Sarkis Soghanalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q747582" start="75723" end="75758" title="Opération Daguet" label="France participated in the Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q725609" start="76316" end="76330" title="Charles Pasqua" label="Charles Pasqua"/>
<link wikidata="Q4600511" start="76756" end="76782" title="2002 State of the Union Address" label="state of the union address"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="76806" end="76820" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q340700" start="76839" end="76851" title="axis of evil" label="axis of evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q129104" start="77114" end="77121" title="anthrax" label="anthrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612896" start="77127" end="77136" title="nerve gas" label="nerve gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="77142" end="77156" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208235" start="77285" end="77305" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 1441" label="UNSC Resolution 1441"/>
<link wikidata="Q297275" start="77473" end="77482" title="Hans Blix" label="Hans Blix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439780" start="77783" end="77795" title="February 2003 Saddam Hussein interview" label="an interview"/>
<link wikidata="Q861764" start="77801" end="77809" title="CBS News" label="CBS News"/>
<link wikidata="Q733027" start="77819" end="77829" title="Dan Rather" label="Dan Rather"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="78032" end="78046" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963018" start="78355" end="78389" title="Multi-National Force – Iraq" label="United States-led coalition forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="78687" end="78696" title="guerrilla" label="guerrilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q311916" start="78888" end="78892" title="Uday Hussein" label="Uday"/>
<link wikidata="Q336347" start="78897" end="78902" title="Qusay Hussein" label="Qusay"/>
<link wikidata="Q65074171" start="78948" end="78987" title="Killing of Qusay and Uday Hussein" label="in a three-hour gunfight with US forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q83317" start="78991" end="78996" title="Mosul" label="Mosul"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451242" start="79145" end="79167" title="Firdos Square statue destruction" label="toppling of his statue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1804983" start="79376" end="79391" title="Battle of Baghdad (2003)" label="fall of Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810587" start="79674" end="79703" title="U.S. list of most-wanted Iraqis" label="US list of most-wanted Iraqis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780506" start="79796" end="79814" title="Operation Red Dawn" label="Operation Red Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029552" start="79924" end="79931" title="ad-Dawr" label="ad-Dawr"/>
<link wikidata="Q217683" start="80263" end="80274" title="Paul Bremer" label="Paul Bremer"/>
<link wikidata="Q208875" start="80876" end="80883" title="The Sun (United Kingdom)" label="The Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q133536" start="81158" end="81175" title="Geneva Convention" label="Geneva Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q6056617" start="81242" end="81265" title="Interrogation of Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam was interrogated"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="81269" end="81272" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543441" start="81279" end="81290" title="George Piro" label="George Piro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301754" start="81847" end="81857" title="Douglas M. Stone" label="Doug Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029785" start="82190" end="82202" title="Camp Cropper" label="Camp Cropper"/>
<link wikidata="Q173462" start="82328" end="82351" title="crimes against humanity" label="crimes against humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475666" start="82414" end="82436" title="Iraqi Special Tribunal" label="Iraqi Special Tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810109" start="82442" end="82486" title="Dujail Massacre" label="crimes committed against residents of Dujail"/>
<link wikidata="Q889817" start="82816" end="82833" title="President of Iraq" label="President of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="83071" end="83089" title="sentenced to death" label="sentenced to death"/>
<link wikidata="Q342263" start="83130" end="83144" title="Barzan Ibrahim al-Tikriti" label="Barzan Ibrahim"/>
<link wikidata="Q461434" start="83150" end="83170" title="Awad Hamed al-Bandar" label="Awad Hamed al-Bandar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="83400" end="83408" title="executed" label="executed"/>
<link wikidata="Q175111" start="83412" end="83419" title="hanging" label="hanging"/>
<link wikidata="Q514400" start="83440" end="83451" title="Eid al-Adha" label="Eid ul-Adha"/>
<link wikidata="Q216169" start="83506" end="83518" title="firing squad" label="firing squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027295" start="83692" end="83704" title="Camp Justice (Iraq)" label="Camp Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q311315" start="83728" end="83737" title="Kadhimiya" label="Kadhimiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q216826" start="85195" end="85210" title="Muqtada al-Sadr" label="Moqtada Al-Sadr"/>
<link wikidata="Q41831" start="85905" end="85912" title="shahada" label="shahada"/>
<link wikidata="Q253660" start="86720" end="86733" title="Sajida Talfah" label="Sajida Talfah"/>
<link wikidata="Q311916" start="87113" end="87125" title="Uday Hussein" label="Uday Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475056" start="87185" end="87211" title="Iraqi Football Association" label="Iraqi Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142173" start="87213" end="87228" title="Fedayeen Saddam" label="Fedayeen Saddam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697028" start="87279" end="87287" title="Iraqi TV" label="Iraqi TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808621" start="87312" end="87317" title="Babel (newspaper)" label="Babel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119134" start="87647" end="87663" title="Kamel Hana Gegeo" label="Kamel Hana Gegeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q238529" start="87713" end="87728" title="Suzanne Mubarak" label="Suzanne Mubarak"/>
<link wikidata="Q462061" start="88237" end="88259" title="Izzat Ibrahim ad-Douri" label="Izzat Ibrahim ad-Douri"/>
<link wikidata="Q336347" start="88332" end="88345" title="Qusay Hussein" label="Qusay Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q531366" start="88653" end="88675" title="Iraqi Republican Guard" label="Iraqi Republican Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143952" start="88684" end="88687" title="Iraqi Special Security Organization" label="SSO"/>
<link wikidata="Q247291" start="88761" end="88772" title="Marsh Arabs" label="Marsh Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q272154" start="88898" end="88912" title="Raghad Hussein" label="Raghad Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q3805" start="89007" end="89012" title="Amman" label="Amman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672351" start="89104" end="89120" title="Iraqi Government" label="Iraqi Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368122" start="89290" end="89312" title="Hussein Kamel al-Majid" label="Hussein Kamel al-Majid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052569" start="89362" end="89374" title="Rana Hussein" label="Rana Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045405" start="89524" end="89536" title="Saddam Kamel" label="Saddam Kamel"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="89838" end="89844" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079292" start="89966" end="89983" title="Samira Shahbandar" label="Samira Shahbandar"/>
<link wikidata="Q853937" start="90052" end="90065" title="Iraqi Airways" label="Iraqi Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820" start="90234" end="90240" title="Beirut" label="Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q56867910" start="90854" end="90881" title="Abd al-Tawab Mullah Huwaysh" label="Abd al-Tawab Mullah Huwaysh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368122" start="91017" end="91039" title="Hussein Kamel al-Majid" label="Hussein Kamel al-Majid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045405" start="91067" end="91088" title="Saddam Kamel" label="Saddam Kamel al-Majid"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="91102" end="91108" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3805" start="91477" end="91482" title="Amman" label="Amman"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="91520" end="91523" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q310172" start="91555" end="91565" title="Al-Arabiya" label="Al-Arabiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q62288" start="91980" end="91985" title="Rolex" label="Rolex"/>
<link wikidata="Q24882798" start="92099" end="92127" title="Sacred Heart Chaldean Church" label="Sacred Heart Chaldean Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="92131" end="92148" title="Detroit, Michigan" label="Detroit, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q963539" start="92353" end="92366" title="Detroit Mayor" label="Detroit Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q863703" start="92367" end="92380" title="Coleman Young" label="Coleman Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q99864" start="92410" end="92425" title="key to the city" label="key to the city"/>
<link wikidata="Q64868" start="92693" end="92701" title="Chaldean Catholic Church" label="Chaldean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672351" start="92850" end="92866" title="Iraqi government" label="Iraqi government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885229" start="92928" end="92951" title="Order of the Two Rivers" label="Order of the Two Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q29512339" start="93158" end="93179" title="Hamid Yusif Hummadi" label="Hamid Youssef Hummadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q99864" start="93501" end="93516" title="Key to the City" label="Key to the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="93575" end="93582" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q13100823" start="93831" end="93846" title="quality of life" label="quality of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q34647" start="93975" end="93987" title="Johannesburg" label="Johannesburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q94056" start="94019" end="94033" title="Order of Merit" label="Order of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="94204" end="94217" title="1991 Gulf War" label="1991 Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="94226" end="94232" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="94241" end="94254" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q49097" start="94287" end="94316" title="1948 Palestinian War" label="1948–&amp;#x27;49 Palestinian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3673877" start="94331" end="94348" title="Kurdish rebellion" label="Kurdish rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988530" start="94354" end="94358" title="14 July Revolution" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120226" start="94363" end="94367" title="17 July Revolution" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q49100" start="94428" end="94436" title="1973 war" label="1973 war"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="94442" end="94448" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q126943948" start="94562" end="94571" title="Saddamism" label="Saddamism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808621" start="94671" end="94676" title="Babel (newspaper)" label="Babil"/>
<link wikidata="Q311916" start="94694" end="94706" title="Uday Hussein" label="Uday Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q6068152" start="94792" end="94809" title="Iraqi nationalism" label="Iraqi nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q114213" start="94814" end="94830" title="Arab nationalism" label="Arab nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q637251" start="94855" end="94873" title="ethnic nationalism" label="ethnic nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="94943" end="94948" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="95021" end="95032" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108185" start="95545" end="95566" title="Ba&amp;#x27;athist Iraq" label="Ba&amp;#x27;athist regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q8581" start="95622" end="95629" title="Saladin" label="Saladin"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="95655" end="95659" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q624887" start="95700" end="95710" title="Neo-Babylonian Empire" label="Babylonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12591" start="95716" end="95730" title="Nebuchadnezzar II" label="Nebuchadnezzar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="95769" end="95776" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="95826" end="95834" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q39524" start="95901" end="95919" title="Gamal Abdel Nasser" label="Gamal Abdel Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q40231" start="95944" end="95957" title="show election" label="show election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6068179" start="95985" end="96000" title="1995 Iraqi presidential referendum" label="1995 referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454894" start="96164" end="96190" title="2002 Iraqi presidential referendum" label="15 October 2002 referendum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="96468" end="96476" title="Iraq War#Iraq Study Group report and Saddam&amp;#x27;s execution" label="his fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q16538" start="96499" end="96509" title="South Park" label="South Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q898211" start="96593" end="96636" title="Terrance and Phillip in Not Without My Anus" label="Terrance and Phillip in Not Without My Anus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35230" start="96733" end="96738" title="Satan" label="Satan"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="96826" end="96833" title="Western world" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260" start="96834" end="96845" title="imperialism" label="imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q575187" start="96847" end="96878" title="Israeli-occupied territories" label="Israeli occupation of Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q19904136" start="98443" end="98457" title="Faith Campaign" label="Faith Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878844" start="98488" end="98497" title="Arab Socialist Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party – Iraq Region" label="our Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q334401" start="98741" end="98764" title="Surveillance" label="widespread surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q132781" start="98766" end="98773" title="torture" label="torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717573" start="98779" end="98801" title="extrajudicial killings" label="extrajudicial killings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863792" start="98803" end="98829" title="Human rights organizations" label="Human rights organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q82664" start="99218" end="99231" title="Iran-Iraq War" label="Iran-Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q856650" start="99233" end="99251" title="Invasion of Kuwait" label="Invasion of Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="99260" end="99268" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099093" start="99537" end="99571" title="International sanctions against Iraq" label="economic sanctions imposed on Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q126943948" start="99653" end="99662" title="Saddamism" label="Saddamism"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="99711" end="99716" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q114213" start="99717" end="99733" title="Arab nationalism" label="Arab nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q179121" start="99744" end="99753" title="Stalinism" label="Stalinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q125881435" start="99759" end="99766" title="Arab fascism" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="99821" end="99831" title="Arab world" label="Arab world"/>
<link wikidata="Q11163621" start="99877" end="99884" title="Iraq–Palestine relations" label="support"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616403" start="99892" end="99909" title="Palestinian cause" label="Palestinian cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q623159" start="99955" end="99963" title="Qalqilya" label="Qalqilya"/>
<link wikidata="Q219060" start="100055" end="100064" title="State of Palestine" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15942300" start="100109" end="100128" title="India–Iraq relations" label="strong relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q55759824" start="100198" end="100214" title="Sidhu Moose Wala" label="Sidhu Moose Wala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149" start="100338" end="100351" title="Indira Gandhi" label="Indira Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="100457" end="100469" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108185" start="100549" end="100553" title="Ba&amp;#x27;athist Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q956893" start="100587" end="100597" title="Malappuram" label="Malappuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q4404526" start="100613" end="100625" title="Saddam Beach" label="Saddam Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584232" start="100657" end="100667" title="Jordanians" label="Jordanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057435" start="100705" end="100723" title="Kurdish separatist" label="Kurdish separatist"/>
<link wikidata="Q61000498" start="100832" end="100857" title="Libyan National Army" label="Libyan National Arab Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298768" start="100859" end="100873" title="Khalifa Haftar" label="Khalifa Haftar"/>
<link wikidata="Q116754004" start="100889" end="100902" title="Saddam Haftar" label="Saddam Haftar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4702306" start="101143" end="101154" title="Al-Bu Nasir (Iraqi tribe)" label="Al-Bu Nasir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1213550" start="101254" end="101269" title="House of Saddam" label="House of Saddam"/>
<link wikidata="Q28542230" start="101296" end="101309" title="Barry Keoghan" label="Barry Keoghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630832" start="101398" end="101420" title="Modern history of Iraq" label="Modern history of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q4404526" start="101423" end="101435" title="Saddam Beach" label="Saddam Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397656" start="101438" end="101469" title="Saddam Hussein Nagar, Sri Lanka" label="Saddam Hussein Nagar, Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4271650" start="101472" end="101500" title="Saddam Hussein&amp;#x27;s novels" label="Saddam Hussein&amp;#x27;s novels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810587" start="101502" end="101531" title="U.S. list of most-wanted Iraqis" label="US list of most-wanted Iraqis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123232" start="101533" end="101564" title="Most-wanted Iraqi playing cards" label="Most-wanted Iraqi playing cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="101703" end="101711" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q649857" start="101747" end="101808" title="National Security Archive" label="National Security Archive at The George Washington University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29491" wikidata="Q204205" url="?curid=29491" title="Sonja Henie">
<text>Sonja Henie (8 April 1912 – 12 October 1969) was a Norwegian figure skater and film star. She was a three-time Olympic champion (1928, 1932, 1936) in women&#x27;s singles, a ten-time World champion (1927–1936) and a six-time European champion (1931–1936). Henie won more Olympic and World titles than any other ladies&#x27; figure skater. She is one of only two skaters to defend a ladies&#x27; singles Olympic title, the other being Katarina Witt, and her six European titles have only been matched by Witt.

At the height of Henie&#x27;s American acting career, she was one of the highest-paid stars in Hollywood and starred in a series of box-office hits, including &quot;Thin Ice&quot; (1937), &quot;Happy Landing&quot; (1938), &quot;My Lucky Star&quot; (1938), &quot;Second Fiddle&quot; (1939), and &quot;Sun Valley Serenade&quot; (1941).

==Biography==

===Early life===
Henie was born on 8 April 1912 in Kristiania (now Oslo), Norway; she was the only daughter of Wilhelm Henie (1872–1937), a prosperous Norwegian furrier, and his wife, Selma Lochmann-Nielsen (1888–1961). In addition to the income from the fur business, both of Henie&#x27;s parents had inherited wealth. Wilhelm Henie had been a one-time World Cycling Champion and the Henie children were encouraged to take up a variety of sports at a young age. Henie initially showed talent at skiing, then followed her older brother, Leif, to take up figure skating. As a girl Henie also was a nationally ranked tennis player, and a skilled swimmer and equestrian. Once Henie began serious training as a figure skater, her formal schooling ended. She was educated by tutors, and her father hired the best experts in the world, including the famous Russian ballerina, Tamara Karsavina, to transform his daughter into a sporting celebrity.

Henie began skating at the age of 5. She enjoyed music and dance from an early age, studying ballet and after starting her competitive skating career, admired the Russian ballet dancer Anna Pavlova after seeing her perform in London.

===Competitive career===

Henie placed eighth in a field of eight at the 1924 Winter Olympics, at the age of eleven. Henie won the first of an unprecedented ten consecutive World Figure Skating Championships in 1927 at the age of fourteen. The results of 1927 World Championships, where Henie won in 3–2 decision (or 7 vs. 8 ordinal points) over the defending Olympic and World Champion Herma Szabo of Austria, was &quot;controversial&quot;, as three of the five judges that gave Henie first-place ordinals were Norwegian (1 + 1 + 1 + 2 + 2 = 7 points) while Szabo received first-place ordinals from an Austrian and a German Judge (1 + 1 + 2 + 2 + 2 = 8 points). Henie went on to win first of her three Olympic gold medals the following year, becoming one of the youngest figure skating Olympic champions. She defended her Olympic titles in 1932 and in 1936, and her world titles annually until 1936. Henie and Gillis Grafström from Sweden are the only skaters to win three Olympic gold medals in single skating. She also won six consecutive European championships from 1931 to 1936.

Henie&#x27;s unprecedented three Olympic gold medals have not been matched by any ladies&#x27; single skater since, nor have her achievements as ten-time consecutive World champion. While Irina Slutskaya of Russia has held the record for most European titles among ladies&#x27; skaters since 2006, Henie still retains the record of most consecutive titles, sharing it with Katarina Witt of East Germany/Germany (1983–1988).

Towards the end of her career, she began to be strongly challenged by younger skaters including Cecilia Colledge, Megan Taylor, and Hedy Stenuf. However, she held off these competitors and went on to win her third Olympic title at the 1936 Winter Olympics, albeit in very controversial circumstances with Cecilia Colledge finishing a very close second. Indeed, after the school figures section at the 1936 Olympic competition, Colledge and Henie were virtually neck and neck with Colledge trailing by just a few points. As Sandra Stevenson recounted in &quot;The Independent&quot;, &quot;the closeness [of the competition] infuriated Henie, who, when the result for that section was posted on a wall in the competitors&#x27; lounge, swiped the piece of paper and tore it into little pieces.

The draw for the free skating [then] came under suspicion after Henie landed the plum position of skating last, while Colledge had to perform second of the 26 competitors. The early start was seen as a disadvantage, with the audience not yet whipped into a clapping frenzy and the judges known to become freer with their higher marks as the event proceeded. Years later, a fairer, staggered draw was adopted to counteract this situation&quot;.

During her competitive career, Henie traveled widely and worked with a variety of foreign coaches. At home in Oslo, she trained at Frogner Stadium, where her coaches included Hjørdis Olsen and Oscar Holte. During the latter part of her competitive career she was coached primarily by the American Howard Nicholson in London.

In addition to traveling to train and compete, she was much in demand as a performer at figure skating exhibitions in both Europe and North America. Henie became so popular with the public that police had to be called out for crowd control on her appearances in various disparate cities such as Prague and New York City.

It was an open secret that, in spite of the strict amateurism requirements of the time, Wilhelm Henie demanded &quot;expense money&quot; for his daughter&#x27;s skating appearances. Both of Henie&#x27;s parents had given up their own pursuits in Norway—leaving Leif to run the fur business—in order to accompany Sonja on her travels and act as her managers.

===Professional and film career===
After the 1936 World Figure Skating Championships, Henie gave up her amateur status and took up a career as a professional performer in acting and live shows. While still a girl, Henie had decided that she wanted to move to California and become a movie star when her competitive days were over, without considering that her strong accent might hinder her acting ambitions.

Henie opened up opportunities for figure skaters to use their skills to earn a living. In addition to appearing in Hollywood films, she toured North America with her own professional shows, thus amassing a great deal of personal wealth and by popularizing the ice show, opened up professional skating opportunities for other lesser-known figure skaters.

In 1936, following a successful ice show in Los Angeles orchestrated by her father to launch her film career, Hollywood studio chief Darryl Zanuck signed her to a long-term contract at Twentieth Century Fox, which made her one of the highest-paid actresses of the time. After the success of her first film, &quot;One in a Million&quot; (1936), Henie&#x27;s position was assured and she became increasingly demanding in her business dealings with Zanuck. Henie also insisted on having total control of the skating numbers in her films such as &quot;Second Fiddle&quot; (1939).

Henie tried to break the musical comedy mould with the anti-Nazi film &quot;Everything Happens at Night&quot; (1939) and &quot;It&#x27;s a Pleasure&quot; (1945), a skating variation of the often-told &quot;A Star Is Born&quot; tale about alcoholic-star-in-decline-helps-newcomer-up. It was her only film shot in Technicolor, but it was not as huge at the box office as her other films and also proved her limitations as a dramatic actress in her only dramatic film.

When Zanuck realized this, he cast her in more musical comedies; &quot;Sun Valley Serenade&quot; (1941) with Glenn Miller, John Payne, The Nicholas Brothers, and hit songs such as &quot;In the Mood&quot;, &quot;Chattanooga Choo Choo&quot;, &quot;It Happened in Sun Valley&quot;, and &quot;I Know Why (And So Do You)&quot;; followed by &quot;Iceland&quot; (1942) with Jack Oakie, Payne, and the hit song &quot;There Will Never Be Another You&quot;; and finally &quot;Wintertime&quot; (1943) with Cesar Romero, Carole Landis, Cornel Wilde, and Oakie. Sonja had by now developed a comedy flair and these films were all among the top box-office hits for 20th Century-Fox the respective years. Adjusted for 2017 dollars, eight Henie movies crossed the $100 million domestic gross mark. &quot;Happy Landing&quot; (1938) was her biggest box office hit.

In her film &quot;Everything Happens at Night&quot; (1939), Ray Milland and Robert Cummings star as rival reporters hot on the trail of Hugo Norden (Maurice Moscovich). Norden, a Nobel Prize winner, was supposedly murdered by the Gestapo, but is rumoured to be in hiding and writing anonymous dispatches advocating world peace. When Geoffrey and Ken track Norden to a small village in the Swiss Alps, they soon find themselves competing over the affections of beautiful Louise (Henie), who has a deeper connection to the missing Nobel laureate than the reporters realize. When Geoffrey and Ken get so distracted by romance that they begin to neglect their assignments, it almost leads to disaster as the Gestapo sets out to silence Norden once and for all. Released on 22 December 1939, it was banned in Nazi Germany.

In addition to her film career at Fox from 1936 to 1943, Henie formed a business arrangement with Arthur Wirtz, who produced her touring ice shows under the name of &quot;Hollywood Ice Revue&quot;. Wirtz also acted as Henie&#x27;s financial advisor. At the time, figure skating and ice shows were not yet an established form of entertainment in the United States. Henie&#x27;s popularity as a film actress attracted many new fans and instituted skating shows as a popular new entertainment. Throughout the 1940s, Henie and Wirtz produced lavish musical ice skating extravaganzas at Rockefeller Center&#x27;s Center Theatre attracting millions of ticket buyers.
Henie broke off her arrangement with Wirtz in 1950 and for the next three seasons produced her own tours under the name &quot;Sonja Henie Ice Revue&quot;. It was an ill-advised decision to set herself up in competition with Wirtz, whose shows now featured the new Olympic champion Barbara Ann Scott. Since Wirtz controlled the best arenas and dates, Henie was left playing smaller venues and markets already saturated by other touring ice shows such as Ice Capades. The collapse of a section of bleachers during a show in Baltimore, Maryland, in 1952 compounded the tour&#x27;s legal and financial woes.

In 1953, Henie formed a new partnership with Morris Chalfen to appear in his European &quot;Holiday On Ice&quot; tour, which proved to be a great success. She produced her own show at New York&#x27;s Roxy Theatre in January 1956. However, a subsequent South American tour in 1956 was a disaster. Henie was drinking heavily at that time and could no longer keep up with the demands of touring, and this marked her retirement from skating.

She did try to make a film series at her own expense; a series that would serve as a travelogue to several cities. Paris and London were mentioned, but only &quot;Hello London&quot; (1958) was made with her own backing, co-starring Michael Wilding and special guest star Stanley Holloway. While her ice show numbers were still worth watching, the film received few distributors and poor reviews, ending her film career.

Her autobiography &quot;Mitt livs eventyr&quot; was published in 1938. An English translation, &quot;Wings on My Feet&quot;, was released in 1940 and republished in a revised edition in 1954. At the time of her death, the 57-year-old Henie was planning a comeback for a television special that would have aired in January 1970. She was to have danced to &quot;Lara&#x27;s Theme&quot; from &quot;Doctor Zhivago&quot;.

===As international celebrity===

Henie&#x27;s connections with Adolf Hitler and other high-ranking Nazi officials made her the subject of controversy before, during, and after World War II. During her amateur skating career, she performed often in Germany and was a favorite of German audiences and of Hitler personally. As a wealthy celebrity, she moved in the same social circles as royalty and heads of state and made Hitler&#x27;s acquaintance as a matter of course.

Through the years, her shows and later art exhibitions drew the attention of such people as Princess Margaret, Countess of Snowdon and Gustaf VI Adolf of Sweden and she met with them. During the shooting of &quot;Second Fiddle&quot; (1939), she greeted the then Crown-Prince couple of Norway Olav and Märtha during their US tour.

Controversy appeared first when Henie greeted Hitler with a Nazi salute at the 1936 Winter Olympics in Garmisch-Partenkirchen and after the Games she accepted an invitation to lunch with Hitler at his resort home in Berchtesgaden in far southeastern Bavaria, where Hitler presented Henie with an autographed photo with a lengthy inscription. She was strongly denounced in the Norwegian press for this.

In her revised 1954 biography, she states that no Norwegian judge was in the panel for the 1936 Olympics—as she was entitled to as a Norwegian. She therefore made the best of it and won her third Olympic medal. When she—as a gold medal winner—passed Hitler&#x27;s tribune with silver medalist Cecilia Colledge and bronze medalist Vivi-Anne Hultén, neither she nor the others honored Hitler with the Nazi salute. The 1936 European Figure Skating Championships also took place in Berlin and neither Henie, Colledge, nor Megan Taylor paid obeisance to Hitler.

=== Influence ===
Henie is credited with being the first figure skater to use dance choreography, to adopt the short skirt in figure skating, and to wear white boots, which deemphasized the heaviness of skates and produced a lighter and longer appearance of the skater&#x27;s legs that was &quot;a focal point for judges&#x27; and spectators&#x27; gaze&quot;. When white boots quickly became standard for female skaters, Henie began wearing beige boots because she wanted to remain unique.

Her innovative skating techniques and glamorous demeanor transformed the sport permanently and confirmed its acceptance as a legitimate sport in the Winter Olympics. Figure skating writer and historian Ellyn Kestnbaum credits Henie with transforming figure skating into what she calls &quot;a spectacle of the skater&#x27;s body&quot; and for &quot;shifting [the sport&#x27;s] meanings firmly in the direction of femininity&quot;. Kestnbaum argues that Henie influenced female skaters&#x27; costumes that emphasized their wealth, especially her fur-trimmed outfits, which were emulated at the 1930 World Championships, held for the first time in North America, in New York City. Henie incorporated dance elements into her figure skating, through the placement of spins, jumps, and choreography to reflect the mood of the music she used.

Kestnbaum argues that although Henie&#x27;s skating was &quot;athletic and powerful for her day&quot;, she added elements,such as using the toepicks of her skates to run or pose on the ice, in movements similar to the use of pointe technique in ballet. Kestnbaum argues that although toe steps are used as &quot;occasional couterpoints to the legato flow of skating movement&quot;, Henie might have overused them, calling them &quot;mincing and ineffective&quot;.

Also according to Kestnbaum, &quot;Henie&#x27;s largest contribution to public images of skating&quot; was in her professional ice shows and in her Hollywood films, which were often the first time audiences were exposed to figure skating through the mass media. As a result, the image of the figure skater was linked to &quot;the image of the glamorous movie star&quot;, within the conventions of film and stage musicals of the 1930s. Kestnbaum argues that the costumes Henie wore in her shows and films, which were short, revealing, full of sequins and feathers, and more reminiscent of the costumes of female entertainers than of the clothes worn in the more conservative world of competitive figure skating of the time, most likely contributed to the &quot;showiness&quot; that influenced the costume choices of later generations of female competitive figure skaters.

===Personal life===
Henie was married three times: to Dan Topping (1940–1946), Winthrop Gardiner Jr. (1949–1956), and Niels Onstad (1956–1969), a Norwegian shipping magnate and art patron. After her retirement in 1956, Henie and Onstad settled in Oslo and accumulated a large collection of modern art that formed the basis for the Henie Onstad Art Centre at Høvikodden in Bærum near Oslo.

She studied in Oslo together with Martin Stixrud and Erna Andersen who was her competitor and skate club member.

Henie was diagnosed with chronic lymphocytic leukemia in the mid-1960s. She died of the disease at age 57 in 1969 in an ambulance plane flight from Paris to Oslo. She is buried with Onstad in Oslo on the hilltop overlooking the Henie Onstad Art Centre.

==Results==

===Ladies&#x27; singles===

===Pairs===
(with Arne Lie)
==Awards==
* Inducted into the World Figure Skating Hall of Fame (1976)
* Inducted into the International Women&#x27;s Sports Hall of Fame (1982)
* She has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.
* In 1938, at age 25, she became the youngest person to be made a knight first class of The Royal Norwegian Order of St. Olav.
* Honorary Colonel and Godmother of the 508th Parachute Infantry Regiment, 82nd Airborne Division, Fort Bragg, North Carolina

==Filmography==
==Other appearances==
* For a time, Sonja Henie&#x27;s picture adorned the tail of a Boeing 737-300 of the airline Norwegian Air Shuttle. As the Boeing 737-300 was being phased out, her picture was placed on the tail of a Boeing 737-800 of the same airline and in 2013 to the tail of Norwegian Air Shuttle&#x27;s first Boeing 787 Dreamliner. One of the airline&#x27;s trademarks is having portraits of famous deceased Norwegians on the tails of its aircraft.
* In 2012, the Posten Norge (Norwegian postal service) issued two stamps featuring Sonja Henie.

==In popular culture==
Henie was portrayed by Ine Marie Wilmann in the 2018 Anne Sewitsky film &quot;Sonja – The White Swan&quot;, shown at the 2019 Sundance Film Festival.

Her name and likeness were mentioned and portrayed by an ice skating Donald Duck in Walt Disney&#x27;s 1939 &quot;The Hockey Champ&quot;.

Her name and appearance was shown in episode 285 of MASH 4077.

Her animated counterpart appeared in the Disney short, &quot;The Autograph Hound&quot; when Donald asked for her autograph.

She is mentioned by Ty Webb, Chevy Chase&#x27;s character in &quot;Caddyshack&quot;, as a possible but unavailable substitute for Rodney Dangerfield&#x27;s character (Al Czervik) in the final “golf wager” round before Michael O’Keefe&#x27;s Danny Noonan is chosen.

&quot;Sonja Henie&#x27;s tutu!&quot; was a frequent exclamatory utterance by Tom and Ray Magliozzi on the National Public Radio show Car Talk.

==Works==

==References==
== Works cited ==
* Andersen, Alf G. &quot;Som i en drøm: Sonja Henies liv&quot;. Schibsted (1985) 
* Henie, Leif and Raymond Strait. &quot;Queen of Ice, Queen of Shadows: The Unsuspected Life of Sonja Henie&quot;.
* Hines, James R. (2011). &quot;Historical Dictionary of Figure Skating&quot;. Lanham, Maryland: Scarecrow Press. .
* Kestnbaum, Ellyn (2003). &quot;Culture on Ice: Figure Skating and Cultural Meaning.&quot; Middleton, Connecticut: Wesleyan Publishing Press. .
*&quot;Variety&quot; (January 1943)
*&quot;Variety&quot; (January 1944)

==External links==
*
*Olympic.org Athlete Profile – Henie
*Henie skating in 1947, film clip by British Pathé</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q204205" start="0" end="11" title="Sonja Henie" label="Sonja Henie"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="51" end="60" title="Norway" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q38108" start="61" end="74" title="figure skating" label="figure skater"/>
<link wikidata="Q942792" start="111" end="127" title="List of Olympic medalists in figure skating" label="Olympic champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q659635" start="129" end="133" title="Figure skating at the 1928 Winter Olympics" label="1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q849601" start="135" end="139" title="Figure skating at the 1932 Winter Olympics" label="1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q666530" start="141" end="145" title="Figure skating at the 1936 Winter Olympics" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310143" start="163" end="170" title="single skating" label="singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q285389" start="183" end="197" title="World Figure Skating Championships" label="World champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q869121" start="225" end="242" title="European Figure Skating Championships" label="European champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q58028" start="434" end="447" title="Katarina Witt" label="Katarina Witt"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="605" end="614" title="Cinema in the United States" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144211" start="675" end="683" title="Thin Ice (1937 film)" label="Thin Ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5652897" start="704" end="717" title="Happy Landing (1938 film)" label="Happy Landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q12126403" start="738" end="751" title="My Lucky Star (1938 film)" label="My Lucky Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735648" start="772" end="785" title="Second Fiddle (1939 film)" label="Second Fiddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q366244" start="810" end="829" title="Sun Valley Serenade" label="Sun Valley Serenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="927" end="931" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246881" start="971" end="984" title="Wilhelm Henie" label="Wilhelm Henie"/>
<link wikidata="Q197195" start="1021" end="1028" title="fur clothing" label="furrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q639244" start="1214" end="1236" title="UCI Track Cycling World Championships" label="World Cycling Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q130949" start="1356" end="1362" title="skiing" label="skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q38108" start="1414" end="1428" title="figure skating" label="figure skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="1475" end="1481" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q31920" start="1504" end="1511" title="swimming (sport)" label="swimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q179226" start="1516" end="1526" title="equestrianism" label="equestrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q231316" start="1730" end="1746" title="Tamara Karsavina" label="Tamara Karsavina"/>
<link wikidata="Q41425" start="1895" end="1901" title="ballet" label="ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q151874" start="1987" end="1999" title="Anna Pavlova" label="Anna Pavlova"/>
<link wikidata="Q9583" start="2110" end="2130" title="1924 Winter Olympics" label="1924 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q255854" start="2424" end="2435" title="Herma Szabo" label="Herma Szabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="2439" end="2446" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="2740" end="2747" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q314679" start="2948" end="2964" title="Gillis Grafström" label="Gillis Grafström"/>
<link wikidata="Q231590" start="3310" end="3325" title="Irina Slutskaya" label="Irina Slutskaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q58028" start="3495" end="3508" title="Katarina Witt" label="Katarina Witt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="3512" end="3524" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="3525" end="3532" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q243064" start="3643" end="3659" title="Cecilia Colledge" label="Cecilia Colledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q271701" start="3661" end="3673" title="Megan Taylor" label="Megan Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q518975" start="3679" end="3690" title="Hedy Stenuf" label="Hedy Stenuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q9600" start="3782" end="3802" title="1936 Winter Olympics" label="1936 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="4106" end="4121" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469545" start="4915" end="4930" title="Frogner" label="Frogner Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="5101" end="5107" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="5405" end="5411" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="5416" end="5429" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q15991269" start="5483" end="5493" title="amateur sports" label="amateurism"/>
<link wikidata="Q285389" start="5841" end="5875" title="World Figure Skating Championships" label="World Figure Skating Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="6050" end="6060" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="6600" end="6611" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q364342" start="6689" end="6702" title="Darryl Zanuck" label="Darryl Zanuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="6741" end="6762" title="Twentieth Century Fox" label="Twentieth Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302885" start="6869" end="6885" title="One in a Million (1936 film)" label="One in a Million"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735648" start="7104" end="7117" title="Second Fiddle (1939 film)" label="Second Fiddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417996" start="7209" end="7236" title="Everything Happens at Night" label="Everything Happens at Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q12125178" start="7260" end="7280" title="It&amp;#x27;s a Pleasure (film)" label="It&amp;#x27;s a Pleasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q873186" start="7339" end="7353" title="A Star Is Born (1937 film)" label="A Star Is Born"/>
<link wikidata="Q674564" start="7445" end="7456" title="Technicolor" label="Technicolor"/>
<link wikidata="Q366244" start="7671" end="7690" title="Sun Valley Serenade" label="Sun Valley Serenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q103651" start="7709" end="7721" title="Glenn Miller" label="Glenn Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q723415" start="7723" end="7733" title="John Payne (actor)" label="John Payne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786868" start="7735" end="7756" title="The Nicholas Brothers" label="The Nicholas Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413725" start="7786" end="7797" title="In the Mood" label="In the Mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q280512" start="7811" end="7832" title="Chattanooga Choo Choo" label="Chattanooga Choo Choo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4041659" start="7846" end="7871" title="It Happened in Sun Valley" label="It Happened in Sun Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977859" start="7889" end="7915" title="I Know Why (And So Do You)" label="I Know Why (And So Do You)"/>
<link wikidata="Q685885" start="7941" end="7948" title="Iceland (film)" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q545846" start="7967" end="7977" title="Jack Oakie" label="Jack Oakie"/>
<link wikidata="Q929316" start="8009" end="8040" title="There Will Never Be Another You" label="There Will Never Be Another You"/>
<link wikidata="Q12133955" start="8066" end="8076" title="Wintertime (film)" label="Wintertime"/>
<link wikidata="Q443585" start="8095" end="8107" title="Cesar Romero" label="Cesar Romero"/>
<link wikidata="Q242785" start="8109" end="8122" title="Carole Landis" label="Carole Landis"/>
<link wikidata="Q727740" start="8124" end="8136" title="Cornel Wilde" label="Cornel Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="8250" end="8266" title="20th Century-Fox" label="20th Century-Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417996" start="8465" end="8492" title="Everything Happens at Night" label="Everything Happens at Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q181774" start="8507" end="8518" title="Ray Milland" label="Ray Milland"/>
<link wikidata="Q366678" start="8523" end="8538" title="Robert Cummings" label="Robert Cummings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865382" start="9364" end="9376" title="Arthur Wirtz" label="Arthur Wirtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q11277" start="9848" end="9866" title="Rockefeller Center" label="Rockefeller Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059357" start="9874" end="9888" title="Center Theatre (New York, New York)" label="Center Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q239812" start="10208" end="10225" title="Barbara Ann Scott" label="Barbara Ann Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335503" start="10380" end="10391" title="Ice Capades" label="Ice Capades"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="10449" end="10468" title="Baltimore, Maryland" label="Baltimore, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913641" start="10577" end="10591" title="Morris Chalfen" label="Morris Chalfen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540545" start="10624" end="10638" title="Holiday On Ice" label="Holiday On Ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170757" start="10732" end="10744" title="Roxy Theatre (New York City)" label="Roxy Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5708785" start="11134" end="11146" title="Hello London" label="Hello London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385992" start="11203" end="11218" title="Michael Wilding (actor)" label="Michael Wilding"/>
<link wikidata="Q549287" start="11242" end="11258" title="Stanley Holloway" label="Stanley Holloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705807" start="11752" end="11769" title="Lara&amp;#x27;s Theme" label="Lara&amp;#x27;s Theme"/>
<link wikidata="Q323827" start="11787" end="11801" title="Doctor Zhivago (film)" label="Doctor Zhivago"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="11874" end="11886" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="11910" end="11914" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="11987" end="11999" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="12059" end="12066" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q153815" start="12375" end="12413" title="Princess Margaret, Countess of Snowdon" label="Princess Margaret, Countess of Snowdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q52878" start="12418" end="12443" title="Gustaf VI Adolf of Sweden" label="Gustaf VI Adolf of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735648" start="12496" end="12509" title="Second Fiddle (1939 film)" label="Second Fiddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q154912" start="12575" end="12579" title="Olav V of Norway" label="Olav"/>
<link wikidata="Q231281" start="12584" end="12590" title="Princess Märtha of Sweden" label="Märtha"/>
<link wikidata="Q153271" start="12674" end="12685" title="Nazi salute" label="Nazi salute"/>
<link wikidata="Q127043" start="12717" end="12739" title="Garmisch-Partenkirchen" label="Garmisch-Partenkirchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q278221" start="12830" end="12843" title="Berchtesgaden" label="Berchtesgaden"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="12864" end="12871" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q243064" start="13310" end="13326" title="Cecilia Colledge" label="Cecilia Colledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q270060" start="13347" end="13363" title="Vivi-Anne Hultén" label="Vivi-Anne Hultén"/>
<link wikidata="Q556541" start="13433" end="13475" title="1936 European Figure Skating Championships" label="1936 European Figure Skating Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q271701" start="13535" end="13547" title="Megan Taylor" label="Megan Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q180856" start="13659" end="13671" title="choreography" label="choreography"/>
<link wikidata="Q24081" start="14659" end="14683" title="1930 World Figure Skating Championships" label="1930 World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="14730" end="14743" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302727" start="15129" end="15145" title="pointe technique" label="pointe technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q649116" start="15247" end="15253" title="legato" label="legato"/>
<link wikidata="Q674273" start="15911" end="15917" title="sequin" label="sequin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214501" start="16295" end="16306" title="Dan Topping" label="Dan Topping"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574909" start="16359" end="16371" title="Niels Onstad" label="Niels Onstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779403" start="16599" end="16609" title="Høvikodden" label="Høvikodden"/>
<link wikidata="Q57076" start="16613" end="16618" title="Bærum" label="Bærum"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="16624" end="16628" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="16646" end="16650" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q955453" start="16665" end="16679" title="Martin Stixrud" label="Martin Stixrud"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16684" end="16697" title="Erna Andersen" label="Erna Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088156" start="16770" end="16798" title="chronic lymphocytic leukemia" label="chronic lymphocytic leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q763256" start="16865" end="16880" title="ambulance plane" label="ambulance plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="16893" end="16898" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="16902" end="16906" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q377611" start="17099" end="17132" title="World Figure Skating Hall of Fame" label="World Figure Skating Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="17238" end="17260" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q94345" start="17350" end="17387" title="The Royal Norwegian Order of St. Olav" label="The Royal Norwegian Order of St. Olav"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358" start="17464" end="17486" title="82nd Airborne Division" label="82nd Airborne Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355950" start="17617" end="17631" title="Boeing 737-300" label="Boeing 737-300"/>
<link wikidata="Q215392" start="17647" end="17668" title="Norwegian Air Shuttle" label="Norwegian Air Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084919" start="17754" end="17768" title="Boeing 737-800" label="Boeing 737-800"/>
<link wikidata="Q6428" start="17851" end="17872" title="Boeing 787 Dreamliner" label="Boeing 787 Dreamliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q188779" start="17950" end="17960" title="Norwegians" label="Norwegians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815701" start="18006" end="18018" title="Posten Norge" label="Posten Norge"/>
<link wikidata="Q17113974" start="18134" end="18151" title="Ine Marie Wilmann" label="Ine Marie Wilmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q17107235" start="18164" end="18177" title="Anne Sewitsky" label="Anne Sewitsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q59156630" start="18232" end="18259" title="2019 Sundance Film Festival" label="2019 Sundance Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q6550" start="18331" end="18342" title="Donald Duck" label="Donald Duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948693" start="18376" end="18392" title="The Hockey Champ" label="The Hockey Champ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961414" start="18526" end="18545" title="The Autograph Hound" label="The Autograph Hound"/>
<link wikidata="Q680922" start="18933" end="18954" title="Tom and Ray Magliozzi" label="Tom and Ray Magliozzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="18962" end="18983" title="National Public Radio" label="National Public Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917613" start="18989" end="18997" title="Car Talk" label="Car Talk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893565" start="19670" end="19683" title="British Pathé" label="British Pathé"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29493" wikidata="Q7433469" url="?curid=29493" title="Science &amp; Environmental Policy Project">
<text>The Science &amp; Environmental Policy Project (SEPP) is an advocacy group financed by private contributions based in Arlington County, Virginia. It was founded in 1990 by atmospheric physicist S. Fred Singer.

SEPP disputes the prevailing scientific views on several scientific issues including climate change, ozone depletion, and the health risks of secondhand smoke.

SEPP&#x27;s former chairman of the Board of Directors is listed as Rockefeller University president emeritus Frederick Seitz, a former president of the National Academy of Sciences, now deceased.

==SEPP&#x27;s views==
SEPP listed the following key issues in 2010: 
* &quot;Computer models forecast rapidly rising global temperatures, but data from weather satellites and balloon instruments show no warming whatsoever. Nevertheless, these same unreliable computer models underpin the Global Climate Treaty.&quot;
* In preparing its 1995 report, the UN-sponsored Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change unfairly marginalized scientific views which do not support the conclusion that human activity is causing climate change.
* The Environmental Protection Agency has promulgated various regulations (pertaining to e.g. smog, ozone, environmental toxins, and particulate matter) which significantly harm the economy with negligible environmental benefit.
* No detectable increase in ultraviolet radiation has been demonstrated from thinning of the ozone layer. The ban on CFCs in developed countries is economically harmful and ineffective, because they are still produced in developing countries.
* In general, science has been misused to promote &quot;politically correct&quot; views, and the mechanisms of science funding contribute to a systemic bias.
* Natural resources are best managed by free-market mechanisms in the context of clearly established property rights.
* The U.S. space program should focus on crewed exploration of Mars (as opposed to uncrewed problems, or crewed exploration of low Earth orbit), with the Moon as a stepping stone.
* Efforts to protect the Earth from asteroid impact have been neglected.

On September 2, 1997, Singer said that &quot;The possibility that global temperatures could rise because of an increase in carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is a concern that needs to be monitored...But there has been no indication in the last century that we&#x27;ve seen anything other than natural climate fluctuations. Both greenhouse theory and computer models predict that global warming should be more rapid in the polar regions than anywhere else,&quot; he says, &quot;but in July the Antarctic experienced the coldest weather on record.&quot;

SEPP was the author of the Leipzig Declaration, which was based on the conclusions drawn from a November 1995 conference in Leipzig, Germany, which SEPP organized with the European Academy for Environmental Affairs.

==NIPCC==
In 2008, The Science and Environmental Policy Project completed the organization of the Nongovernmental International Panel on Climate Change (NIPCC) as the culmination of a process that began in 2003. The NIPCC calls itself &quot;an international coalition of scientists convened to provide an independent examination of the evidence available on the causes and consequences of climate change in the published, peer-reviewed literature – examined without bias and selectivity.&quot;

The 2008 NIPCC document titled &quot;Nature, Not Human Activity Rules the Climate: Summary for Policymakers of the Report of the Nongovernmental International Panel of Climate Change&quot;, published by The Heartland Institute, was released in February–March 2008. Singer served as General Editor and also holds the copyright.

Unnamed climate scientists from NASA, Stanford University and Princeton who were contacted by ABC News dismissed the same report as &quot;fabricated nonsense.&quot;. In response, Singer objected to the ABC News piece, calling it &quot;an appalling display of bias, unfairness, journalistic misbehavior, and a breakdown of ethical standards&quot; which used &quot;prejudicial language, distorted facts, libelous insinuations, and anonymous smears.&quot;

==See also==
* Global warming controversy
* Ozone depletion

==References==
==Further reading==
In 2004 Singer was coauthor of two papers published in Geophysical Research Letters:
* Douglass, D. H., B. D. Pearson, and S. F. Singer (2004), Altitude dependence of atmospheric temperature trends: Climate models versus observation, Geophys. Res. Lett., 31, L13208, .
* Douglass, D. H., B. D. Pearson, S. F. Singer, P. C. Knappenberger, and P. J. Michaels (2004), Disparity of tropospheric and surface temperature trends: New evidence, Geophys. Res. Lett., 31, L13207, .

Scientific criticism of SEPP&#x27;s views:
* &quot;The Ozone Backlash,&quot; Science, New Series, Vol. 260, No. 5114, pp. 1580–1583, June 11, 1993.

== External links ==
* The Science &amp; Environmental Policy Project
* SEPP at SourceWatch</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7433469" start="0" end="46" title="Science &amp;amp; Environmental Policy Project" label="The Science &amp;amp; Environmental Policy Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q107126" start="118" end="144" title="Arlington County, Virginia" label="Arlington County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q366340" start="194" end="208" title="S. Fred Singer" label="S. Fred Singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115646" start="296" end="310" title="scientific opinion on climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q183140" start="312" end="327" title="ozone depletion" label="ozone depletion"/>
<link wikidata="Q259516" start="353" end="369" title="secondhand smoke" label="secondhand smoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q270272" start="439" end="461" title="Rockefeller University" label="Rockefeller University"/>
<link wikidata="Q983364" start="481" end="496" title="Frederick Seitz" label="Frederick Seitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="524" end="552" title="United States National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280767" start="721" end="739" title="satellite temperature measurements" label="weather satellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q852817" start="744" end="763" title="radiosonde" label="balloon instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q171183" start="935" end="976" title="Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change" label="Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="1105" end="1136" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q169994" start="1193" end="1197" title="smog" label="smog"/>
<link wikidata="Q36933" start="1199" end="1204" title="ozone" label="ozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="1356" end="1367" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q960800" start="1445" end="1449" title="CFCs" label="CFCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q15490293" start="1714" end="1727" title="systemic bias" label="systemic bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="1910" end="1914" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q663611" start="1974" end="1989" title="low Earth orbit" label="low Earth orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="2001" end="2005" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="2052" end="2057" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q265392" start="2063" end="2078" title="Near-Earth asteroid" label="asteroid impact"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520155" start="2680" end="2699" title="Leipzig Declaration" label="Leipzig Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="2777" end="2793" title="Leipzig, Germany" label="Leipzig, Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q5412204" start="2825" end="2867" title="European Academy for Environmental Affairs" label="European Academy for Environmental Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q21741476" start="2968" end="3029" title="Nongovernmental International Panel on Climate Change" label="Nongovernmental International Panel on Climate Change (NIPCC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430548" start="3243" end="3273" title="effects of climate change" label="consequences of climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972943" start="3555" end="3564" title="publisher" label="published"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151745" start="3568" end="3591" title="The Heartland Institute" label="The Heartland Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="3725" end="3729" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="3731" end="3750" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="3755" end="3764" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q15278684" start="4162" end="4188" title="Global warming controversy" label="Global warming controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q183140" start="4191" end="4206" title="Ozone depletion" label="Ozone depletion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059762" start="4945" end="4956" title="SourceWatch" label="SourceWatch"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29494" wikidata="Q155699" url="?curid=29494" title="Abbey of Saint Gall">
<text>The Abbey of Saint Gall () is a dissolved abbey (747–1805) in a Catholic religious complex in the city of St. Gallen in Switzerland. The Carolingian-era monastery existed from 719, founded by Saint Othmar on the spot where Saint Gall had erected his hermitage. It became an independent principality between 9th and 13th centuries, and was for many centuries one of the chief Benedictine abbeys in Europe. The library of the Abbey is one of the oldest monastic libraries in the world.

The city of St. Gallen originated as an adjoining settlement of the abbey. The abbey was secularized around 1800, and in 1848 its former church became St. Gallen Cathedral, the seat of the Diocese of Saint Gallen. Since 1983 the abbey precinct has been a UNESCO World Heritage Site.

==History==

===Foundation===
Around 612 Gallus, according to tradition an Irish monk and disciple and companion of Saint Columbanus, established a hermitage on the site that would become the monastery. He lived in his cell until his death in 646, and was buried there in Arbon (Canton of Thurgau). Afterwards, the people venerated him as a saint and prayed at his tomb for his intercession in times of danger.

Following Gallus&#x27; death, his disciples remained living together in his cell and followed the rule of St. Columban, which combined prayer, work of the hands, reading, and teaching. They aided and taught virtue to the many pilgrims who came to St. Gall&#x27;s tomb. St. Magnus was the first successor of St. Gallen, but he soon left on a mission to Allgäu, Swabia. His successors were the deacon Stephen and the priest Magulfe, under whom the news of St. Gallen&#x27;s miracles spread throughout most of Germany.

Several different dates are given for the foundation of the monastery, including 719, 720, 747 and the middle of the 8th century. A gentleman and judge of Thurgau, Waltraf (possibly, Waltram or Gaudran), in order to use the alms and collections that were being given at St. Gall&#x27;s tomb to found a more regular monastery, attracted a local Alemannic pastor Otmar. Waltraf went to see Charles Martel, gave him the property of the hermitage, and asked him to give the administration of it to Otmar. Charles agreed and sent Otmar the finances to build a monastery. After the death of Charles Martel, his son Pepin continued to support them. On the recommendation of his brother Carloman, who had visited this monastery on his way to Italy, Pepin gave the monastery privileges, letters of protection, and an assured income. Pepin placed the rule of St. Benedict in the hands of St. Otmar (to be substituted for that of St. Columban).

Otmar (or Othmar) is named as the founder and the first abbot of the Abbey of St. Gall. During his abbacy the St. Gall School was founded. Otmar extended St. Gall&#x27;s original hermit cell and adopted the Carolingian style for his building projects. The abbey grew quickly; many Alemannic noblemen entered to become monks and arts, letters and sciences flourished. The register of monastic professions, at the end of abbot Otmar&#x27;s rule makes mentions of 53 names. Two monks of the Abbey of St Gall, Magnus of Füssen and Theodor, founded the monasteries in Kempten and Füssen in the Allgäu. With the growth in the number of monks the abbey also grew economically stronger. Much land in Thurgau, Zürichgau and in the rest of Alemannia as far as the Neckar was donated to the abbey by means of &quot;Stiftungen&quot;. Under abbot Waldo of Reichenau (740–814) copying of manuscripts was undertaken and a famous library was gathered. Numerous Anglo-Saxon and Irish monks came to copy manuscripts. At Charlemagne&#x27;s request Pope Adrian I sent distinguished cantors from Rome, who instructed the monks in the use of the Gregorian chant. In 744, the Alemannic nobleman Beata sold several properties to the abbey in order to finance his journey to Rome.

===Golden Age===

In the subsequent century, St. Gall came into conflict with the nearby Bishopric of Constance which had recently acquired jurisdiction over the Abbey of Reichenau on Lake Constance. It was not until Emperor Louis the Pious (ruled 814–840) confirmed in 813 the imperial immediacy (&quot;Reichsunmittelbarkeit&quot;) of the abbey, that this conflict ceased. The abbey became an Imperial Abbey (&quot;Reichsabtei&quot;). King Louis the German confirmed in 833 the immunity of the abbey and allowed the monks the free choice of their abbot. In 854 finally, the Abbey of St Gall reached its full autonomy by King Louis the German releasing the abbey from the obligation to pay tithes to the Bishop of Constance.

From this time until the 10th century, the abbey flourished. It was home to several famous scholars, including Notker of Liège, Notker the Stammerer, Notker Labeo, Tuotilo and Hartker (who developed the antiphonal liturgical books for the abbey). During the 9th century a new, larger church was built and the library was expanded. Manuscripts on a wide variety of topics were purchased by the abbey and copies were made. Over 400 manuscripts from this time have survived and are still in the library today.

===Silver Age===

Between 924 and 933 the Magyars threatened the abbey and the books had to be removed to Reichenau for safety. Not all the books were returned.

On 26 April 937 a fire broke out and destroyed much of the abbey and the adjoining settlement, though the library was undamaged. About 954 they started to protect the monastery and buildings by a surrounding wall. Around 971/974 abbot Notker (about whom almost nothing is known; nephew of Notker Physicus) finalized the walling and the adjoining settlements started to become the town of St Gall. In 1006, the abbey was the northernmost place where a sighting of the 1006 supernova was recorded.

The death of abbot Ulrich II on 9 December 1076 terminated the cultural silver age of the monastery.

===Under the Prince-Abbots===


In 1207, abbot Ulrich von Saxwas raised to the rank of Prince (&quot;Reichsfürst&quot;, or simply &quot;Fürst&quot;) of the Holy Roman Empire by King Philip of Germany. The abbey became a Princely Abbey (&quot;Reichsabtei&quot;). As the abbey became more involved in local politics, it entered a period of decline. 
The city of St. Gallen proper progressively freed itself from the rule of the abbot, acquiring Imperial immediacy, and by the late 15th century was recognized as a Free imperial city.
By about 1353 the guilds, headed by the cloth-weavers guild, gained control of the civic government. In 1415 the city bought its liberty from the German king King Sigismund.
During the 14th century Humanists were allowed to carry off some of the rare texts from the abbey library.

In the late 14th and early 15th centuries, the farmers of the abbot&#x27;s personal estates (known as &quot;Appenzell&quot;, from meaning &quot;cell (i.e. estate) of the abbot&quot;) began seeking independence. In 1401, the first of the Appenzell Wars broke out, and following the Appenzell victory at Stoss in 1405 they became allies of the Swiss Confederation in 1411. During the Appenzell Wars, the town of St. Gallen often sided with Appenzell against the abbey. So when Appenzell allied with the Swiss, the town of St. Gallen followed just a few months later. The abbot became an ally of several members of the Swiss Confederation (Zürich, Lucerne, Schwyz and Glarus) in 1451, while Appenzell and St. Gallen became full members of the Swiss Confederation in 1454. Then, in 1457, the town of St. Gallen became officially free from the abbot.

In 1468 the abbot, Ulrich Rösch, bought the County of Toggenburg from the representatives of its counts, after the family died out in 1436. In 1487 he built a monastery at Rorschach on Lake Constance, to which he planned to move. However, he encountered stiff resistance from the St. Gallen citizenry, other clerics, and the Appenzell nobility in the Rhine Valley who were concerned about their holdings. The town of St. Gallen wanted to restrict the increase of power in the abbey and simultaneously increase the power of the town. The mayor of St. Gallen, Ulrich Varnbüler, established contact with farmers and Appenzell residents (led by the fanatical Hermann Schwendiner) who were seeking an opportunity to weaken the abbot. Initially, he protested to the abbot and the representatives of the four sponsoring Confederate cantons (Zürich, Lucerne, Schwyz, and Glarus) against the construction of the new abbey in Rorschach. Then on July 28, 1489, he had armed troops from St. Gallen and Appenzell destroy the buildings already under construction. When the abbot complained to the Confederates about the damages and demanded full compensation, Varnbüler responded with a counter suit and in cooperation with Schwendiner rejected the arbitration efforts of the non-partisan Confederates. He motivated the clerics from Wil to Rorschach to discard their loyalty to the abbey and spoke against the abbey at the town meeting at Waldkirch, where the popular league was formed. He was confident that the four sponsoring cantons would not intervene with force, due to the prevailing tensions between the Confederation and the Swabian League. He was strengthened in his resolve by the fact that the people of St. Gallen elected him again to the highest magistrate in 1490.

====An associate of the Swiss Confederation====
However, in early 1490 the four cantons decided to carry out their duty to the abbey and to invade the St. Gallen canton with an armed force. The people of Appenzell and the local clerics submitted to this force without noteworthy resistance, while the city of St. Gallen braced for a fight to the finish. However, when they learned that their compatriots had given up the fight, they lost confidence; the result was that they concluded a peace pact that greatly restricted the city&#x27;s powers and burdened the city with serious penalties and reparations payments. Varnbüler and Schwendiner fled to the court of King Maximilian and lost all their property in St. Gallen and Appenzell. However, the abbot&#x27;s reliance on the Swiss to support him reduced his position almost to that of a &quot;subject district&quot;.

The town adopted the Reformation in 1524, while the abbey remained Catholic, which damaged relations between the town and abbey. Both the abbot and a representative of the town were admitted to the Swiss Tagsatzung or Diet as the closest associates of the Confederation.

In the 16th century the abbey was raided by Calvinist groups, which scattered many of the old books. In 1530, abbot Diethelm began a restoration that stopped the decline and led to an expansion of the schools and library.

Under abbot Pius Reher (1630–54) a printing press was started. In 1712 during the Toggenburg war, also called the second war of Villmergen, the Abbey of St. Gall was pillaged by the Swiss. They took most of the books and manuscripts to Zürich and Bern. For security, the abbey was forced to request the protection of the townspeople of St. Gallen. Until 1457 the townspeople had been serfs of the abbey, but they had grown in power until they were protecting the abbey.

====End of the Prince-Abbots====
Following the disturbances, the abbey was still the largest religious city-state in Switzerland, with over 77,000 inhabitants. A final attempt to expand the abbey resulted in the demolition of most of the medieval monastery. The new structures, including the cathedral by architect Peter Thumb (1681–1766), were designed in the late Baroque style and constructed between 1755 and 1768. The large and ornate new abbey did not remain a monastery for very long. In 1798 the Prince-Abbot&#x27;s secular power (the last to hold the title was Pankraz Vorster) was suppressed, and the abbey was secularized. The monks were driven out and moved into other abbeys. The abbey became a separate See in 1846, with the abbey church as its cathedral and a portion of the monastic buildings for the bishop.

==Cultural treasures==
The Abbey library of Saint Gall is recognized as one of the richest medieval libraries in the world. It is home to one of the most comprehensive collections of early medieval books in the German-speaking part of Europe. , the library consists of over 160,000 books, of which 2100 are handwritten. Nearly half of the handwritten books are from the Middle Ages and 400 are over 1000 years old. Lately the &quot;Stiftsbibliothek&quot; has launched a project for the digitisation of the priceless manuscript collection, which currently (December 2009) contains 355 documents that are available on the &quot;Codices Electronici Sangallenses&quot; webpage.

The library interior is exquisitely realised in the Rococo style with carved polished wood, stucco and paint used to achieve its overall effect. It was designed by the architect Peter Thumb and is open to the public. In addition it holds exhibitions as well as concerts and other events.

One of the more interesting documents in the Stiftsbibliothek is a copy of Priscian&#x27;s &quot;Institutiones grammaticae&quot; which contains the poem &quot;Is acher in gaíth in-nocht...&quot; written in Old Irish.

The library also preserves a unique 9th-century document, known as the Plan of St. Gall, the only surviving major architectural drawing from the roughly 700-year period between the fall of the Western Roman Empire and the 13th century. The Plan drawn was never actually built, and was so named because it was kept at the famous medieval monastery library, where it remains to this day. The plan was an ideal of what a well-designed and well-supplied monastery should have, as envisioned by one of the synods held at Aachen for the reform of monasticism in the Frankish empire during the early years of emperor Louis the Pious (between 814 and 817).

A late 9th-century drawing of Paul lecturing an agitated crowd of Jews and gentiles, part of a copy of a Pauline epistles produced at and still held by the monastery, was included in a medieval-drawing show at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York the summer of 2009. A reviewer noted that the artist had &quot;a special talent for depicting hair, ... with the saint&#x27;s beard ending in curling droplets of ink.&quot;

St. Gall is noted for its early use of the neume, the basic element of Western and Eastern systems of musical notation prior to the invention of five-line staff notation. The earliest extant manuscripts are from the 9th or 10th century.

In 1983, the Convent of St. Gall was inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List as &quot;a perfect example of a great Carolingian monastery&quot;.

==People of the abbey==
===List of abbots===
There were a total of 73 ruling abbots (including six anti-abbots) between 719 and 1805.
A complete collection of abbots&#x27; biographies was published 
by Henggeler (1929). A table of abbots&#x27; names complete with their coats of arms was printed by Beat Jakob Anton Hiltensperger in 1778.
* Othmar (719–759) 
* John (759/60–782)
* Ratpert (782)
* Waldo (782–784)
* Werdo (784–812)
* Wolfleoz (812–816)
* Gozbert (816–837) Expanded the buildings, started collecting books for the library.
* Bernwig (837–840/41)
* Engilbert I (840/841)
* Grimald (841–872)
* Hartmut (872–883)
* Bernhard (883–890)
* Solomon (890–919), Abbot of 11 other monasteries and Bishop of Constance.
* Hartmann (922–925)
* Engilbert II (925–933)
* Thieto (933–942)
* Craloh (942–958)
** Anno (953–954), anti-abbot
* Purchart I (958–971)
* Notker (971–975), nephew of Notker Physicus
* Ymmo (976–984)
* Ulrich I (984–990)
* Kerhart (990–1001)
* Purchart II (1001–1022)
* Thietpald (1022–1034)
* Nortpert (1034–1072)
* Ulrich II (1072–1076)
* Ulrich of Eppenstein (1077–1121)
** Lutold (1077–c. 1083), anti-abbot
** Werinhar (1083–1086), anti-abbot
* Manegold von Mammern (1121–1133)
** Heinrich von Twiel (1121–1122), anti-abbot
* Werinher (1133–1167)
* Ulrich von Tegerfelden (1167–1199)
* Ulrich von Veringen (1199–1200)
* Heinrich von Klingen (1200–1204)
* Ulrich von Sax (1204–1220) Lord of Hohensax and first Prince-Abbot
* Rudolf von Güttingen (1220–1226)
* Konrad von Bussnang (1226–1239)
* Walter von Trauchburg (1239–1244)
* Berchtold von Falkenstein (1244–1272)
* Ulrich von Güttingen (1272–1277)
** Heinrich von Wartenberg (1272–1274), anti-abbot
* Rumo von Ramstein (1277–1281)
* Wilhelm von Montfort (1281–1301)
** Konrad von Gundelfingen (1288–1291), anti-abbot sponsored by Rudolf I of Germany
* Heinrich von Ramstein (1301–1318)
* Hiltbold von Werstein (1318–1329)
* Rudolf von Montfort (1330–1333)
* Hermann von Bonstetten (1333–1360)
* Georg von Wildenstein (1360–1379)
* Kuno von Stoffeln (1379–1411)
* Heinrich von Gundelfingen (1411–1418)
* Konrad von Pegau (1418–1419)
* Heinrich von Mansdorf (1419–1426)
* Eglolf Blarer (1426–1442)
* Kaspar von Breitenlandenberg (1442–1463)
* Ulrich Rösch (1463–1491) Bought the county of Toggenburg. In 1487 he built a monastery at Rorschach.
* Gotthard Giel von Glattburg (1491–1504)
* Franz von Gaisberg (1504–1529) Abbot when the Reformation took place.
* Kilian Germann (1529–1530) Elected to prevent the Reformation from entering the Abbey.
* Diethelm Blarer von Wartensee (1530–1564) Expanded the Abbey, known as the Third Founder due to his work on the Abbey.
* Otmar Kunz (1564–1577)
* Joachim Opser (1577–1594)
* Bernhard Müller (1594–1630)
* Pius Reher (1630–1654)
* Gallus Alt (1654–1687)
* Celestino Sfondrati (1687–1696)
* Leodegar Bürgisser (1696–1717)
* Joseph von Rudolphi (1717–1740)
* Cölestin Gugger von Staudach (1740–1767)
* Beda Angehrn (1767–1796)
* Pankraz Vorster (1796–1805)
===Nuns===
* Wiborada (died 926). First woman formally canonized by the Catholic Church.

==See also==
*List of Carolingian monasteries
*Carolingian architecture
*Carolingian art
*Carolingian dynasty
*Carolingian Empire
*Carolingian Renaissance
*Saint-Gall Cantatorium
*Waltharius
*Ekkehard I

== Notes and references ==
* Walter William Horn&#x27;s Papers Regarding The Plan of St. Gall : production materials, 1967–1979 are housed in the Department of Special Collections and University Archives at Stanford University Libraries

==External links==

* Stiftsbibliothek Sankt Gallen
* Codices Electronici Sangallenses —project for the digitisation of the medieval manuscripts at Sankt Gallen
* E-codices, Virtual Manuscript Library of Switzerland
* St Gall Plan - presents a digitised version of the St Gall Plan, and zoomable reproductions of Carolingian manuscripts from St Gall.
* UNESCO World Heritage Listing for the Convent of St Gall

==Further reading==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q155699" start="4" end="23" title="Abbey of Saint Gall" label="Abbey of Saint Gall"/>
<link wikidata="Q160742" start="42" end="47" title="abbey" label="abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="64" end="72" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25607" start="106" end="116" title="St. Gallen" label="St. Gallen"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="120" end="131" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q157123" start="137" end="152" title="Carolingian Renaissance" label="Carolingian-era"/>
<link wikidata="Q115719" start="192" end="204" title="Saint Othmar" label="Saint Othmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q180936" start="223" end="233" title="Saint Gall" label="Saint Gall"/>
<link wikidata="Q513550" start="250" end="259" title="Hermitage (religious retreat)" label="hermitage"/>
<link wikidata="Q208500" start="286" end="298" title="principality" label="principality"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="375" end="386" title="Benedictine" label="Benedictine"/>
<link wikidata="Q689896" start="409" end="429" title="Abbey library of Saint Gall" label="library of the Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q144945" start="636" end="656" title="St. Gallen Cathedral" label="St. Gallen Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q777992" start="674" end="697" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Saint Gallen" label="Diocese of Saint Gallen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="747" end="766" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q180936" start="810" end="816" title="Saint Gall" label="Gallus"/>
<link wikidata="Q592459" start="844" end="854" title="Hiberno-Scottish mission" label="Irish monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q319653" start="891" end="901" title="Columbanus" label="Columbanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q64156" start="1041" end="1046" title="Arbon" label="Arbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q972672" start="1147" end="1159" title="Intercession of saints" label="intercession"/>
<link wikidata="Q566085" start="1450" end="1460" title="Magnus of Füssen" label="St. Magnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q169276" start="1533" end="1539" title="Allgäu" label="Allgäu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2208978" start="2042" end="2051" title="Alamannia" label="Alemannic"/>
<link wikidata="Q115719" start="2059" end="2064" title="Saint Othmar" label="Otmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301" start="2086" end="2100" title="Charles Martel" label="Charles Martel"/>
<link wikidata="Q115719" start="2192" end="2197" title="Saint Othmar" label="Otmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q81212" start="2307" end="2312" title="Pepin the Short" label="Pepin"/>
<link wikidata="Q157084" start="2377" end="2385" title="Carloman of Bavaria" label="Carloman"/>
<link wikidata="Q852724" start="2539" end="2559" title="Rule of Saint Benedict" label="rule of St. Benedict"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337737" start="2840" end="2857" title="Carolingian architecture" label="Carolingian style"/>
<link wikidata="Q132990" start="2914" end="2922" title="Alemanni" label="Alemanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q566085" start="3139" end="3155" title="Magnus of Füssen" label="Magnus of Füssen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3994" start="3196" end="3203" title="Kempten" label="Kempten"/>
<link wikidata="Q262684" start="3208" end="3214" title="Füssen" label="Füssen"/>
<link wikidata="Q169276" start="3222" end="3228" title="Allgäu" label="Allgäu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12713" start="3325" end="3332" title="Thurgau" label="Thurgau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673" start="3387" end="3393" title="Neckar" label="Neckar"/>
<link wikidata="Q355437" start="3437" end="3442" title="Stift" label="Stift"/>
<link wikidata="Q649734" start="3467" end="3485" title="Waldo of Reichenau" label="Waldo of Reichenau"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="3578" end="3589" title="Anglo-Saxons" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="3594" end="3599" title="Ireland" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="3635" end="3646" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q103292" start="3667" end="3675" title="Adrian I" label="Adrian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q26473" start="3757" end="3772" title="Gregorian chant" label="Gregorian chant"/>
<link wikidata="Q896856" start="3979" end="4001" title="Bishopric of Constance" label="Bishopric of Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q679114" start="4052" end="4070" title="Abbey of Reichenau" label="Abbey of Reichenau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4127" start="4074" end="4088" title="Lake Constance" label="Lake Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q43974" start="4115" end="4130" title="Louis the Pious" label="Louis the Pious"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341156" start="4168" end="4186" title="imperial immediacy" label="imperial immediacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q152463" start="4331" end="4347" title="Louis the German" label="Louis the German"/>
<link wikidata="Q570452" start="4727" end="4742" title="Notker of Liège" label="Notker of Liège"/>
<link wikidata="Q354813" start="4744" end="4764" title="Notker the Stammerer" label="Notker the Stammerer"/>
<link wikidata="Q673977" start="4766" end="4778" title="Notker Labeo" label="Notker Labeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q599703" start="4780" end="4787" title="Tuotilo" label="Tuotilo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4819" end="4829" title="Antiphonary#History" label="antiphonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q282226" start="5162" end="5184" title="Hungarian invasions of Europe" label="the Magyars threatened"/>
<link wikidata="Q156439" start="5230" end="5239" title="Reichenau Island" label="Reichenau"/>
<link wikidata="Q50356040" start="5521" end="5527" title="Notker (abbot of Saint Gall)" label="Notker"/>
<link wikidata="Q335920" start="5575" end="5590" title="Notker Physicus" label="Notker Physicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q934700" start="5749" end="5767" title="SN 1006" label="the 1006 supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q50529698" start="5802" end="5811" title="Ulrich II of Saint Gall" label="Ulrich II"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="6041" end="6058" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q121130" start="6067" end="6084" title="Philip of Germany" label="Philip of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q25607" start="6245" end="6255" title="St. Gallen" label="St. Gallen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341156" start="6328" end="6346" title="Imperial immediacy" label="Imperial immediacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q57318" start="6397" end="6415" title="Free imperial city" label="Free imperial city"/>
<link wikidata="Q939871" start="6435" end="6440" title="guild" label="guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q175211" start="6563" end="6569" title="Kingdom of Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q57124" start="6575" end="6589" title="Sigismund, Holy Roman Emperor" label="King Sigismund"/>
<link wikidata="Q46158" start="6615" end="6624" title="Humanism" label="Humanists"/>
<link wikidata="Q688257" start="6807" end="6816" title="Appenzell" label="Appenzell"/>
<link wikidata="Q455747" start="6936" end="6950" title="Appenzell Wars" label="Appenzell Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q681105" start="7001" end="7006" title="Stoss Pass" label="Stoss"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="7336" end="7342" title="Zürich" label="Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q4191" start="7344" end="7351" title="Lucerne" label="Lucerne"/>
<link wikidata="Q68155" start="7353" end="7359" title="Schwyz" label="Schwyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q63912" start="7364" end="7370" title="Glarus" label="Glarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476552" start="7565" end="7577" title="Ulrich Rösch" label="Ulrich Rösch"/>
<link wikidata="Q527658" start="7590" end="7610" title="County of Toggenburg" label="County of Toggenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q68250" start="7718" end="7727" title="Rorschach, St. Gallen" label="Rorschach"/>
<link wikidata="Q4127" start="7731" end="7745" title="Lake Constance" label="Lake Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627721" start="8083" end="8102" title="List of mayors of St. Gallen" label="mayor of St. Gallen"/>
<link wikidata="Q25607" start="8104" end="8120" title="Ulrich Varnbüler" label="Ulrich Varnbüler"/>
<link wikidata="Q688257" start="8159" end="8168" title="Appenzell" label="Appenzell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8201" end="8220" title="Hermann Schwendiner" label="Hermann Schwendiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q64077" start="8865" end="8868" title="Wil" label="Wil"/>
<link wikidata="Q687124" start="9166" end="9180" title="Swabian League" label="Swabian League"/>
<link wikidata="Q150726" start="9976" end="9991" title="Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="King Maximilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="10205" end="10216" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q250641" start="10388" end="10398" title="Tagsatzung" label="Tagsatzung"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10414" end="10432" title="Old Swiss Confederacy#Closest associates" label="closest associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="10500" end="10509" title="Calvinism" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q50376403" start="10691" end="10701" title="Pius Reher" label="Pius Reher"/>
<link wikidata="Q690096" start="10800" end="10817" title="Toggenburg War" label="war of Villmergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="10861" end="10866" title="Switzerland" label="Swiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="10915" end="10921" title="Zürich" label="Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q70" start="10926" end="10930" title="Bern" label="Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q103350" start="11063" end="11068" title="Serfdom" label="serfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="11516" end="11523" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049591" start="11720" end="11735" title="Pankraz Vorster" label="Pankraz Vorster"/>
<link wikidata="Q314739" start="11771" end="11782" title="German Mediatisation" label="secularized"/>
<link wikidata="Q866196" start="11867" end="11870" title="Episcopal see" label="See"/>
<link wikidata="Q611644" start="11967" end="11973" title="Bishop (Catholic Church)" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q689896" start="12003" end="12030" title="Abbey library of Saint Gall" label="Abbey library of Saint Gall"/>
<link wikidata="Q122960" start="12703" end="12709" title="Rococo" label="Rococo"/>
<link wikidata="Q86158" start="12829" end="12840" title="Peter Thumb" label="Peter Thumb"/>
<link wikidata="Q356433" start="13015" end="13023" title="Priscian" label="Priscian"/>
<link wikidata="Q15944406" start="13099" end="13128" title="Is acher in gaíth in-nocht..." label="Is acher in gaíth in-nocht..."/>
<link wikidata="Q35308" start="13146" end="13155" title="Old Irish" label="Old Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q426702" start="13229" end="13245" title="Plan of St. Gall" label="Plan of St. Gall"/>
<link wikidata="Q608613" start="13339" end="13371" title="fall of the Western Roman Empire" label="fall of the Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017" start="13674" end="13680" title="Aachen" label="Aachen"/>
<link wikidata="Q43974" start="13768" end="13783" title="Louis the Pious" label="Louis the Pious"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="13838" end="13842" title="Saint Paul" label="Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q265283" start="13913" end="13929" title="Pauline epistles" label="Pauline epistles"/>
<link wikidata="Q160236" start="14022" end="14048" title="Metropolitan Museum of Art" label="Metropolitan Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="14052" end="14060" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q41867" start="14278" end="14283" title="neume" label="neume"/>
<link wikidata="Q233861" start="14337" end="14353" title="musical notation" label="musical notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192193" start="14390" end="14395" title="staff (music)" label="staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="14534" end="14553" title="World Heritage List" label="World Heritage List"/>
<link wikidata="Q157123" start="14592" end="14603" title="Carolingian Renaissance" label="Carolingian"/>
<link wikidata="Q115719" start="14963" end="14969" title="Saint Othmar" label="Othmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750004" start="14983" end="14987" title="John II (bishop of Constance)" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q25858193" start="15003" end="15010" title="Ratpert (abbot of Saint Gall)" label="Ratpert"/>
<link wikidata="Q649734" start="15019" end="15024" title="Waldo of Reichenau" label="Waldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q50313682" start="15037" end="15042" title="Werdo" label="Werdo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2591969" start="15055" end="15063" title="Wolfleoz" label="Wolfleoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540559" start="15076" end="15083" title="Gozbert of Saint Gall" label="Gozbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q50345834" start="15162" end="15169" title="Bernwig" label="Bernwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q50339786" start="15185" end="15196" title="Engilbert I of Saint Gall" label="Engilbert I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430895" start="15209" end="15216" title="Grimald of Weissenburg" label="Grimald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587610" start="15229" end="15236" title="Hartmut of Saint Gall" label="Hartmut"/>
<link wikidata="Q50359634" start="15249" end="15257" title="Bernard of Saint Gall" label="Bernhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q129480" start="15270" end="15277" title="Solomon III (bishop of Constance)" label="Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q896856" start="15323" end="15342" title="Bishop of Constance" label="Bishop of Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q50339811" start="15346" end="15354" title="Hartmann of Saint Gall" label="Hartmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q50359637" start="15367" end="15379" title="Engilbert II of Saint Gall" label="Engilbert II"/>
<link wikidata="Q50359638" start="15392" end="15398" title="Thieto" label="Thieto"/>
<link wikidata="Q50359639" start="15411" end="15417" title="Craloh" label="Craloh"/>
<link wikidata="Q50359641" start="15431" end="15435" title="Anno of Saint Gall" label="Anno"/>
<link wikidata="Q50357405" start="15460" end="15470" title="Purchart I" label="Purchart I"/>
<link wikidata="Q50356040" start="15483" end="15489" title="Notker (abbot of Saint Gall)" label="Notker"/>
<link wikidata="Q335920" start="15511" end="15526" title="Notker Physicus" label="Notker Physicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q50356882" start="15529" end="15533" title="Ymmo" label="Ymmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q50356884" start="15546" end="15554" title="Ulrich I of Saint Gall" label="Ulrich I"/>
<link wikidata="Q50359645" start="15567" end="15574" title="Kerhart" label="Kerhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q50357408" start="15588" end="15599" title="Purchart II" label="Purchart II"/>
<link wikidata="Q50357411" start="15614" end="15623" title="Thietpald" label="Thietpald"/>
<link wikidata="Q50359644" start="15638" end="15646" title="Nortpert" label="Nortpert"/>
<link wikidata="Q50529698" start="15661" end="15670" title="Ulrich II of Saint Gall" label="Ulrich II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1488083" start="15685" end="15705" title="Ulrich of Eppenstein" label="Ulrich of Eppenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q50529702" start="15721" end="15727" title="Lutold of Saint Gall" label="Lutold"/>
<link wikidata="Q50529707" start="15758" end="15766" title="Werinhar" label="Werinhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q50529293" start="15793" end="15813" title="Manegold von Mammern" label="Manegold von Mammern"/>
<link wikidata="Q50529290" start="15829" end="15847" title="Heinrich von Twiel" label="Heinrich von Twiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q50529297" start="15874" end="15882" title="Werinher" label="Werinher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477090" start="15897" end="15919" title="Ulrich von Tegerfelden" label="Ulrich von Tegerfelden"/>
<link wikidata="Q50360143" start="15934" end="15953" title="Ulrich von Veringen" label="Ulrich von Veringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q50360182" start="15968" end="15988" title="Heinrich von Klingen" label="Heinrich von Klingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477072" start="16003" end="16017" title="Ulrich von Sax" label="Ulrich von Sax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342368" start="16072" end="16092" title="Rudolf von Güttingen" label="Rudolf von Güttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q50529301" start="16107" end="16126" title="Konrad von Bussnang" label="Konrad von Bussnang"/>
<link wikidata="Q50529304" start="16141" end="16162" title="Walter von Trauchburg" label="Walter von Trauchburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q818828" start="16177" end="16202" title="Berchtold von Falkenstein" label="Berchtold von Falkenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477008" start="16217" end="16237" title="Ulrich von Güttingen" label="Ulrich von Güttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1599701" start="16253" end="16276" title="Heinrich von Wartenberg" label="Heinrich von Wartenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2175645" start="16303" end="16320" title="Rumo von Ramstein" label="Rumo von Ramstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636866" start="16335" end="16355" title="Wilhelm von Montfort" label="Wilhelm von Montfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782421" start="16371" end="16394" title="Konrad von Gundelfingen" label="Konrad von Gundelfingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q76956" start="16432" end="16451" title="Rudolf I of Germany" label="Rudolf I of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q50364036" start="16454" end="16475" title="Heinrich von Ramstein" label="Heinrich von Ramstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q50376400" start="16490" end="16511" title="Hiltbold von Werstein" label="Hiltbold von Werstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497108" start="16526" end="16545" title="Rudolf III von Montfort" label="Rudolf von Montfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q50361522" start="16560" end="16582" title="Hermann von Bonstetten" label="Hermann von Bonstetten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506729" start="16597" end="16618" title="Georg von Wildenstein" label="Georg von Wildenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792272" start="16633" end="16650" title="Kuno von Stoffeln" label="Kuno von Stoffeln"/>
<link wikidata="Q50361782" start="16665" end="16690" title="Heinrich von Gundelfingen" label="Heinrich von Gundelfingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q50361535" start="16705" end="16721" title="Konrad von Pegau" label="Konrad von Pegau"/>
<link wikidata="Q50361542" start="16736" end="16757" title="Heinrich von Mansdorf" label="Heinrich von Mansdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q50362716" start="16772" end="16785" title="Eglolf Blarer" label="Eglolf Blarer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686341" start="16800" end="16828" title="Kaspar von Breitenlandenberg" label="Kaspar von Breitenlandenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476552" start="16843" end="16855" title="Ulrich Rösch" label="Ulrich Rösch"/>
<link wikidata="Q50529319" start="16946" end="16973" title="Gotthard Giel von Glattburg" label="Gotthard Giel von Glattburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q50529325" start="16988" end="17006" title="Franz von Gaisberg" label="Franz von Gaisberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q26428275" start="17060" end="17074" title="Kilian Germann" label="Kilian Germann"/>
<link wikidata="Q50529328" start="17149" end="17178" title="Diethelm Blarer von Wartensee" label="Diethelm Blarer von Wartensee"/>
<link wikidata="Q50376406" start="17270" end="17280" title="Otmar Kunz" label="Otmar Kunz"/>
<link wikidata="Q50379049" start="17295" end="17308" title="Joachim Opser" label="Joachim Opser"/>
<link wikidata="Q50377860" start="17323" end="17338" title="Bernhard Müller (abbot)" label="Bernhard Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q50376403" start="17353" end="17363" title="Pius Reher" label="Pius Reher"/>
<link wikidata="Q23060295" start="17378" end="17388" title="Gallus Alt" label="Gallus Alt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943921" start="17403" end="17422" title="Celestino Sfondrati" label="Celestino Sfondrati"/>
<link wikidata="Q50376405" start="17437" end="17455" title="Leodegar Bürgisser" label="Leodegar Bürgisser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708359" start="17470" end="17489" title="Joseph von Rudolphi" label="Joseph von Rudolphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18411255" start="17504" end="17532" title="Cölestin Gugger von Staudach" label="Cölestin Gugger von Staudach"/>
<link wikidata="Q813787" start="17547" end="17559" title="Beda Angehrn" label="Beda Angehrn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049591" start="17574" end="17589" title="Pankraz Vorster" label="Pankraz Vorster"/>
<link wikidata="Q438362" start="17615" end="17623" title="Wiborada" label="Wiborada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566252" start="17706" end="17737" title="List of Carolingian monasteries" label="List of Carolingian monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337737" start="17739" end="17763" title="Carolingian architecture" label="Carolingian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q614082" start="17765" end="17780" title="Carolingian art" label="Carolingian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q133602" start="17782" end="17801" title="Carolingian dynasty" label="Carolingian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q31929" start="17803" end="17821" title="Carolingian Empire" label="Carolingian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q157123" start="17823" end="17846" title="Carolingian Renaissance" label="Carolingian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q18331605" start="17848" end="17870" title="Saint-Gall Cantatorium" label="Saint-Gall Cantatorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q946343" start="17872" end="17882" title="Waltharius" label="Waltharius"/>
<link wikidata="Q68074" start="17884" end="17894" title="Ekkehard I" label="Ekkehard I"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29498" wikidata="Q13006147" url="?curid=29498" title="Secondary education">
<text>Secondary education is the education level following primary education and preceding tertiary education.

Level 2 or &quot;lower secondary education&quot; (less commonly &quot;junior secondary education&quot;) is considered the second and final phase of basic education, and level 3 &quot;upper secondary education&quot; or &quot;senior secondary education&quot; is the stage before tertiary education. Every country aims to provide basic education, but the systems and terminology remain unique to them. Secondary education typically takes place after six years of primary education and is followed by higher education, vocational education or employment. In most countries secondary education is compulsory, at least until the age of 16. Children typically enter the lower secondary phase around age 12. Compulsory education sometimes extends to age 20 and further.

Since 1989, education has been seen as a basic human right for a child; Article 28, of the Convention on the Rights of the Child states that primary education should be free and compulsory while different forms of secondary education, including general and vocational education, should be available and accessible to every child. The terminology has proved difficult, and there was no universal definition before ISCED divided the period between primary education and university into junior secondary education and upper secondary education.

In classical and medieval times, secondary education was provided by the church for the sons of nobility and to boys preparing for universities and the priesthood. As trade required navigational and scientific skills, the church expanded the curriculum and widened the intake. With the Reformation the state began taking control of learning from the church, and with Comenius and John Locke education changed from being repetition of Latin text to building up knowledge in the child. Education was for the few. Up to the middle of the 19th century, secondary schools were organised to satisfy the needs of different social classes with the labouring classes getting four years, the merchant class five years, and the elite getting seven years. The rights to a secondary education were codified after 1945, and some countries are moving to mandatory and free secondary education for all youth under 19.

==Definition==
Secondary education refers to the stage of formal education that follows primary education and precedes higher education. It is typically offered to students between the ages of 12 and 18, although the specific age range may vary depending on the educational system and country. The purpose of secondary education is to provide students with a well-rounded education that prepares them for higher education or the workforce. It aims to develop their intellectual, social, and emotional skills, while also fostering critical thinking, creativity, and independence.

The 1997 International Standard Classification of Education (ISCED) describes seven levels that can be used to compare education internationally. Within a country these can be implemented in different ways, with different age levels and local denominations. The seven levels are:
* Level 0 – Pre-primary education
* Level 1 – Primary education or first stage of basic education
* Level 2 – Lower secondary or second stage of basic education
* Level 3 – (Upper) secondary education
* Level 4 – Post-secondary non-tertiary education
* Level 5 – First stage of tertiary education
* Level 6 – Second stage of tertiary education

Within this system, Levels 1 and 2 – that is, primary education and lower secondary – together form basic education. Beyond that, national governments may attach the label of secondary education to Levels 2 through 4 together, Levels 2 and 3 together, or Level 2 alone. These level definitions were put together for statistical purposes, and to allow the gathering of comparative data nationally and internationally. They were approved by the UNESCO General Conference at its 29th session in November 1997. Though they may be dated, they do provide a universal set of definitions and remain unchanged in the 2011 update.

The start of lower secondary education is characterised by the transition from the single-class-teacher, who delivers all content to a cohort of pupils, to one where content is delivered by a series of subject specialists. Its educational aim is to complete provision of basic education (thereby completing the delivery of basic skills) and to lay the foundations for lifelong learning.

Lower secondary education is likely to show these criteria:
*entry after some six years of primary education
*the requirement for more highly qualified teachers teaching only within their specialism
*exit to Level 3 courses, or vocational education, or employment after nine or more total years of education.

The end of lower secondary education often coincides with the end of compulsory education in countries where that exists.

(Upper) secondary education starts on the completion of basic education, which also is defined as completion of lower secondary education. The educational focus is varied according to the student&#x27;s interests and future direction. Education at this level is usually voluntary.

(Upper) secondary education is likely to show these criteria:
*entry after some nine years of basic education
*typical age at entry is between 14 and 16 years
*all teachers have level 5 qualifications in the subject they are teaching
*exit to Level 4 or 5 courses or to direct employment.

More subjects may be dropped, and increased specialism occurs. Completion of (upper) secondary education provides the entry requirements to Level 5 tertiary education, the entry requirements to technical or vocational education (Level 4, non tertiary course), or direct entry into the workplace.

In 2012 the ISCED published further work on education levels where it codified particular paths and redefined the tertiary levels. Lower secondary education and (upper) secondary education could last between two and five years, and the transition between two often would be when students were allowed some subject choice.

Terminology for secondary schools varies by country, and the exact meaning of any of these varies. Secondary schools may also be called &quot;academies&quot;, &quot;colleges&quot;, &quot;gymnasiums&quot;, &quot;high schools&quot;, &quot;lyceums&quot;, &quot;middle schools&quot;, &quot;preparatory schools&quot;, &quot;sixth-form colleges&quot;, &quot;upper schools&quot;, or &quot;vocational schools&quot;, among other names. For further information about nomenclature, see the section below by country.

==History==

A form of education for adolescents became necessary in all societies that had an alphabet and engaged in commerce. In Western Europe, formal secondary education can be traced back to the Athenian educational reforms of 320BC. Though their civilisation was eclipsed and they were enslaved, Hellenistic Athenian teachers were valued in the Roman system. The Roman and Hellenistic schools of rhetoric taught the seven liberal arts and sciences – &quot;grammar, rhetoric, logic, arithmetic, geometry, music&quot; and &quot;astronomy&quot; – which were regarded as a preparation for the study at a tertiary level of theology, law and medicine. Boys would have been prepared to enter these schools by private tutors at home. Girls would have only received tuition at home.

England provides a good case study. When Augustine of Canterbury brought Christianity there in 597, no schools existed. He needed trained priests to conduct church services and boys to sing in the choir. He had to create both the grammar schools that taught Latin, to enable the English to study for the priesthood, and song schools (choir schools) that trained the &#x27;sons of gentlefolk&#x27; to sing in cathedral choirs. In the case of Canterbury (597) and Rochester (604), both still exist. Bede in his &quot;Ecclesiastical History of the English People&quot; (732) tells that the Canterbury school taught more than the &#x27;intended reading and understanding of Latin&#x27;, but &#x27;the rules of metric, astronomy and the computus as well as the works of the saints&#x27; Even at this stage, there was tension, as the church was worried that knowledge of Latin would give the student access to non-Christian texts that it would not wish them to read.

Over the centuries leading to the renaissance and reformation the church was the main provider of secondary education. Various invasions and schisms within the controlling church challenged the focus of the schools, and the curriculum and language of instruction waxed and waned. From 1100, With the growth of the towns, grammar schools &#x27;free&#x27; of the church were founded, and some church grammar schools were handed over to the laïty. Universities were founded that did not just train students for the priesthood.

===Renaissance and Reformation===
Whereas in mainland Europe the Renaissance preceded the Reformation, local conditions in England caused the Reformation to come first. The Reformation was about, among other things, allowing the laïty to interpret the Bible in their own way without the intervention of priests, and preferably in the vernacular. This stimulated the foundation of free grammar schools - who searched for a less constrained curriculum. Colonialisation required navigation, mensuration, languages and administrative skills. The laïty wanted these taught to their sons. After Gutenberg in 1455 had mastered moveable metal type printing and Tyndale had translated the Bible into English (1525), Latin became a skill reserved for the catholic church and sons of conservative nobility. Schools started to be set up for the sons of merchants in Europe and the colonies too- for example Boston Latin Grammar School (1635).

Comenius (1592–1670), a Moravian protestant proposed a new model of education- where ideas were developed from the familiar to the theoretical rather than through repetition, where languages were taught in the vernacular and supported universal education. In his &quot;Didactica Magna&quot; (Great Didactic), he outlined a system of schools that is the exact counterpart of many western school systems: kindergarten, elementary school, secondary school, six-form college, university.
Locke&#x27;s &quot;Some Thoughts Concerning Education&quot; (1693) stressed the importance of a broader intellectual training, moral development and physical hardening. 

The grammar schools of the period can be categorised in three groups: the nine leading schools, seven of them boarding institutions which maintained the traditional curriculum of the classics, and mostly served &#x27;the aristocracy and the squirearchy&#x27;; most of the old endowed grammar schools serving a broad social base in their immediate localities which also stuck to the old curriculum; the grammar schools situated in the larger cities, serving the families of merchants and tradesmen who embraced change.

===Industrialisation===
During the 18th century their social base widened and their curriculum developed, particularly in mathematics and the natural sciences. But this was not universal education and was self-selecting by wealth. The industrial revolution changed that. Industry required an educated workforce where all workers needed to have completed a basic education. In France, Louis XIV, wrestled the control of education from the Jesuits, Condorcet set up Collèges for universal lower secondary education throughout the country, then Napoleon set up a regulated system of Lycee. In England, Robert Peel&#x27;s Factory Act 1802 required an employer to provide instruction in reading, writing and arithmetic during at least the first four years of the seven years of apprenticeship. The state had accepted responsibility for the basic education of the poor.
The provision of school places remained inadequate, so an Order in Council dated 10 April 1839 created the Committee of the Privy Council on Education.

===Universal education===
There was considerable opposition to the idea that children of all classes should receive basic education, all the initiatives such as industrial schools and Sunday schools were initially a private or church initiative. With the Great Exhibition of 1851, it became clear just how far behind the English education system had fallen.

Three reports were commissioned to examine the education of upper, middle and labouring class children. The Clarendon Commission sought to improve the nine Great Public Schools. The Taunton Commission looked at the 782 endowed grammar schools (private and public). They found varying quality and a patchy geographical coverage, with two thirds of all towns not having any secondary school. There was no clear conception of the purpose of secondary education. There were only thirteen girls&#x27; schools and their tuition was superficial, unorganised and unscientific. They recommended a system of first-grade schools targeted at a leaving age of 18 as preparation for upper and upper-middle-class boys entering university, second-grade targeted at a leaving age of 16 for boys preparing for the army or the newer professions, and third-grade targeted at a leaving age of 14 for boys of small tenant farmers, small tradesmen, and superior artisans. This resulted in the Endowed Schools Act 1869 which advocated that girls should enjoy the same education as boys.

The Newcastle Commission inquired &quot;into the state of public education in England and to consider and report what measures, if any, are required for the extension of sound and cheap elementary instruction to all classes of the people&quot;. It produced 1861 Newcastle Report and this led to the Elementary Education Act 1870 (33 &amp; 34 Vict. c. 75) (Forster Act).

The school boards set up by the Elementary Education Act 1870 were stopped from providing secondary education by the Cockerton Judgement of 1899. The school leaving age at this time was 10. The Judgement prompted the Education Act 1902 (Balfour Act). Compulsory education was extended to 12. The new local education authorities (LEA)s that were formed from the school boards; started to open higher grade elementary schools (ISCED Level2) or county schools to supplement the endowed grammar schools. These LEAs were allowed to build second-grade secondary schools that in the main became the future secondary modern schools.

In the &quot;1904 Regulations for Secondary Schools&quot;, the Board of Education determined that secondary schools should offer :
a four year subject-based course leading to a certificate in English language and literature, geography, history, a foreign language, mathematics, science, drawing, manual work, physical training, and, for girls, housewifery.

The Education Act 1918 (Fisher Act) extended compulsory full-time education to 14, and recommended compulsory part-time education from 14 to 18.
The Hadlow report, &quot;Education the Adolescent&quot; (1926) proposed that there should be a break point at eleven, establishing primary schools and secondary schools.

The United Nations, founded in 1947, was committed to education for all but the definition was difficult to formulate.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948) declared that elementary and fundamental education, which it did not define, was a right to be enjoyed by all. The Education Act 1944 (Butler Act) made sweeping changes to the funding of state education using the tripartite system, but was not allowed to tackle private schools. It introduced the GCE &#x27;O&#x27;level at 16, and the &#x27;A&#x27; at 18, but only raised the school leaving age until 15, making the exam inaccessible to the majority. But one year of ISCED Level 3 (Upper) secondary education was mandatory and free.

In 1972 the school leaving was raised to 16. The Education and Skills Act 2008, when it came into force in the 2013 academic year, initially required participation in some form of education or training until the school year in which the child turned 17, followed by the age being raised to the young person&#x27;s 18th birthday in 2015. This was referred to as raising the &quot;participation age&quot; to distinguish it from the school leaving age which remains at 16. Thus the UK is following the ISCED Level 3 (Upper) secondary education guideline.

==Right to a secondary education==
The United Nations was strong in its commitment to education for all but fell into linguistic difficulty defining that right.

&quot;Article I: Purposes and functions
1. The purpose of the Organization is to contribute to peace and security by promoting collaboration among the nations through education, science and culture in order to further universal respect for justice, for the rule of law and for the human rights and fundamental freedoms which are affirmed for the peoples of the world, without distinction of race, sex, language or religion, by the Charter of the United Nations.&quot;

The Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948) declared that elementary and fundamental education was a right to be enjoyed by all, but again could not define either elementary and fundamental education.
Article 26 :(1) Everyone has the right to education. Education shall be free, at least in the elementary and fundamental stages. Elementary education shall be compulsory. Technical and professional education shall be made generally available and higher education shall be equally accessible to all on the basis of merit.
It was assumed that elementary education was basic education—the entitlement for children—and fundamental education was a right for working people, but for a lawyer the definition is neither qualitative (stating what education means) or quantitative saying when it starts and when it is completed. The term secondary is not defined or mentioned. Together this has enabled countries to terminate free, compulsory, basic education at 11 or only continue education past eleven to boys.

Article 28, of the Convention on the Rights of the Child (1989) stated that primary education should be free and compulsory while different forms of secondary education, including general and vocational education, should be available and accessible to every
child. Free education should be provided and financial assistance offered in case of need.
In 1990, at Jomtien again tried to define the content basic education and how it should be delivered. &#x27;Basic education&#x27; is defined as &#x27;action designed to meet &#x27;basic learning needs&#x27;. &#x27;primary schooling&#x27; is considered as &#x27;the main delivery system of basic education&#x27;.
 Which is explained in Principals for Action that:
addressing the basic learning needs of all means: early childhood care and development opportunities; relevant, quality primary schooling or equivalent out-of-school education for children; and literacy, basic knowledge and life skills training for youth and adults.&#x27;

The assumption being made that basic knowledge and life skills training for youth was the function of secondary education. This was codified by the ISCED documents. The Dakar Framework for Action 2010 goal 2 states: Ensuring that by 2015 all children, particularly girls, children in difficult circumstances and those belonging to ethnic minorities, have access to and complete free and compulsory (primary in the sense basic) education of good quality. The Dakar Framework for Action 2010 goal 5 states: Eliminating gender disparities in primary and secondary education by 2005, and achieving gender equality in education by 2015, with a focus on ensuring girls&#x27; full and equal access to and achievement in basic education of good quality.

In 1996, the Council of Europe adopted the Revised European Social Charter, which guarantees secondary education.

Malala Yousafzai, Nobel Peace Prize winner in a said in a 2017 interview that:
&quot;My goal is to make sure every child, girl and boy, they get the opportunity to go to school.&quot; &quot;It is their basic human right, so I will be working on that and I will never stop until I see the last child going to school.&quot;
In 2017, Human Rights Watch adopted a policy calling on states to take immediate measures to ensure that secondary education is accessible to all free of charge, and compulsory through the end of lower-secondary school. This was a call for secondary education to be included as part of the minimum core of the right to education, and seen as an immediate obligation.

==Future directions for secondary education==
UNESCO believes that in order to prepare young people for life and work in a rapidly changing world, secondary-level education systems need to be re-oriented to impart a broad repertoire of life-skills. These skills should include the key generic competencies, non occupation-specific practical capabilities, information and communications technology, the ability to learn independently, to work in teams, entrepreneurship and civic responsibility.

They may be best instilled through a shared foundational learning period and by deferring the directing of students into academic and vocational streams for as long as possible, and then there should be flexibility to ensure the free movement of students between the streams depending on their aptitudes and inclinations. Accreditation in one stream should have equal recognition in the other as well as for access to higher education. This will equip young people with multiple skills so that they are prepared to enter and re-enter the workforce several times in their working lives, as wage employees or self-employed entrepreneurs, and to re-train themselves when their skills become obsolete.

It recognizes that there is no single model that will suit all countries, or even all communities in a given country. Secondary-level education policy should be under continuous review to keep in step with scientific and technological, economic and societal change.

=== Promoting the Rule of Law ===
Adolescence is associated with a time of significant growth where identity, belongingness, and socialization, especially among peer groups is particularly important. Secondary schools play an important role in youth&#x27;s socialization, development and forming their ideas and approach to justice, democracy and human rights.

Education systems that promote education for justice, that is, respect for the rule of law (RoL) together with international human rights and fundamental freedoms strengthen the relationship between learners and public institutions with the objective of empowering young people to become champions of peace and justice. Teachers are on the front line of this work and, along with families, play a formative role in shaping the future of youth&#x27;s attitudes and behaviours.

=== Career and Life Planning Education ===
Career and Life Planning Education (CLPE) activities as well as (Career) Development Education take place at secondary schools in Hong Kong. Students&#x27; transition from study to work is important in Hong Kong and career education in senior secondary schooling in this country is hence provided. Job shadowing is not yet done in their secondary schools however.

==By country==
Each country has developed the form of education most appropriate for them. There is an attempt to compare the effectiveness by using the results from the PISA that, each third year, assesses the scholastic performance on mathematics, science, and reading of a representative sample of 5000 fifteen year olds from each country.

==See also==

*Education Index
*:Category:Secondary education by country for secondary education in individual countries
*List of colleges and universities by country
*List of the oldest schools in the world
*List of schools by country
*List of countries by secondary education attainment
*Student orientation, can be used for allowing people to find their vocation
*Programme for International Student Assessment PISA test of 15yr old attainment

==References==
== Sources ==

==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13006147" start="0" end="19" title="Secondary education" label="Secondary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q975085" start="53" end="70" title="primary education" label="primary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="85" end="103" title="tertiary education" label="tertiary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309206" start="254" end="269" title="basic education" label="basic education"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="383" end="401" title="tertiary education" label="tertiary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q975085" start="566" end="583" title="primary education" label="primary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="603" end="619" title="higher education" label="higher education"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869278" start="621" end="641" title="vocational education" label="vocational education"/>
<link wikidata="Q511009" start="698" end="708" title="compulsory education" label="compulsory"/>
<link wikidata="Q466087" start="960" end="997" title="Convention on the Rights of the Child" label="Convention on the Rights of the Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="1698" end="1709" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12735" start="1779" end="1787" title="Comenius" label="Comenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="1792" end="1802" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390351" start="2904" end="2954" title="International Standard Classification of Education" label="International Standard Classification of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q975085" start="3221" end="3238" title="Primary education" label="Primary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309206" start="3620" end="3635" title="basic education" label="basic education"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="3963" end="3969" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390351" start="5844" end="5849" title="International Standard Classification of Education" label="ISCED"/>
<link wikidata="Q162633" start="6297" end="6306" title="Academy" label="academies"/>
<link wikidata="Q189004" start="6320" end="6327" title="college" label="college"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="6342" end="6352" title="Gymnasium (school)" label="gymnasiums"/>
<link wikidata="Q121116229" start="6366" end="6377" title="High school (upper secondary)" label="high school"/>
<link wikidata="Q16463" start="6392" end="6398" title="lyceum" label="lyceum"/>
<link wikidata="Q149566" start="6413" end="6427" title="middle schools" label="middle schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q428602" start="6441" end="6459" title="University-preparatory school" label="preparatory school"/>
<link wikidata="Q7533204" start="6474" end="6492" title="sixth-form college" label="sixth-form college"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899050" start="6507" end="6519" title="upper school" label="upper school"/>
<link wikidata="Q322563" start="6537" end="6554" title="vocational school" label="vocational school"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6634" end="6658" title="#By country" label="section below by country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340267" start="6734" end="6764" title="History of writing" label="societies that had an alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040847" start="6862" end="6890" title="Education in ancient Greece" label="Athenian educational reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040847" start="7013" end="7025" title="Education in ancient Greece" label="Roman system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="7516" end="7528" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360332" start="7884" end="7894" title="King&amp;#x27;s School, Canterbury" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411092" start="7905" end="7914" title="King&amp;#x27;s School, Rochester" label="Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q661541" start="7958" end="8002" title="Ecclesiastical History of the English People" label="Ecclesiastical History of the English People"/>
<link wikidata="Q56318457" start="8175" end="8183" title="computus" label="computus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="8439" end="8450" title="renaissance" label="renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="8455" end="8466" title="reformation" label="reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="8995" end="9006" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="9020" end="9031" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q815962" start="9381" end="9396" title="Colonialisation" label="Colonialisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q158075" start="9519" end="9528" title="Gutenberg Bible" label="Gutenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462802" start="9583" end="9590" title="Tyndale Bible" label="Tyndale"/>
<link wikidata="Q49129" start="9825" end="9852" title="Boston Latin School" label="Boston Latin Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q12735" start="9862" end="9870" title="Comenius" label="Comenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q756716" start="9886" end="9894" title="Moravians" label="Moravian"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="9895" end="9905" title="protestant" label="protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="10346" end="10351" title="John Locke" label="Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471642" start="10365" end="10399" title="Some Thoughts Concerning Education" label="Some Thoughts Concerning Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="11420" end="11429" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q201477" start="11483" end="11492" title="Marquis de Condorcet" label="Condorcet"/>
<link wikidata="Q26869819" start="11500" end="11507" title="Collège" label="Collège"/>
<link wikidata="Q26869819" start="11616" end="11621" title="Lycee" label="Lycee"/>
<link wikidata="Q181875" start="11635" end="11646" title="Robert Peel" label="Robert Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16983634" start="11654" end="11670" title="Factory Act 1802" label="Factory Act 1802"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309206" start="11871" end="11886" title="basic education" label="basic education"/>
<link wikidata="Q6528244" start="12007" end="12050" title="Privy Council" label="Committee of the Privy Council on Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q5056369" start="12214" end="12231" title="industrial school (Great Britain)" label="industrial school"/>
<link wikidata="Q661513" start="12237" end="12250" title="Sunday school" label="Sunday school"/>
<link wikidata="Q273095" start="12308" end="12332" title="Great Exhibition of 1851" label="Great Exhibition of 1851"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126857" start="12520" end="12540" title="Clarendon Commission" label="Clarendon Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376568" start="12594" end="12612" title="Taunton Commission" label="Taunton Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376568" start="13382" end="13406" title="Endowed Schools Act 1869" label="Endowed Schools Act 1869"/>
<link wikidata="Q29378768" start="13480" end="13500" title="Newcastle Commission" label="Newcastle Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q29378768" start="13733" end="13754" title="Newcastle Commission" label="1861 Newcastle Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358882" start="13775" end="13804" title="Elementary Education Act 1870" label="Elementary Education Act 1870"/>
<link wikidata="Q118945380" start="13806" end="13823" title="33 &amp;amp; 34 Vict." label="33 &amp;amp; 34 Vict."/>
<link wikidata="Q29467207" start="13964" end="13983" title="Cockerton Judgement" label="Cockerton Judgement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340872" start="14064" end="14082" title="Education Act 1902" label="Education Act 1902"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664350" start="14147" end="14174" title="local education authority" label="local education authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q16974630" start="14239" end="14269" title="higher elementary school" label="higher grade elementary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443856" start="14446" end="14469" title="secondary modern school" label="secondary modern school"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866852" start="14536" end="14554" title="Board of Education (United Kingdom)" label="Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340871" start="14835" end="14853" title="Education Act 1918" label="Education Act 1918"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14876" end="14912" title="Raising of school leaving age in England and Wales#The Fisher Act of 1918" label="compulsory full-time education to 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q5781573" start="14980" end="15031" title="William Henry Hadow" label="Hadlow report, &amp;quot;Education the Adolescent&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="15151" end="15165" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813" start="15266" end="15307" title="The Universal Declaration of Human Rights" label="The Universal Declaration of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340874" start="15430" end="15448" title="Education Act 1944" label="Education Act 1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340944" start="15898" end="15927" title="Education and Skills Act 2008" label="Education and Skills Act 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="16441" end="16455" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q171328" start="16995" end="17024" title="Charter of the United Nations" label="Charter of the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813" start="17033" end="17074" title="The Universal Declaration of Human Rights" label="The Universal Declaration of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309206" start="17605" end="17620" title="basic education" label="basic education"/>
<link wikidata="Q466087" start="18063" end="18100" title="Convention on the Rights of the Child" label="Convention on the Rights of the Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390351" start="19178" end="19183" title="ISCED" label="ISCED"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="19195" end="19225" title="Dakar Framework for Action" label="The Dakar Framework for Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="19790" end="19807" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334480" start="19828" end="19851" title="European Social Charter" label="European Social Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q32732" start="19892" end="19908" title="Malala Yousafzai" label="Malala Yousafzai"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="19910" end="19927" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="20223" end="20241" title="Human Rights Watch" label="Human Rights Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="20628" end="20634" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268834" start="20937" end="20978" title="information and communications technology" label="information and communications technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q131774" start="22078" end="22089" title="Adolescence" label="Adolescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q13189320" start="22368" end="22375" title="justice" label="justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="22391" end="22403" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q8434" start="22406" end="22415" title="Education" label="Education"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22437" end="22458" title="Education for Justice" label="education for justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="22485" end="22496" title="rule of law" label="rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981240" start="23056" end="23065" title="Education in Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206749" start="23224" end="23237" title="Job shadowing" label="Job shadowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q323481" start="23461" end="23465" title="Programme for International Student Assessment" label="PISA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566274" start="23650" end="23665" title="Education Index" label="Education Index"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23667" end="23707" title=":Category:Secondary education by country" label=":Category:Secondary education by country"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682368" start="23757" end="23801" title="List of colleges and universities by country" label="List of colleges and universities by country"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643194" start="23803" end="23842" title="List of the oldest schools in the world" label="List of the oldest schools in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q736514" start="23844" end="23870" title="List of schools by country" label="List of schools by country"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136946" start="23872" end="23923" title="List of countries by secondary education attainment" label="List of countries by secondary education attainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505736" start="23925" end="23944" title="Student orientation" label="Student orientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25242029" start="24002" end="24048" title="Programme for International Student Assessment (2000 to 2012)" label="Programme for International Student Assessment"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29500" wikidata="Q616181" url="?curid=29500" title="Serotonin syndrome">
<text>Serotonin syndrome (SS) is a group of symptoms that may occur with the use of certain serotonergic medications or drugs. The symptoms can range from mild to severe, and are potentially fatal. Symptoms in mild cases include high blood pressure and a fast heart rate; usually without a fever. Symptoms in moderate cases include high body temperature, agitation, increased reflexes, tremor, sweating, dilated pupils, and diarrhea. In severe cases, body temperature can increase to greater than . Complications may include seizures and extensive muscle breakdown.
Serotonin syndrome is typically caused by the use of two or more serotonergic medications or drugs. This may include selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI), serotonin norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI), monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI), tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), amphetamines, pethidine (meperidine), tramadol, dextromethorphan, buspirone, , , St. John&#x27;s wort, triptans, MDMA, ondansetron, metoclopramide, or cocaine. It occurs in about 15% of SSRI overdoses. It is a predictable consequence of excess serotonin on the central nervous system. Onset of symptoms is typically within a day of the extra serotonin.
Diagnosis is based on a person&#x27;s symptoms and history of medication use. Other conditions that can produce similar symptoms such as neuroleptic malignant syndrome, malignant hyperthermia, anticholinergic toxicity, heat stroke, and meningitis should be ruled out. No laboratory tests can confirm the diagnosis.
Initial treatment consists of discontinuing medications which may be contributing. In those who are agitated, benzodiazepines may be used. If this is not sufficient, a serotonin antagonist such as cyproheptadine may be used. In those with a high body temperature, active cooling measures may be needed. The number of cases of SS that occur each year is unclear. With appropriate medical intervention the risk of death is low, likely less than 1%. The high-profile case of Libby Zion, who is generally accepted to have died from SS, resulted in changes to graduate medical school education in New York State.

==Signs and symptoms==
Symptom onset is usually relatively rapid, and SS encompasses a wide range of clinical findings. Mild symptoms may consist of increased heart rate, shivering, sweating, dilated pupils, myoclonus (intermittent jerking or twitching), as well as hyperreflexia (overresponsive reflexes). Many of these symptoms may be side effects of the drug or drug interaction causing excessive levels of serotonin rather than an effect of elevated serotonin itself.

Tremor is a common side effect of MDMA&#x27;s action on dopamine, whereas hyperreflexia is symptomatic of exposure to serotonin agonists. Moderate intoxication includes additional abnormalities such as hyperactive bowel sounds, high blood pressure and hyperthermia; a temperature as high as . The overactive reflexes and clonus in moderate cases may be greater in the lower limbs than in the upper limbs. Mental changes include hypervigilance or insomnia and agitation. Severe symptoms include severe increases in heart rate and blood pressure. Temperature may rise to above in life-threatening cases. Other abnormalities include metabolic acidosis, rhabdomyolysis, seizures, kidney failure, and disseminated intravascular coagulation; these effects usually arising as a consequence of hyperthermia.

The symptoms are often present as a clinical triad of abnormalities:
* Cognitive effects: headache, agitation, hypomania, mental confusion, hallucinations, coma
* Autonomic effects: shivering, sweating, hyperthermia, vasoconstriction, tachycardia, nausea, diarrhea
* Somatic effects: myoclonus (muscle twitching), hyperreflexia (manifested by clonus), tremor

==Causes==
Numerous medications and street drugs can cause SS when taken alone at high doses or in combination with other serotonergic agents. The table below lists some of these.

Many cases of serotonin toxicity occur in people who have ingested drug combinations that synergistically increase synaptic serotonin. It may also occur due to an overdose of a single serotonergic agent. The combination of monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) with precursors such as or pose a particularly acute risk of life-threatening serotonin syndrome. The case of combination of MAOIs with tryptamine agonists (commonly known as ayahuasca) can present similar dangers as their combination with precursors, but this phenomenon has been described in general terms as the cheese effect. Many MAOIs irreversibly inhibit monoamine oxidase. It can take at least four weeks for this enzyme to be replaced by the body in the instance of irreversible inhibitors. With respect to tricyclic antidepressants, only clomipramine and imipramine have a risk of causing SS.

Many medications may have been incorrectly thought to cause SS. For example, some case reports have implicated atypical antipsychotics in SS, but it appears based on their pharmacology that they are unlikely to cause the syndrome. It has also been suggested that mirtazapine has no significant serotonergic effects and is therefore not a dual action drug. Bupropion has also been suggested to cause SS, although as there is no evidence that it has any significant serotonergic activity, it is thought unlikely to produce the syndrome. In 2006 the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) issued an alert suggesting that the combined use of either SSRIs or SNRIs with triptan medications or sibutramine could potentially lead to severe cases of SS. This has been disputed by other researchers, as none of the cases reported by the FDA met the Hunter criteria for SS. The condition has however occurred in surprising clinical situations, and because of phenotypic variations among individuals, it has been associated with unexpected drugs, including mirtazapine.

The relative risk and severity of serotonergic side effects and serotonin toxicity, with individual drugs and combinations, is complex. SS has been reported in patients of all ages, including the elderly, children, and even newborn infants due to in utero exposure. The serotonergic toxicity of SSRIs increases with dose, but even in overdose, it is insufficient to cause fatalities from SS in healthy adults. Elevations of central nervous system (CNS) serotonin will typically only reach potentially fatal levels when drugs with different mechanisms of action are mixed together. Various drugs, other than SSRIs, also have clinically significant potency as serotonin reuptake inhibitors, (such as tramadol, amphetamine, and MDMA) and are associated with severe cases of the syndrome.

Although the most significant health risk associated with opioid overdoses is respiratory depression, it is still possible for an individual to develop SS from certain opioids without the loss of consciousness. However, most cases of opioid-related SS involve the concurrent use of a serotergenic drug such as antidepressants. Nonetheless, it is not uncommon for individuals taking opioids to also be taking antidepressants due to the comorbidity of pain and depression.

Cases where opioids alone are the cause of SS are typically seen with tramadol, because of its dual mechanism as a serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor. SS caused by tramadol can be particularly problematic if an individual taking the drug is unaware of the risks associated with it and attempts to self-medicate symptoms such as headache, agitation, and tremors with more opioids, further exacerbating the condition.

==Pathophysiology==

Serotonin is a neurotransmitter involved in multiple complex biological processes including aggression, pain, sleep, appetite, anxiety, depression, migraine, and vomiting. In humans the effects of excess serotonin were first noted in 1960 in patients receiving an MAOI and tryptophan. The syndrome is caused by increased serotonin in the CNS. It was originally suspected that agonism of 5-HT1A receptors in central grey nuclei and the medulla oblongata was responsible for the development of the syndrome. Further study has determined that overstimulation of primarily the 5-HT2A receptors appears to contribute substantially to the condition. The 5-HT1A receptor may still contribute through a pharmacodynamic interaction in which increased synaptic concentrations of a serotonin agonist saturate all receptor subtypes. Additionally, noradrenergic CNS hyperactivity may play a role as CNS norepinephrine concentrations are increased in SS and levels appear to correlate with the clinical outcome. Other neurotransmitters may also play a role; NMDA receptor antagonists and γ-aminobutyric acid have been suggested as affecting the development of the syndrome. Serotonin toxicity is more pronounced following supra-therapeutic doses and overdoses, and they merge in a continuum with the toxic effects of overdose.

===Spectrum concept===
A postulated &quot;spectrum concept&quot; of serotonin toxicity emphasises the role that progressively increasing serotonin levels play in mediating the clinical picture as side effects merge into toxicity. The dose-response relationship is the effect of progressive elevation of serotonin, either by raising the dose of one drug, or combining it with another serotonergic drug which may produce large elevations in serotonin levels. Some experts prefer the terms serotonin toxicity or serotonin toxidrome, to more accurately reflect that it is a form of poisoning.

==Diagnosis==

There is no specific test for SS. Diagnosis is by symptom observation and investigation of the person&#x27;s history. Several criteria have been proposed. The first evaluated criteria were introduced in 1991 by Harvey Sternbach. Researchers later developed the Hunter Toxicity Criteria Decision Rules, which have better sensitivity and specificity, 84% and 97%, respectively, when compared with the gold standard of diagnosis by a medical toxicologist. As of 2007, Sternbach&#x27;s criteria were still the most commonly used.

The most important symptoms for diagnosing SS are tremor, extreme aggressiveness, akathisia, or clonus (spontaneous, inducible and ocular). Physical examination of the patient should include assessment of deep tendon reflexes and muscle rigidity, the dryness of the mucosa of the mouth, the size and reactivity of the pupils, the intensity of bowel sounds, skin color, and the presence or absence of sweating. The patient&#x27;s history also plays an important role in diagnosis, investigations should include inquiries about the use of prescription and over-the-counter drugs, illicit substances, and dietary supplements, as all these agents have been implicated in the development of SS. To fulfill the Hunter Criteria, a patient must have taken a serotonergic agent and meet one of the following conditions:
* Spontaneous clonus, or
* Inducible clonus plus agitation or diaphoresis, or
* Ocular clonus plus agitation or diaphoresis, or
* Tremor plus hyperreflexia, or
* Hypertonism plus temperature &gt; plus ocular clonus or inducible clonus

===Differential diagnosis===

Serotonin toxicity has a characteristic picture which is generally hard to confuse with other medical conditions, but in some situations it may go unrecognized because it may be mistaken for a viral illness, anxiety disorders, neurological disorder, anticholinergic poisoning, sympathomimetic toxicity, or worsening psychiatric condition. The condition most often confused with serotonin syndrome is neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS). The clinical features of neuroleptic malignant syndrome and SS share some features which can make differentiating them difficult. In both conditions, autonomic dysfunction and altered mental status develop. However, they are actually very different conditions with different underlying dysfunction (serotonin excess vs dopamine blockade). Both the time course and the clinical features of NMS differ significantly from those of serotonin toxicity. Serotonin toxicity has a rapid onset after the administration of a serotonergic drug and responds to serotonin blockade such as drugs like chlorpromazine and cyproheptadine. Dopamine receptor blockade (NMS) has a slow onset, typically evolves over several days after administration of a neuroleptic drug, and responds to dopamine agonists such as bromocriptine.

Differential diagnosis may become difficult in patients recently exposed to both serotonergic and neuroleptic drugs. Bradykinesia and extrapyramidal &quot;lead pipe&quot; rigidity are classically present in NMS, whereas SS causes hyperkinesia and clonus; these distinct symptoms can aid in differentiation.

==Management==

Management is based primarily on stopping the usage of the precipitating drugs, the administration of serotonin antagonists such as cyproheptadine (with a regimen of 12 mg for the initial dose followed by 2 mg every 2 hours until clinical, while some claim that a higher initial dose up to 32 mg has more benefit), and supportive care including the control of agitation, the control of autonomic instability, and the control of hyperthermia. Additionally, those who ingest large doses of serotonergic agents may benefit from gastrointestinal decontamination with activated charcoal if it can be administered within an hour of overdose. The intensity of therapy depends on the severity of symptoms. If the symptoms are mild, treatment may only consist of discontinuation of the offending medication or medications, offering supportive measures, giving benzodiazepines for myoclonus, and waiting for the symptoms to resolve. Moderate cases should have all thermal and cardiorespiratory abnormalities corrected and can benefit from serotonin antagonists. The serotonin antagonist cyproheptadine is the recommended initial therapy, although there have been no controlled trials demonstrating its efficacy for SS. Despite the absence of controlled trials, there are a number of case reports detailing apparent improvement after people have been administered cyproheptadine. Animal experiments also suggest a benefit from serotonin antagonists. Cyproheptadine is only available as tablets and therefore can only be administered orally or via a nasogastric tube; it is unlikely to be effective in people administered activated charcoal and has limited use in severe cases. Cyproheptadine can be stopped when the person is no longer experiencing symptoms and the half life of serotonergic medications already passed.

Additional pharmacological treatment for severe case includes administering atypical antipsychotic drugs with serotonin antagonist activity such as olanzapine or asenapine. Critically ill people should receive the above therapies as well as sedation or neuromuscular paralysis. People who have autonomic instability such as low blood pressure require treatment with direct-acting sympathomimetics such as epinephrine, norepinephrine, or phenylephrine. Conversely, hypertension or tachycardia can be treated with short-acting antihypertensive drugs such as nitroprusside or esmolol; longer acting drugs such as propranolol should be avoided as they may lead to hypotension and shock. The cause of serotonin toxicity or accumulation is an important factor in determining the course of treatment. Serotonin is catabolized by monoamine oxidase A in the presence of oxygen, so if care is taken to prevent an unsafe spike in body temperature or metabolic acidosis, oxygenation will assist in dispatching the excess serotonin. The same principle applies to alcohol intoxication. In cases of SS caused by MAOIs, oxygenation will not help to dispatch serotonin. In such instances, hydration is the main concern until the enzyme is regenerated.

===Agitation===
Specific treatment for some symptoms may be required. One of the most important treatments is the control of agitation due to the extreme possibility of injury to the person themselves or caregivers, benzodiazepines should be administered at first sign of this. Physical restraints are not recommended for agitation or delirium as they may contribute to mortality by enforcing isometric muscle contractions that are associated with severe lactic acidosis and hyperthermia. If physical restraints are necessary for severe agitation they must be rapidly replaced with pharmacological sedation. The agitation can cause a large amount of muscle breakdown. This breakdown can cause severe damage to the kidneys through a condition called rhabdomyolysis.

===Hyperthermia===
Treatment for hyperthermia includes reducing muscle overactivity via sedation with a benzodiazepine. More severe cases may require muscular paralysis with vecuronium, intubation, and artificial ventilation. Suxamethonium is not recommended for muscular paralysis as it may increase the risk of cardiac dysrhythmia from hyperkalemia associated with rhabdomyolysis. Antipyretic agents are not recommended as the increase in body temperature is due to muscular activity, not a hypothalamic temperature set point abnormality.

==Prognosis==
Upon the discontinuation of serotonergic drugs, most cases of SS resolve within 24 hours, although in some cases delirium may persist for a number of days. Symptoms typically persist for a longer time frame in patients taking drugs which have a long elimination half-life, active metabolites, or a protracted duration of action.

Cases have reported persisting chronic symptoms, and antidepressant discontinuation may contribute to ongoing features. Following appropriate medical management, SS is generally associated with a favorable prognosis.

== Epidemiology ==
Epidemiological studies of SS are difficult as many physicians are unaware of the diagnosis or they may miss the syndrome due to its variable manifestations. In 1998 a survey conducted in England found that 85% of the general practitioners that had prescribed the antidepressant nefazodone were unaware of SS. The incidence may be increasing as a larger number of pro-serotonergic drugs (drugs which increase serotonin levels) are now being used in clinical practice. One postmarketing surveillance study identified an incidence of 0.4 cases per 1000 patient-months for patients who were taking nefazodone. Additionally, around 14–16% of persons who overdose on SSRIs are thought to develop SS.

==Notable cases==
The most widely recognized example of SS was the death of Libby Zion in 1984. Zion was a freshman at Bennington College at her death on March 5, 1984, at age 18. She died within 8 hours of her emergency admission to the New York Hospital Cornell Medical Center. She had an ongoing history of depression, and came to the Manhattan hospital on the evening of March 4, 1984, with a fever, agitation and &quot;strange jerking motions&quot; of her body. She also seemed disoriented at times. The emergency room physicians were unable to diagnose her condition definitively but admitted her for hydration and observation. Her death was caused by a combination of pethidine and phenelzine. A medical intern prescribed the pethidine. The case influenced graduate medical education and residency work hours. Limits were set on working hours for medical postgraduates, commonly referred to as interns or residents, in hospital training programs, and they also now require closer senior physician supervision.

==See also==
* Carcinoid syndrome

==References==
==External links==
* Image demonstrating findings in moderately severe serotonin syndrome from </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q616181" start="0" end="18" title="Serotonin syndrome" label="Serotonin syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q616181" start="20" end="22" title="Serotonin syndrome" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q167934" start="86" end="98" title="Serotonin" label="serotonergic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708739" start="114" end="119" title="Recreational drug use" label="drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="223" end="242" title="high blood pressure" label="high blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q209583" start="249" end="264" title="fast heart rate" label="fast heart rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q38933" start="284" end="289" title="fever" label="fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q242165" start="326" end="347" title="hyperthermia" label="high body temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429154" start="360" end="378" title="hyperreflexia" label="increased reflexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q223907" start="380" end="386" title="tremor" label="tremor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503092" start="388" end="396" title="sweating" label="sweating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128283" start="398" end="412" title="dilated pupils" label="dilated pupils"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="418" end="426" title="diarrhea" label="diarrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q190259" start="445" end="461" title="body temperature" label="body temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279182" start="519" end="526" title="seizure" label="seizure"/>
<link wikidata="Q917069" start="532" end="558" title="rhabdomyolysis" label="extensive muscle breakdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q334477" start="677" end="715" title="selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor" label="selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273909" start="724" end="767" title="serotonin norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor" label="serotonin norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q410954" start="776" end="803" title="monoamine oxidase inhibitor" label="monoamine oxidase inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q908843" start="812" end="836" title="tricyclic antidepressant" label="tricyclic antidepressant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445303" start="846" end="858" title="Substituted amphetamine" label="amphetamines"/>
<link wikidata="Q55434" start="860" end="869" title="pethidine" label="pethidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q407592" start="884" end="892" title="tramadol" label="tramadol"/>
<link wikidata="Q407781" start="894" end="910" title="dextromethorphan" label="dextromethorphan"/>
<link wikidata="Q412194" start="912" end="921" title="buspirone" label="buspirone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="927" end="947" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s wort" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s wort"/>
<link wikidata="Q423866" start="949" end="956" title="triptan" label="triptan"/>
<link wikidata="Q69488" start="959" end="963" title="MDMA" label="MDMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q410011" start="965" end="976" title="ondansetron" label="ondansetron"/>
<link wikidata="Q421095" start="978" end="992" title="metoclopramide" label="metoclopramide"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="997" end="1004" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q167934" start="1090" end="1099" title="serotonin" label="serotonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="1107" end="1129" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424956" start="1336" end="1366" title="neuroleptic malignant syndrome" label="neuroleptic malignant syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585081" start="1368" end="1390" title="malignant hyperthermia" label="malignant hyperthermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q113259" start="1392" end="1416" title="anticholinergic toxicity" label="anticholinergic toxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q337554" start="1418" end="1429" title="heat stroke" label="heat stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q48143" start="1435" end="1445" title="meningitis" label="meningitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q83871" start="1624" end="1638" title="benzodiazepine" label="benzodiazepine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455047" start="1682" end="1702" title="serotonin antagonist" label="serotonin antagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q417884" start="1711" end="1725" title="cyproheptadine" label="cyproheptadine"/>
<link wikidata="Q422876" start="1778" end="1792" title="active cooling" label="active cooling"/>
<link wikidata="Q195362" start="1978" end="1996" title="Libby Zion Law" label="case of Libby Zion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="2106" end="2120" title="New York State" label="New York State"/>
<link wikidata="Q209583" start="2272" end="2292" title="increased heart rate" label="increased heart rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503092" start="2305" end="2313" title="diaphoresis" label="sweating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128283" start="2315" end="2329" title="dilated pupils" label="dilated pupils"/>
<link wikidata="Q116275" start="2331" end="2340" title="myoclonus" label="myoclonus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429154" start="2389" end="2402" title="hyperreflexia" label="hyperreflexia"/>
<link wikidata="Q223907" start="2596" end="2602" title="Tremor" label="Tremor"/>
<link wikidata="Q69488" start="2630" end="2634" title="MDMA" label="MDMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q170304" start="2652" end="2660" title="dopamine" label="dopamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455050" start="2714" end="2732" title="serotonin agonists" label="serotonin agonists"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="2824" end="2843" title="high blood pressure" label="high blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q242165" start="2848" end="2860" title="hyperthermia" label="hyperthermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424895" start="2917" end="2923" title="clonus" label="clonus"/>
<link wikidata="Q841423" start="2988" end="2998" title="upper limb" label="upper limb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641161" start="3024" end="3038" title="hypervigilance" label="hypervigilance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869874" start="3042" end="3050" title="insomnia" label="insomnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q394129" start="3055" end="3064" title="Psychomotor agitation" label="agitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1598200" start="3226" end="3244" title="metabolic acidosis" label="metabolic acidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q917069" start="3246" end="3260" title="rhabdomyolysis" label="rhabdomyolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279182" start="3262" end="3269" title="seizure" label="seizure"/>
<link wikidata="Q476921" start="3272" end="3286" title="kidney failure" label="kidney failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q823027" start="3292" end="3330" title="disseminated intravascular coagulation" label="disseminated intravascular coagulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="3468" end="3485" title="Cognitive" label="Cognitive effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q86" start="3487" end="3495" title="headache" label="headache"/>
<link wikidata="Q188611" start="3508" end="3517" title="hypomania" label="hypomania"/>
<link wikidata="Q557945" start="3519" end="3535" title="mental confusion" label="mental confusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q130741" start="3537" end="3550" title="hallucination" label="hallucination"/>
<link wikidata="Q159557" start="3553" end="3557" title="coma" label="coma"/>
<link wikidata="Q171064" start="3560" end="3577" title="Autonomic nervous system" label="Autonomic effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060890" start="3579" end="3588" title="shivering" label="shivering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067506" start="3614" end="3630" title="vasoconstriction" label="vasoconstriction"/>
<link wikidata="Q209583" start="3632" end="3643" title="tachycardia" label="tachycardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q186889" start="3645" end="3651" title="nausea" label="nausea"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="3653" end="3661" title="diarrhea" label="diarrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q505535" start="3664" end="3671" title="Somatic nervous system" label="Somatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429154" start="3711" end="3724" title="hyperreflexia" label="hyperreflexia"/>
<link wikidata="Q410954" start="4161" end="4188" title="monoamine oxidase inhibitor" label="monoamine oxidase inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q380436" start="4373" end="4382" title="ayahuasca" label="ayahuasca"/>
<link wikidata="Q165930" start="4513" end="4526" title="cheese effect" label="cheese effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q410867" start="4560" end="4577" title="monoamine oxidase" label="monoamine oxidase"/>
<link wikidata="Q758295" start="4913" end="4935" title="atypical antipsychotic" label="atypical antipsychotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q421930" start="5065" end="5076" title="mirtazapine" label="mirtazapine"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="5352" end="5380" title="Food and Drug Administration (United States)" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q9612" start="6108" end="6116" title="Uterus" label="in utero"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="6285" end="6307" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271540" start="6401" end="6421" title="Mechanism of action" label="mechanisms of action"/>
<link wikidata="Q407592" start="6559" end="6567" title="tramadol" label="tramadol"/>
<link wikidata="Q179452" start="6569" end="6580" title="amphetamine" label="amphetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17154378" start="6705" end="6720" title="opioid overdose" label="opioid overdose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641494" start="6725" end="6747" title="respiratory depression" label="respiratory depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q12829165" start="6835" end="6856" title="loss of consciousness" label="loss of consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q167934" start="6931" end="6948" title="Serotonin" label="serotergenic drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q76560" start="6957" end="6971" title="antidepressant" label="antidepressant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273909" start="7234" end="7277" title="serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor" label="serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q162657" start="7581" end="7597" title="neurotransmitter" label="neurotransmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q181003" start="7839" end="7849" title="tryptophan" label="tryptophan"/>
<link wikidata="Q389934" start="7942" end="7949" title="Agonist" label="agonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q238516" start="7953" end="7969" title="5-HT receptor" label="5-HT1A receptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243765" start="7973" end="7985" title="central grey" label="central grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q189033" start="8001" end="8018" title="medulla oblongata" label="medulla oblongata"/>
<link wikidata="Q14891424" start="8139" end="8155" title="5-HT2A receptor" label="5-HT2A receptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q725307" start="8261" end="8276" title="pharmacodynamic" label="pharmacodynamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q186242" start="8456" end="8470" title="norepinephrine" label="norepinephrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q414896" start="8610" end="8623" title="NMDA receptor" label="NMDA receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q210021" start="8640" end="8659" title="γ-aminobutyric acid" label="γ-aminobutyric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505252" start="8802" end="8810" title="overdose" label="overdose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251001" start="9114" end="9140" title="dose-response relationship" label="dose-response relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q18621601" start="9458" end="9467" title="poisoning" label="poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3808900" start="9805" end="9832" title="sensitivity and specificity" label="sensitivity and specificity"/>
<link wikidata="Q416417" start="10094" end="10103" title="akathisia" label="akathisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q835153" start="10152" end="10172" title="Physical examination" label="Physical examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183041" start="10217" end="10235" title="deep tendon reflex" label="deep tendon reflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219805" start="10278" end="10297" title="Mucous membrane" label="mucosa of the mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154971" start="10566" end="10587" title="over-the-counter drug" label="over-the-counter drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q645858" start="10614" end="10632" title="dietary supplement" label="dietary supplement"/>
<link wikidata="Q167934" start="10762" end="10780" title="serotonergic agent" label="serotonergic agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503092" start="10885" end="10896" title="Perspiration" label="diaphoresis"/>
<link wikidata="Q223907" start="10953" end="10959" title="Tremor" label="Tremor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429154" start="10965" end="10978" title="hyperreflexia" label="hyperreflexia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="11183" end="11201" title="medical conditions" label="medical conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q808" start="11282" end="11295" title="viral illness" label="viral illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q544006" start="11297" end="11313" title="anxiety disorder" label="anxiety disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339235" start="11316" end="11337" title="neurological disorder" label="neurological disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q113259" start="11339" end="11354" title="anticholinergic" label="anticholinergic"/>
<link wikidata="Q598405" start="11366" end="11381" title="sympathomimetic" label="sympathomimetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424956" start="11489" end="11519" title="neuroleptic malignant syndrome" label="neuroleptic malignant syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q171064" start="11677" end="11686" title="Autonomic nervous system" label="autonomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895596" start="11711" end="11724" title="mental status" label="mental status"/>
<link wikidata="Q407972" start="12114" end="12128" title="chlorpromazine" label="chlorpromazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q417884" start="12133" end="12147" title="cyproheptadine" label="cyproheptadine"/>
<link wikidata="Q415496" start="12149" end="12166" title="Dopamine receptor" label="Dopamine receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q208144" start="12262" end="12273" title="neuroleptic" label="neuroleptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q413581" start="12322" end="12335" title="bromocriptine" label="bromocriptine"/>
<link wikidata="Q837512" start="12338" end="12360" title="Differential diagnosis" label="Differential diagnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036662" start="12455" end="12467" title="Bradykinesia" label="Bradykinesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385411" start="12472" end="12486" title="extrapyramidal symptoms" label="extrapyramidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641007" start="12568" end="12580" title="hyperkinesia" label="hyperkinesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455047" start="12764" end="12784" title="serotonin antagonist" label="serotonin antagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q417884" start="12794" end="12808" title="cyproheptadine" label="cyproheptadine"/>
<link wikidata="Q190878" start="13225" end="13243" title="activated charcoal" label="activated charcoal"/>
<link wikidata="Q83871" start="13513" end="13527" title="benzodiazepine" label="benzodiazepine"/>
<link wikidata="Q30612" start="13818" end="13835" title="controlled trials" label="controlled trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575857" start="14200" end="14216" title="nasogastric tube" label="nasogastric tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q201872" start="14620" end="14630" title="olanzapine" label="olanzapine"/>
<link wikidata="Q416545" start="14634" end="14643" title="asenapine" label="asenapine"/>
<link wikidata="Q82642" start="14800" end="14814" title="blood pressure" label="blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q132621" start="14877" end="14888" title="epinephrine" label="epinephrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q421910" start="14909" end="14922" title="phenylephrine" label="phenylephrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q575890" start="14997" end="15013" title="antihypertensive" label="antihypertensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q27108300" start="15028" end="15041" title="nitroprusside" label="nitroprusside"/>
<link wikidata="Q418139" start="15045" end="15052" title="esmolol" label="esmolol"/>
<link wikidata="Q423364" start="15082" end="15093" title="propranolol" label="propranolol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15294" end="15313" title="monoamine oxidase A" label="monoamine oxidase A"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="15333" end="15339" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q459499" start="15986" end="16005" title="Medical restraint" label="Physical restraints"/>
<link wikidata="Q127006" start="16111" end="16129" title="muscle contraction" label="muscle contraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500373" start="16163" end="16178" title="lactic acidosis" label="lactic acidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q574801" start="16306" end="16314" title="sedation" label="sedation"/>
<link wikidata="Q917069" start="16457" end="16471" title="rhabdomyolysis" label="rhabdomyolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q27108523" start="16648" end="16658" title="vecuronium" label="vecuronium"/>
<link wikidata="Q939018" start="16660" end="16670" title="intubation" label="intubation"/>
<link wikidata="Q424378" start="16700" end="16713" title="Suxamethonium" label="Suxamethonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q582687" start="16857" end="16868" title="Antipyretic" label="Antipyretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q190259" start="16915" end="16931" title="body temperature" label="body temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q164386" start="16967" end="16979" title="hypothalamic" label="hypothalamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q160796" start="17143" end="17151" title="delirium" label="delirium"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="17292" end="17301" title="half-life" label="half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q175918" start="17413" end="17443" title="SSRI discontinuation syndrome" label="antidepressant discontinuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500773" start="17815" end="17835" title="general practitioner" label="general practitioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q416632" start="17876" end="17886" title="nefazodone" label="nefazodone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234359" start="18069" end="18095" title="postmarketing surveillance" label="postmarketing surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q195362" start="18369" end="18379" title="Libby Zion" label="Libby Zion"/>
<link wikidata="Q817902" start="18412" end="18430" title="Bennington College" label="Bennington College"/>
<link wikidata="Q975653" start="18531" end="18571" title="New York-Presbyterian Hospital" label="New York Hospital Cornell Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937869" start="18776" end="18787" title="disoriented" label="disoriented"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18900" end="18909" title="Management of dehydration#Medical uses" label="hydration"/>
<link wikidata="Q55434" start="18968" end="18977" title="pethidine" label="pethidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747559" start="18982" end="18992" title="phenelzine" label="phenelzine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17068745" start="19129" end="19168" title="Medical resident work hours" label="working hours for medical postgraduates"/>
<link wikidata="Q339547" start="19326" end="19344" title="Carcinoid syndrome" label="Carcinoid syndrome"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29501" wikidata="Q131201" url="?curid=29501" title="Sustainable development">
<text>Sustainable development is an approach to growth and human development that aims to meet the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. The aim is to have a society where living conditions and resources meet human needs without undermining planetary integrity. Sustainable development aims to balance the needs of the economy, environment, and society. The Brundtland Report in 1987 helped to make the concept of sustainable development better known.

Sustainable development overlaps with the idea of sustainability which is a normative concept. UNESCO formulated a distinction between the two concepts as follows: &quot;&quot;Sustainability&quot; is often thought of as a long-term goal (i.e. a more sustainable world), while &quot;sustainable development&quot; refers to the many processes and pathways to achieve it.&quot;

The &quot;Rio Process&quot; that began at the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro has placed the concept of sustainable development on the international agenda. Sustainable development is the foundational concept of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).&quot;&quot; These global goals for the year 2030 were adopted in 2015 by the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA). They address the global challenges, including for example poverty, climate change, biodiversity loss, and peace.

There are some problems with the concept of sustainable development. Some scholars say it is an oxymoron because according to them, &quot;development&quot; is inherently unsustainable. Other commentators are disappointed in the lack of progress that has been achieved so far. Scholars have stated that &quot;sustainable development&quot; is open-ended, much critiqued as ambiguous, incoherent, and therefore easily appropriated.&quot;&quot; 

==Definition==
In 1987, the United Nations World Commission on Environment and Development released the report &quot;Our Common Future&quot;, commonly called the Brundtland Report. The report included a definition of &quot;sustainable development&quot; which is now widely used:

Sustainable development thus tries to find a balance between economic development, environmental protection, and social well-being.

Scholars note that sustainable development is understood in many different ways.&quot;&quot; They also highlight inconsistencies in the current market-driven system of social, economic and political organisation. Efforts toward global sustainability must consider the diverse challenges, conditions, and choices that affect prospects and prosperity for all, everywhere.

Sustainability means different things to different people, and the concept of sustainable development has led to a diversity of discourses that legitimize competing sociopolitical projects.

== Development of the concept ==

Sustainable development has its roots in ideas regarding sustainable forest management, which were developed in Europe during the 17th and 18th centuries. In response to a growing awareness of the depletion of timber resources in England, John Evelyn argued, in his 1662 essay &quot;Sylva&quot;, that &quot;sowing and planting of trees had to be regarded as a national duty of every landowner, in order to stop the destructive over- exploitation of natural resources.&quot; In 1713, Hans Carl von Carlowitz, a senior mining administrator in the service of Elector Frederick Augustus I of Saxony published &quot;Sylvicultura economics&quot;, a 400-page work on forestry. Building upon the ideas of Evelyn and French minister Jean-Baptiste Colbert, von Carlowitz developed the concept of managing forests for sustained yield. His work influenced others, including Alexander von Humboldt and Georg Ludwig Hartig, eventually leading to the development of the science of forestry. This, in turn, influenced people like Gifford Pinchot, the first head of the US Forest Service, whose approach to forest management was driven by the idea of wise use of resources, and Aldo Leopold whose land ethic was influential in the development of the environmental movement in the 1960s.

Following the publication of Rachel Carson&#x27;s &quot;Silent Spring&quot; in 1962, the developing environmental movement drew attention to the relationship between economic growth and environmental degradation. Kenneth E. Boulding, in his influential 1966 essay &quot;The Economics of the Coming Spaceship Earth&quot;, identified the need for the economic system to fit itself to the ecological system with its limited pools of resources. Another milestone was the 1968 article by Garrett Hardin that popularized the term &quot;tragedy of the commons&quot;.

The direct linking of sustainability and development in a contemporary sense can be traced to the early 1970s. &quot;Strategy of Progress&quot;, a 1972 book (in German) by Ernst Basler, explained how the long-acknowledged sustainability concept of preserving forests for future wood production can be directly transferred to the broader importance of preserving environmental resources to sustain the world for future generations. That same year, the interrelationship of environment and development was formally demonstrated in a systems dynamic simulation model reported in the classic report on &quot;Limits to Growth&quot;. This was commissioned by the Club of Rome and written by a group of scientists led by Dennis and Donella Meadows of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Describing the desirable &quot;state of global equilibrium&quot;, the authors wrote: &quot;We are searching for a model output that represents a world system that is sustainable without sudden and uncontrolled collapse and capable of satisfying the basic material requirements of all of its people.&quot; The year 1972 also saw the publication of the influential book, &quot;A Blueprint for Survival&quot;.

In 1975, an MIT research group prepared ten days of hearings on &quot;Growth and Its Implication for the Future&quot; for the US Congress, the first hearings ever held on sustainable development.

In 1980, the International Union for Conservation of Nature published a world conservation strategy that included one of the first references to sustainable development as a global priority and introduced the term &quot;sustainable development&quot;. Two years later, the United Nations World Charter for Nature raised five principles of conservation by which human conduct affecting nature is to be guided and judged.

Since the Brundtland Report, the concept of sustainable development has developed beyond the initial intergenerational framework to focus more on the goal of &quot;socially inclusive and environmentally sustainable economic growth&quot;. In 1992, the UN Conference on Environment and Development published the Earth Charter, which outlines the building of a just, sustainable, and peaceful global society in the 21st century. The action plan Agenda 21 for sustainable development identified information, integration, and participation as key building blocks to help countries achieve development that recognizes these interdependent pillars. Furthermore, Agenda 21 emphasizes that broad public participation in decision-making is a fundamental prerequisite for achieving sustainable development.

The Rio Protocol was a huge leap forward: for the first time, the world agreed on a sustainability agenda. In fact, a global consensus was facilitated by neglecting concrete goals and operational details.

Whilst the discussions about (or discourse of) sustainable development are highly influential in global and national governance frameworks, its meaning and operationalization are context-dependent and have evolved over time. This evolution can for example be seen in the transition from the Millennium Development Goals (years 2000 to 2015) to the Sustainable Development Goals (years 2015 to 2030).

== Global governance framework ==
The most comprehensive global governance framework for sustainable development is the &quot;2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development&quot; with its 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). This agenda was a follow-up to the Millennium Declaration from the year 2000 with its eight Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), the first comprehensive global governance framework for sustainable development. The SDGs have concrete targets (unlike the results from the Rio Process) but no methods for sanctions. They contain goals, targets and indicators for example in the areas of poverty reduction, environmental protection, human prosperity and peace.

Scholars who are investigating global environmental governance have identified a set of discourses within the public space that mostly convey four sustainability frames: mainstream sustainability, progressive sustainability, a limits discourse, and radical sustainability. First, &quot;mainstream sustainability&quot; is a conservative approach on both economic and political terms. Second, &quot;progressive sustainability&quot; is an economically conservative, yet politically reformist approach. Under this framing, sustainable development is still centered on economic growth but human well-being and development can only be achieved through a redistribution of power to even out inequalities between developed and developing countries. Third, a &quot;limits discourse&quot; is an economically reformist, yet politically conservative approach to sustainability. Fourth, &quot;radical sustainability&quot; is a transformative approach seeking to break with existing global economic and political structures.

== Related concepts ==

=== Sustainability ===
== Dimensions ==

Sustainable development, like sustainability, is regarded to have three &quot;dimensions&quot;: the environment, economy and society. The idea is that a good balance between the three dimensions should be achieved. Instead of calling them &quot;dimensions&quot;, other terms commonly used are &quot;pillars&quot;, &quot;domains&quot;, &quot;aspects&quot;, &quot;spheres&quot;.

== Pathways ==

Six interdependent capacities are deemed to be necessary for the successful pursuit of sustainable development. These are the capacities to measure progress towards sustainable development; promote equity within and between generations; adapt to shocks and surprises; transform the system onto more sustainable development pathways; link knowledge with action for sustainability; and to devise governance arrangements that allow people to work together.

During the MDG era (year 2000 to 2015), the key objective of sustainable development was poverty reduction to be reached through economic growth and participation in the global trade system. The SDGs take a much more comprehensive approach to sustainable development than the MDGs did. They offer a more people-centred development agenda. Out of the 17 SDGs, for example, 11 goals contain targets related to equity, equality or inclusion, and SDG 10 is solely devoted to addressing inequality within and among countries.

=== Improving on environmental sustainability ===
 An unsustainable situation occurs when natural capital (the total of nature&#x27;s resources) is used up faster than it can be replenished. Sustainability requires that human activity only uses nature&#x27;s resources at a rate at which they can be replenished naturally. The concept of sustainable development is intertwined with the concept of carrying capacity. Theoretically, the long-term result of environmental degradation is the inability to sustain human life.

Important operational principles of sustainable development were published by Herman Daly in 1990: renewable resources should provide a sustainable yield (the rate of harvest should not exceed the rate of regeneration); for non-renewable resources there should be equivalent development of renewable substitutes; waste generation should not exceed the assimilative capacity of the environment.

In 2019, a summary for policymakers of the largest, most comprehensive study to date of biodiversity and ecosystem services was published by the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services. It recommended that human civilization will need a transformative change, including sustainable agriculture, reductions in consumption and waste, fishing quotas and collaborative water management.

Environmental problems associated with industrial agriculture and agribusiness are now being addressed through approaches such as sustainable agriculture, organic farming and more sustainable business practices. At the local level there are various movements working towards sustainable food systems which may include less meat consumption, local food production, slow food, sustainable gardening, and organic gardening. The environmental effects of different dietary patterns depend on many factors, including the proportion of animal and plant foods consumed and the method of food production.
As global population and affluence have increased, so has the use of various materials increased in volume, diversity, and distance transported. By 2050, humanity could consume an estimated 140 billion tons of minerals, ores, fossil fuels and biomass per year (three times its current amount) unless the economic growth rate is decoupled from the rate of natural resource consumption.

Sustainable use of materials has targeted the idea of dematerialization, converting the linear path of materials (extraction, use, disposal in landfill) to a circular material flow that reuses materials as much as possible, much like the cycling and reuse of waste in nature. This way of thinking is expressed in the concept of circular economy, which employs reuse, sharing, repair, refurbishment, remanufacturing and recycling to create a closed-loop system, minimizing the use of resource inputs and the creation of waste, pollution and carbon emissions. The European Commission has adopted an ambitious Circular Economy Action Plan in 2020, which aims at making sustainable products the norm in the EU.
===Improving on economic and social aspects===
It has been suggested that because of the rural poverty and overexploitation, environmental resources should be treated as important economic assets, called natural capital. Economic development has traditionally required a growth in the gross domestic product. This model of unlimited personal and GDP growth may be over. Sustainable development may involve improvements in the quality of life for many but may necessitate a decrease in resource consumption. &quot;Growth&quot; generally ignores the direct effect that the environment may have on social welfare, whereas &quot;development&quot; takes it into account.

As early as the 1970s, the concept of sustainability was used to describe an economy &quot;in equilibrium with basic ecological support systems&quot;. Scientists in many fields have highlighted &quot;The Limits to Growth&quot;, and economists have presented alternatives, for example a &#x27;steady-state economy&#x27;, to address concerns over the impacts of expanding human development on the planet. In 1987, the economist Edward Barbier published the study &quot;The Concept of Sustainable Economic Development&quot;, where he recognized that goals of environmental conservation and economic development are not conflicting and can be reinforcing each other.

A World Bank study from 1999 concluded that based on the theory of genuine savings (defined as &quot;traditional net savings less the value of resource depletion and environmental degradation plus the value of investment in human capital&quot;), policymakers have many possible interventions to increase sustainability, in macroeconomics or purely environmental. Several studies have noted that efficient policies for renewable energy and pollution are compatible with increasing human welfare, eventually reaching a golden-rule steady state.

A meta review in 2002 looked at environmental and economic valuations and found a &quot;lack of concrete understanding of what &quot;sustainability policies&quot; might entail in practice&quot;. A study concluded in 2007 that knowledge, manufactured and human capital (health and education) has not compensated for the degradation of natural capital in many parts of the world. It has been suggested that intergenerational equity can be incorporated into a sustainable development and decision making, as has become common in economic valuations of climate economics.

The World Business Council for Sustainable Development published a Vision 2050 document in 2021 to show &quot;How business can lead the transformations the world needs&quot;. The vision states that &quot;we envision a world in which 9+billion people can live well, within planetary boundaries, by 2050.&quot; This report was highlighted by &quot;The Guardian&quot; as &quot;the largest concerted corporate sustainability action plan to date – include reversing the damage done to ecosystems, addressing rising greenhouse gas emissions and ensuring societies move to sustainable agriculture.&quot;

== Barriers ==
== Assessments and reactions ==

The concept of sustainable development has been and still is, subject to criticism, including the question of what is to be sustained in sustainable development. It has been argued that there is no such thing as sustainable use of a non-renewable resource, since any positive rate of exploitation will eventually lead to the exhaustion of earth&#x27;s finite stock; this perspective renders the Industrial Revolution as a whole unsustainable.

The sustainable development debate is based on the assumption that societies need to manage three types of capital (economic, social, and natural), which may be non-substitutable and whose consumption might be irreversible. Natural capital can not necessarily be substituted by economic capital. While it is possible that we can find ways to replace some natural resources, it is much less likely that they will ever be able to replace ecosystem services, such as the protection provided by the ozone layer, or the climate stabilizing function of the Amazonian forest.

The concept of sustainable development has been criticized from different angles. While some see it as paradoxical (or an oxymoron) and regard development as inherently unsustainable, others are disappointed in the lack of progress that has been achieved so far. Part of the problem is that &quot;development&quot; itself is not consistently defined.

The vagueness of the Brundtland definition of sustainable development has been criticized as follows: The definition has &quot;opened up the possibility of downplaying sustainability. Hence, governments spread the message that we can have it all at the same time, i.e. economic growth, prospering societies and a healthy environment. No new ethic is required. This so-called weak version of sustainability is popular among governments, and businesses, but profoundly wrong and not even weak, as there is no alternative to preserving the earth&#x27;s ecological integrity.&quot;

Scholars have stated that &quot;sustainable development&quot; is open-ended, much critiqued as ambiguous, incoherent, and therefore easily appropriated.&quot;&quot;

== Society and culture ==

=== Sustainable development goals ===
Sustainable development is the foundational concept of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Policies to achieve the SDGs are meant to cohere around this concept.&quot;&quot;

=== Education for sustainable development ===
Education for sustainable development (ESD) is a term officially used by the United Nations. It is defined as education practices that encourage changes in knowledge, skills, values, and attitudes to enable a more sustainable and just society for humanity. ESD aims to empower and equip current and future generations to meet their needs using a balanced and integrated approach to sustainable development&#x27;s economic, social, and environmental dimensions.

Agenda 21 was the first international document that identified education as an essential tool for achieving sustainable development and highlighted areas of action for education. ESD is a component of measurement in an indicator for Sustainable Development Goal 12 (SDG) for &quot;responsible consumption and production&quot;. SDG 12 has 11 targets, and target 12.8 is &quot;By 2030, ensure that people everywhere have the relevant information and awareness for sustainable development and lifestyles in harmony with nature.&quot; 20 years after the Agenda 21 document was declared, the &#x27;Future we want&#x27; document was proclaimed in the Rio+20 UN Conference on Sustainable Development, stating that &quot;We resolve to promote education for sustainable development and to integrate sustainable development more actively into education beyond the Decade of Education for Sustainable Development.&quot;

One version of education for Sustainable Development recognizes modern-day environmental challenges. It seeks to define new ways to adjust to a changing biosphere, as well as engage individuals to address societal issues that come with them In the International Encyclopedia of Education, this approach to education is seen as an attempt to &quot;shift consciousness toward an ethics of life-giving relationships that respects the interconnectedness of man to his natural world&quot; to equip future members of society with environmental awareness and a sense of responsibility to sustainability.

For UNESCO, education for sustainable development involves:

The Thessaloniki Declaration, presented at the &quot;International Conference on Environment and Society: Education and Public Awareness for Sustainability&quot; by UNESCO and the Government of Greece (December 1997), highlights the importance of sustainability not only with regards to the natural environment, but also with &quot;poverty, health, food security, democracy, human rights, and peace&quot;.

== See also ==
* 
* 
* Sustainable remediation
* Digital public goods

==References==
== External links ==

* Sustainable Development Knowledge Platform of the UN
* Sustainable Development Solutions Network</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131201" start="0" end="23" title="Sustainable development" label="Sustainable development"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917873" start="53" end="70" title="Human development (economics)" label="human development"/>
<link wikidata="Q961310" start="298" end="317" title="planetary integrity" label="planetary integrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530482" start="376" end="383" title="Economic development" label="economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q832237" start="385" end="396" title="Environmental protection" label="environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891928" start="415" end="432" title="Brundtland Report" label="Brundtland Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q219416" start="560" end="574" title="sustainability" label="sustainability"/>
<link wikidata="Q288156" start="586" end="603" title="Normativity" label="normative concept"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="605" end="611" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q751149" start="937" end="949" title="Earth Summit" label="Earth Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649586" start="1106" end="1135" title="Sustainable Development Goals" label="Sustainable Development Goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="1221" end="1252" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="United Nations General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q10294" start="1319" end="1326" title="poverty" label="poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="1328" end="1342" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q18466271" start="1344" end="1361" title="biodiversity loss" label="biodiversity loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q169429" start="1471" end="1479" title="oxymoron" label="oxymoron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451551" start="1861" end="1908" title="World Commission on Environment and Development" label="World Commission on Environment and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891928" start="1980" end="1997" title="Brundtland Report" label="Brundtland Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530482" start="2159" end="2179" title="economic development" label="economic development"/>
<link wikidata="Q832237" start="2181" end="2205" title="environmental protection" label="environmental protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981051" start="2211" end="2228" title="social well-being" label="social well-being"/>
<link wikidata="Q219416" start="2602" end="2616" title="Sustainability" label="Sustainability"/>
<link wikidata="Q372561" start="2884" end="2913" title="sustainable forest management" label="sustainable forest management"/>
<link wikidata="Q342712" start="3066" end="3077" title="John Evelyn" label="John Evelyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q17040291" start="3110" end="3115" title="Sylva, or A Discourse of Forest-Trees and the Propagation of Timber" label="Sylva"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050262" start="3254" end="3259" title="over-exploitation" label="over-"/>
<link wikidata="Q548599" start="3260" end="3293" title="exploitation of natural resources" label="exploitation of natural resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q86590" start="3310" end="3333" title="Hans Carl von Carlowitz" label="Hans Carl von Carlowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q53437" start="3391" end="3421" title="Augustus II the Strong" label="Frederick Augustus I of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q188971" start="3551" end="3572" title="Jean-Baptiste Colbert" label="Jean-Baptiste Colbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934864" start="3634" end="3649" title="sustained yield" label="sustained yield"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694" start="3689" end="3711" title="Alexander von Humboldt" label="Alexander von Humboldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q70835" start="3716" end="3735" title="Georg Ludwig Hartig" label="Georg Ludwig Hartig"/>
<link wikidata="Q534301" start="3841" end="3856" title="Gifford Pinchot" label="Gifford Pinchot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891156" start="3880" end="3897" title="US Forest Service" label="US Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q971382" start="3988" end="4000" title="Aldo Leopold" label="Aldo Leopold"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484063" start="4007" end="4017" title="land ethic" label="land ethic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8189417" start="4060" end="4082" title="environmental movement" label="environmental movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q100948" start="4127" end="4140" title="Rachel Carson" label="Rachel Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q591623" start="4154" end="4167" title="Silent Spring" label="Silent Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334780" start="4284" end="4309" title="environmental degradation" label="environmental degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q505520" start="4311" end="4330" title="Kenneth E. Boulding" label="Kenneth E. Boulding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778319" start="4396" end="4411" title="Spaceship Earth" label="Spaceship Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q592132" start="4581" end="4595" title="Garrett Hardin" label="Garrett Hardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q334622" start="4628" end="4650" title="tragedy of the commons" label="tragedy of the commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q219416" start="4681" end="4695" title="sustainability" label="sustainability"/>
<link wikidata="Q219416" start="4881" end="4895" title="sustainability" label="sustainability"/>
<link wikidata="Q277111" start="5263" end="5279" title="Limits to Growth" label="Limits to Growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189291" start="5373" end="5379" title="Dennis Meadows" label="Dennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q271226" start="5384" end="5399" title="Donella Meadows" label="Donella Meadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="5407" end="5444" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930417" start="5821" end="5845" title="A Blueprint for Survival" label="A Blueprint for Survival"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="5866" end="5869" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="5980" end="5991" title="United States Congress" label="US Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="6064" end="6110" title="International Union for Conservation of Nature" label="International Union for Conservation of Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961231" start="6338" end="6362" title="World Charter for Nature" label="World Charter for Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q20113959" start="6389" end="6401" title="Conservation (ethic)" label="conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891928" start="6481" end="6498" title="Brundtland Report" label="Brundtland Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q17121563" start="6644" end="6653" title="inclusive growth" label="inclusive"/>
<link wikidata="Q131201" start="6674" end="6701" title="sustainable economic growth" label="sustainable economic growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q751149" start="6722" end="6766" title="UN Conference on Environment and Development" label="UN Conference on Environment and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q871256" start="6781" end="6794" title="Earth Charter" label="Earth Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q208571" start="6913" end="6922" title="Agenda 21" label="Agenda 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801868" start="7268" end="7284" title="Rio Protocol" label="The Rio Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q219416" start="7352" end="7366" title="sustainability" label="sustainability"/>
<link wikidata="Q190539" start="7507" end="7516" title="discourse" label="discourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q30686831" start="7591" end="7611" title="governance framework" label="governance framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q81737" start="7765" end="7793" title="Millennium Development Goals" label="Millennium Development Goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649586" start="7822" end="7851" title="Sustainable Development Goals" label="Sustainable Development Goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524235" start="7932" end="7949" title="global governance" label="global governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649586" start="8059" end="8088" title="Sustainable Development Goals" label="Sustainable Development Goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q81737" start="8189" end="8217" title="Millennium Development Goals" label="Millennium Development Goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824165" start="8481" end="8498" title="poverty reduction" label="poverty reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q832237" start="8500" end="8524" title="environmental protection" label="environmental protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q454" start="8547" end="8552" title="peace" label="peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q219416" start="9662" end="9676" title="sustainability" label="sustainability"/>
<link wikidata="Q8425" start="9757" end="9764" title="society" label="society"/>
<link wikidata="Q189833" start="10610" end="10625" title="economic growth" label="economic growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q178803" start="10651" end="10663" title="global trade" label="global trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q98109508" start="10831" end="10838" title="List of Sustainable Development Goal targets and indicators" label="17 SDGs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540268" start="11093" end="11108" title="natural capital" label="natural capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q866283" start="11400" end="11417" title="carrying capacity" label="carrying capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334780" start="11458" end="11483" title="environmental degradation" label="environmental degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385073" start="11603" end="11614" title="Herman Daly" label="Herman Daly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738815" start="11661" end="11678" title="sustainable yield" label="sustainable yield"/>
<link wikidata="Q63535006" start="11963" end="12004" title="Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services" label="largest, most comprehensive study to date"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="12008" end="12020" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q295865" start="12025" end="12042" title="ecosystem service" label="ecosystem service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666088" start="12065" end="12145" title="Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services" label="Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751054" start="12231" end="12254" title="sustainable agriculture" label="sustainable agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q192270" start="12270" end="12281" title="Consumption (economics)" label="consumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381236" start="12345" end="12367" title="Environmental impact of agriculture" label="Environmental problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347753" start="12384" end="12406" title="industrial agriculture" label="industrial agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q396622" start="12411" end="12423" title="agribusiness" label="agribusiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751054" start="12475" end="12498" title="sustainable agriculture" label="sustainable agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q165647" start="12500" end="12515" title="organic farming" label="organic farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q295382" start="12525" end="12555" title="Sustainable business" label="sustainable business practices"/>
<link wikidata="Q76737185" start="12620" end="12643" title="sustainable food system" label="sustainable food system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2674120" start="12686" end="12696" title="local food" label="local food"/>
<link wikidata="Q335823" start="12709" end="12718" title="slow food" label="slow food"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104554" start="12720" end="12741" title="sustainable gardening" label="sustainable gardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q3162639" start="12747" end="12764" title="organic gardening" label="organic gardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q23582796" start="13304" end="13324" title="resource consumption" label="resource consumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q18351085" start="13381" end="13398" title="Dematerialization (economics)" label="dematerialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146151" start="13485" end="13507" title="Material flow accounting" label="circular material flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q497743" start="13655" end="13671" title="circular economy" label="circular economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q846574" start="13687" end="13692" title="reuse" label="reuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277143" start="13694" end="13701" title="Sharing economy" label="sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521829" start="13726" end="13741" title="remanufacturing" label="remanufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q132580" start="13746" end="13755" title="recycling" label="recycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3737914" start="13810" end="13825" title="Resource depletion" label="resource inputs"/>
<link wikidata="Q319970" start="13846" end="13851" title="Waste minimisation" label="waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="13889" end="13908" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q79198143" start="13934" end="13962" title="Circular Economy Action Plan" label="Circular Economy Action Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19708004" start="14123" end="14136" title="rural poverty" label="rural poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050262" start="14141" end="14157" title="overexploitation" label="overexploitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540268" start="14238" end="14253" title="natural capital" label="natural capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q23582796" start="14519" end="14539" title="resource consumption" label="resource consumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q277111" start="14901" end="14921" title="The Limits to Growth" label="The Limits to Growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q134775" start="14993" end="15013" title="steady-state economy" label="steady-state economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q30068992" start="15127" end="15141" title="Edward Barbier" label="Edward Barbier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="15367" end="15377" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q3737914" start="15508" end="15526" title="resource depletion" label="resource depletion"/>
<link wikidata="Q165687" start="15589" end="15602" title="human capital" label="human capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q39680" start="15688" end="15702" title="macroeconomics" label="macroeconomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333592" start="16458" end="16475" title="Economic analysis of climate change" label="climate economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q677910" start="16482" end="16532" title="World Business Council for Sustainable Development" label="World Business Council for Sustainable Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q961310" start="16750" end="16770" title="planetary boundaries" label="planetary boundaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="16824" end="16836" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q106358009" start="16988" end="17012" title="greenhouse gas emissions" label="greenhouse gas emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q936791" start="17357" end="17379" title="non-renewable resource" label="non-renewable resource"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="17519" end="17540" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540268" start="17792" end="17807" title="Natural capital" label="Natural capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q295865" start="18004" end="18021" title="ecosystem service" label="ecosystem service"/>
<link wikidata="Q169429" start="18260" end="18268" title="oxymoron" label="oxymoron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7977963" start="18976" end="18980" title="Weak and strong sustainability" label="weak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649586" start="19359" end="19388" title="Sustainable Development Goals" label="Sustainable Development Goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q11999334" start="19439" end="19445" title="Policy coherence for development" label="cohere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="19603" end="19617" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q208571" start="19988" end="19997" title="Agenda 21" label="Agenda 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q53581232" start="20221" end="20252" title="Sustainable Development Goal 12" label="Sustainable Development Goal 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="21500" end="21506" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="21722" end="21728" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q17000165" start="21987" end="22010" title="Sustainable remediation" label="Sustainable remediation"/>
<link wikidata="Q102440913" start="22013" end="22033" title="Digital public goods" label="Digital public goods"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29507" wikidata="Q39379" url="?curid=29507" title="Scientific American">
<text>Scientific American, informally abbreviated SciAm or sometimes SA, is an American popular science magazine. Many scientists, including Albert Einstein and Nikola Tesla, have contributed articles to it, with more than 150 Nobel Prize-winners being featured since its inception.

In print since 1845, it is the oldest continuously published magazine in the United States. &quot;Scientific American&quot; is owned by Springer Nature, which is a subsidiary of Holtzbrinck Publishing Group.

== History ==


&quot;Scientific American&quot; was founded by inventor and publisher Rufus Porter in 1845 as a four-page weekly newspaper. The first issue of the large-format New York City newspaper was released on August 28, 1845.

Throughout its early years, much emphasis was placed on reports of what was going on at the U.S. Patent Office. It also reported on a broad range of inventions including perpetual motion machines, an 1860 device for buoying vessels by Abraham Lincoln, and the universal joint which now can be found in nearly every automobile manufactured. Current issues include a &quot;this date in history&quot; section, featuring excerpts from articles originally published 50, 100, and 150 years earlier. Topics include humorous incidents, wrong-headed theories, and noteworthy advances in the history of science and technology. It started as a weekly publication in August 1845 before turning into a monthly in November 1921.

Porter sold the publication to Alfred Ely Beach, son of media magnate Moses Yale Beach, and Orson Desaix Munn, a mere ten months after founding it. Editors and co-owners from the Yale family included Frederick C. Beach and his son, Stanley Yale Beach, and from the Munn family, Charles Allen Munn and his nephew, Orson Desaix Munn II. Until 1948, it remained owned by the families under Munn &amp; Company. Under Orson Munn&#x27;s grandson, Orson Desaix Munn III, it had evolved into something of a &quot;workbench&quot; publication, similar to the 20th-century incarnation of &quot;Popular Science&quot;.

In the years after World War II, the magazine fell into decline. In 1948, three partners who were planning on starting a new popular science magazine, to be called &quot;The Sciences&quot;, purchased the assets of the old &quot;Scientific American&quot; instead and put its name on the designs they had created for their new magazine. Thus the partnerspublisher Gerard Piel, editor Dennis Flanagan, and general manager Donald H. Miller Jr. essentially created a new magazine. Miller retired in 1979, Flanagan and Piel in 1984, when Gerard Piel&#x27;s son Jonathan became president and editor; circulation had grown fifteen-fold since 1948. In 1986, it was sold to the Holtzbrinck Publishing Group of Germany, which has owned it until the Springer-Nature merger. In the fall of 2008, &quot;Scientific American&quot; was put under the control of Holtzbrinck&#x27;s Nature Publishing Group division.

Donald Miller died in December 1998, Gerard Piel in September 2004 and Dennis Flanagan in January 2005. Mariette DiChristina became editor-in-chief after John Rennie stepped down in June 2009, and stepped down herself in September 2019. In April 2020, Laura Helmuth assumed the role of editor-in-chief.

The magazine is the oldest continuously published magazine in the United States.

In 2009, the publisher notified collegiate libraries that yearly subscription prices for the magazine would increase by nearly 500% for print and 50% for online access to $1,500 yearly.

Offices of the &quot;Scientific American&quot; have included 37 Park Row in Manhattan and the Woolworth Building in 1915 when it was just finished two years earlier in 1913. The Woolworth Building was at the time one of the first skyscrapers in the city and the tallest one in the world.

== International editions ==
&quot;Scientific American&quot; published its first foreign-language edition in 1890 in Spanish, titled &quot;La América Científica é Industrial&quot;, but ended sometime in the early 1900s. In 1968, the Italian-language edition&quot;, Le Scienze&quot;, was launched followed by the Japanese edition, &quot;日経サイエンス&quot; (transliteration: &quot;Nikkei Science&quot;) in 1971.

Subsequent international editions included the Spanish-language revival for Spain, &quot;Inveestigación y Ciencia&quot; (&quot;Investigation and Science&quot;) in 1976, the French &quot;Pour la Science&quot; (&quot;For Science&quot;) in 1977, the German &quot;Spektrum der Wissenschaft&quot; (&quot;Spectrum of Science&quot;) in 1978, as well as the Russian &quot;V Mire Nauki&quot; (Russian: В мире науки; &quot;In the world of science&quot;).

The Polish edition, published by Prószyński Media, began in 1991 under the name &quot;Świat Nauki&quot; (“World of Science”).

In 2002, the Taiwanese edition, &quot;Scientist&quot; (traditional Chinese: 科學人), was established in Taipei.That same year, the German-language edition, &quot;Spektrum der Wissenschaft&quot;, introduced &quot;Gehirn &amp; Geist&quot; (“Brain &amp; Mind”), focusing on psychology and neuroscience.

In Italy, &quot;Mente &amp; Cervello&quot; (“Mind &amp; Brain”) launched in 2003, complementing the older &quot;Le Scienze&quot;. The Dutch edition debuted in 2003, published by Cascade in Antwerp.

== Editors ==

* Rufus Porter (1792 – 1884), from 1845 to 1847.
* Orson Desaix Munn (1824 – 1907), from 1847 to 1907.
* Charles Allen Munn (1859 – 1924), from 1907 to 1924.
* Orson Desaix Munn II (1883 – 1958), from 1924 to 1947.
* Dennis Flanagan (1919 – 2005), from 1947 to 1984.
* Jonathan Piel, from 1984 to 1994.
* John Rennie, from 1994 to 2009.
* Mariette DiChristina, from 2009 to 2019.
* Laura Helmuth, from 2020 to 2024.

=== Editorial controversy ===

In 2013, Danielle N. Lee, a female scientist who blogged at &quot;Scientific American&quot;, was called a &quot;whore&quot; in an email by an editor at the science website &quot;Biology Online&quot; after refusing to write professional content without compensation. Lee wrote a response to the email and posted it on the &quot;Scientific American&quot; blog. Then editor-in-chief Mariette DiChristina removed Lee&#x27;s post, citing legal reasons for removing the blog. The editor at &quot;Biology Online&quot; was fired after the incident.

The controversy widened in the ensuing days. The magazine&#x27;s blog editor, Bora Zivkovic, was the subject of allegations of sexual harassment by another blogger, Monica Byrne. Although the alleged incident had occurred about a year earlier, editor Mariette DiChristina informed readers that the incident had been investigated and resolved to Byrne&#x27;s satisfaction. However, the incident involving Lee had prompted Byrne to reveal the identity of Zivkovic, following the latter&#x27;s support of Lee. Zivkovic admitted the incident with Byrne had taken place. He apologized to Byrne, and referred to the incident as &quot;singular&quot;, stating that his behavior was not &quot;engaged in before or since.&quot;

Zivkovic resigned from the board of Science Online, the popular science blogging conference that he co-founded with Anton Zuiker. Following Zivkovic&#x27;s admission, several female bloggers, including other bloggers for the magazine, wrote their own accounts, alleging additional incidents of sexual harassment, although none of these accounts were independently investigated. A day after these new revelations, Zivkovic resigned from his position at &quot;Scientific American&quot;.

== Special issues ==
Scientific American has published numerous special editions over the years, focusing on various scientific topics. These editions are typically released quarterly and cover themes such as space settlement by humans, evolution, economics, and climate change. For example, the March 2024, (volume 33, issue 1s), included articles with themes about space exploration as well as human sexual division of labor and differentiation among early-human hunter-gatherers.” Similarly, the June 2024 edition, (volume 33, issue 2s), featured pieces on analyzing the &quot;cosmic nothing&quot; and issues in physics raised often by the cosmological constant.

These special editions are available to subscribers and can be accessed through Scientific American’s archives. The magazine’s archive provides a comprehensive list of past issues, including special editions, dating back to its inception in 1845.

== Scientific American 50 award ==
The Scientific American 50 award was started in 2002 to recognize contributions to science and technology during the magazine&#x27;s previous year. The magazine&#x27;s 50 awards cover many categories including agriculture, communications, defense, environment, and medical diagnostics. The complete list of each year&#x27;s winners appear in the December issue of the magazine, as well as on the magazine&#x27;s web site.

== Website ==

In March 1996, Scientific American launched its own website that included articles from current and past issues, online-only features, daily news, special reports, and trivia, among other things. The website introduced a paywall in April 2019, with readers able to view a few articles for free each month.

== Columns ==

Notable features have included:

* Martin Gardner&#x27;s Mathematical Games column
* Douglas Hofstadter&#x27;s Metamagical Themas
* The Amateur Scientist column
* A. K. Dewdney&#x27;s Computer Recreations column
* Michael Shermer&#x27;s Skeptic column
* James Burke&#x27;s Connections

== Television ==

From 1990 to 2005 &quot;Scientific American&quot; produced a television program on PBS called &quot;Scientific American Frontiers&quot; with hosts Woodie Flowers and Alan Alda.

== Books ==

From 1983 to 1997, &quot;Scientific American&quot; has produced an encyclopedia set of volumes from their publishing division, the Scientific American Library. These books were not sold in retail stores, but as a Book of the Month Club selection priced from $24.95 to $32.95.

Topics covered dozens of areas of scientific knowledge and included in-depth essays on: The Animal Mind; Atmosphere, Climate, and Change; Beyond the Third Dimension; Cosmic Clouds; Cycles of Life • Civilization and the Biosphere; The Discovery of Subatomic Particles; Diversity and the Tropical Rain Forest; Earthquakes and Geological Discovery; Exploring Planetary Worlds; Gravity&#x27;s Fatal Attraction; Fire; Fossils and the History of Life; From Quarks to the Cosmos; A Guided Tour of the Living Cell; Human Diversity; Perception; The Solar System; Sun and Earth; The Science of Words (Linguistics); The Science of Musical Sound; The Second Law (of Thermodynamics); Stars; Supercomputing and the Transformation of Science.

&quot;Scientific American&quot; launched a publishing imprint in 2010 in partnership with Farrar, Straus and Giroux.

* A &quot;collection of updated or adapted &quot;Scientific American&quot; articles and shorter pieces... .&quot; According to editor Andrea Gawrylewski &#x27;The reader will quickly notice a common theme. ... there really is no debate where the science is concerned. Contributors include Seth Shostak, Paul Offit, Richard Dawkins and Harriet Hall.

== Scientific and political debate ==

In April 1950, the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission ordered &quot;Scientific American&quot; to cease publication of an issue containing an article by Hans Bethe that appeared to reveal classified information about the thermonuclear hydrogen bomb. Subsequent review of the material determined that the AEC had overreacted. The incident was important for the &quot;new&quot; &quot;Scientific American&quot;″s history, as the AEC&#x27;s decision to burn 3,000 copies of an early press-run of the magazine containing the offending material appeared to be &quot;book burning in a free society&quot; when publisher Gerard Piel leaked the incident to the press.

In the October 2020 issue of the magazine, it endorsed Joe Biden for the 2020 presidential election, citing Donald Trump&#x27;s rejection of scientific evidence, especially during the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States. In the column reporting the endorsement, the magazine&#x27;s editors said, &quot;&quot;Scientific American&quot; has never endorsed a presidential candidate in its 175-year history. This year we are compelled to do so. We do not do this lightly.&quot; In September 2024 and for the second time in its history, for the same reason, &quot;Scientific American&quot; endorsed Kamala Harris for the 2024 United States presidential election.

In November 2024 editor-in-chief Laura Helmuth resigned from Scientific American following an apology for a social media post in which she characterized some supporting Trump as fascists. Throughout her tenure, many critics (including some of Scientific American&#x27;s former writers) objected to what they viewed as the magazine&#x27;s shift towards social justice politics at the expense of its scientific credibility.

== Awards ==

* 2010: IQ Award for the German edition &quot;Spektrum der Wissenschaft&quot;
* 2012: Science in Society Journalism Award, for the editorial board&#x27;s piece titled &quot;Ban Chimp Testing.&quot;
* 2013, the National Association of Science Writers awarded freelancer Douglas Fox in the science reporting category for his article “Witness to an Antarctic Meltdown,” published in &quot;Scientific American&quot;.
* 2024, Scientific American received seven Telly Awards, which honor excellence in video and television content across all screens. The magazine’s visual compositions on various scientific topics were selected from over 13,000 submissions.

== See also ==
* 14145 Sciam, asteroid named after &quot;Scientific American&quot;
* &quot;American Scientist&quot;
* &quot;Discover&quot; (magazine)
* Albert Graham Ingalls, former editor and author of an amateur astronomy column
* &quot;New Scientist&quot;
* &quot;Scientific American Mind&quot;

== References ==
== External links ==

* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q995600" start="82" end="97" title="popular science" label="popular science"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="135" end="150" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q9036" start="155" end="167" title="Nikola Tesla" label="Nikola Tesla"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="221" end="232" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q21096327" start="414" end="429" title="Springer Nature" label="Springer Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q127005" start="456" end="484" title="Holtzbrinck Publishing Group" label="Holtzbrinck Publishing Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378087" start="573" end="585" title="Rufus Porter (painter)" label="Rufus Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459541" start="813" end="831" title="United States Patent and Trademark Office" label="U.S. Patent Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q12623" start="891" end="907" title="perpetual motion" label="perpetual motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="956" end="971" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q862003" start="981" end="996" title="universal joint" label="universal joint"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644938" start="1468" end="1484" title="Alfred Ely Beach" label="Alfred Ely Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324773" start="1507" end="1523" title="Moses Yale Beach" label="Moses Yale Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104158" start="1529" end="1546" title="Orson Desaix Munn" label="Orson Desaix Munn"/>
<link wikidata="Q37491029" start="1616" end="1627" title="Yale (surname)" label="Yale family"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497568" start="1637" end="1655" title="Frederick Converse Beach" label="Frederick C. Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q122341103" start="1669" end="1687" title="Stanley Yale Beach" label="Stanley Yale Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075086" start="1715" end="1733" title="Charles Allen Munn" label="Charles Allen Munn"/>
<link wikidata="Q28065941" start="1750" end="1770" title="Orson Desaix Munn II" label="Orson Desaix Munn II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1824" end="1842" title="Alfred Ely Beach#Munn &amp;amp; Co." label="Munn &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q773087" start="2020" end="2035" title="Popular Science (magazine)" label="Popular Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q5550132" start="2406" end="2417" title="Gerard Piel" label="Gerard Piel"/>
<link wikidata="Q127005" start="2712" end="2740" title="Holtzbrinck Publishing Group" label="Holtzbrinck Publishing Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q21096327" start="2782" end="2797" title="Springer Nature" label="Springer-Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q180419" start="2907" end="2930" title="Nature Research" label="Nature Publishing Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6763265" start="3046" end="3066" title="Mariette DiChristina" label="Mariette DiChristina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475409" start="3096" end="3107" title="John Rennie (editor)" label="John Rennie"/>
<link wikidata="Q87721546" start="3194" end="3207" title="Laura Helmuth" label="Laura Helmuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q589298" start="3228" end="3243" title="editor-in-chief" label="editor-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386890" start="3579" end="3587" title="Park Row (Manhattan)" label="Park Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="3591" end="3600" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q217652" start="3609" end="3627" title="Woolworth Building" label="Woolworth Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="3921" end="3928" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3226980" start="4069" end="4079" title="Le Scienze" label="Le Scienze"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="4286" end="4291" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="4383" end="4389" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="4457" end="4463" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="4560" end="4567" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="4594" end="4602" title="Russian language" label="Russian:"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="4660" end="4666" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="4796" end="4805" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q178528" start="4838" end="4857" title="Traditional Chinese characters" label="traditional Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867" start="4884" end="4890" title="Taipei" label="Taipei"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="5215" end="5220" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="5270" end="5277" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378087" start="5297" end="5309" title="Rufus Porter (painter)" label="Rufus Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104158" start="5346" end="5363" title="Orson Desaix Munn" label="Orson Desaix Munn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075086" start="5400" end="5418" title="Charles Allen Munn" label="Charles Allen Munn"/>
<link wikidata="Q28065941" start="5455" end="5475" title="Orson Desaix Munn II" label="Orson Desaix Munn II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5258415" start="5512" end="5527" title="Dennis Flanagan" label="Dennis Flanagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6274143" start="5564" end="5577" title="Jonathan Piel" label="Jonathan Piel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475409" start="5600" end="5611" title="John Rennie (editor)" label="John Rennie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6763265" start="5634" end="5654" title="Mariette DiChristina" label="Mariette DiChristina"/>
<link wikidata="Q87721546" start="5677" end="5690" title="Laura Helmuth" label="Laura Helmuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q24049147" start="5752" end="5767" title="Danielle N. Lee" label="Danielle N. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433585" start="7040" end="7054" title="Science Online" label="Science Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q9328551" start="7699" end="7715" title="space settlement" label="space settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="7727" end="7736" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="7738" end="7747" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="7753" end="7767" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458769" start="7892" end="7916" title="Sexual division of labour" label="sexual division of labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545655" start="7921" end="7936" title="Sexual differentiation in humans" label="differentiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="7955" end="7971" title="Hunter-gatherer" label="hunter-gatherers"/>
<link wikidata="Q845371" start="8070" end="8084" title="Void (astronomy)" label="cosmic nothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q59151" start="8133" end="8154" title="cosmological constant" label="cosmological constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q910845" start="9099" end="9106" title="paywall" label="paywall"/>
<link wikidata="Q677706" start="9235" end="9249" title="Martin Gardner" label="Martin Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q18355344" start="9257" end="9282" title="List of Martin Gardner Mathematical Games columns" label="Mathematical Games column"/>
<link wikidata="Q319308" start="9285" end="9303" title="Douglas Hofstadter" label="Douglas Hofstadter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6822966" start="9311" end="9329" title="Metamagical Themas" label="Metamagical Themas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3985636" start="9332" end="9353" title="The Amateur Scientist" label="The Amateur Scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q93036" start="9363" end="9376" title="A. K. Dewdney" label="A. K. Dewdney"/>
<link wikidata="Q126225" start="9414" end="9429" title="Michael Shermer" label="Michael Shermer"/>
<link wikidata="Q778787" start="9454" end="9465" title="James Burke (science historian)" label="James Burke"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9473" end="9484" title="Connections (British documentary)#Related works" label="Connections"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="9587" end="9590" title="Public Broadcasting Service" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433742" start="9604" end="9633" title="Scientific American Frontiers" label="Scientific American Frontiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569833" start="9651" end="9665" title="Woodie Flowers" label="Woodie Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q310394" start="9670" end="9679" title="Alan Alda" label="Alan Alda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943125" start="9908" end="9930" title="Book of the Month Club" label="Book of the Month Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q499210" start="10064" end="10075" title="Animal cognition" label="Animal Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067003" start="10791" end="10816" title="Farrar, Straus and Giroux" label="Farrar, Straus and Giroux"/>
<link wikidata="Q5762284" start="11108" end="11120" title="Seth Shostak" label="Seth Shostak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7152812" start="11122" end="11132" title="Paul Offit" label="Paul Offit"/>
<link wikidata="Q44461" start="11134" end="11149" title="Richard Dawkins" label="Richard Dawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q193923" start="11154" end="11166" title="Harriet A. Hall" label="Harriet Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q939090" start="11232" end="11256" title="United States Atomic Energy Commission" label="Atomic Energy Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q155794" start="11355" end="11365" title="Hans Bethe" label="Hans Bethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q625107" start="11437" end="11450" title="hydrogen bomb" label="hydrogen bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q22702" start="11762" end="11774" title="book burning" label="book burning"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="11916" end="11925" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q22923830" start="11934" end="11960" title="2020 United States presidential election" label="2020 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="11969" end="11981" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q83873577" start="12045" end="12083" title="COVID-19 pandemic in the United States" label="COVID-19 pandemic in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853588" start="12457" end="12470" title="Kamala Harris" label="Kamala Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q101110072" start="12479" end="12519" title="2024 United States presidential election" label="2024 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q87721546" start="12555" end="12568" title="Laura Helmuth" label="Laura Helmuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204940" start="12967" end="12975" title="IQ Award" label="IQ Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433690" start="13045" end="13080" title="Science in Society Journalism Awards" label="Science in Society Journalism Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417966" start="13630" end="13641" title="14145 Sciam" label="14145 Sciam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493243" start="13704" end="13722" title="American Scientist" label="American Scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q733742" start="13731" end="13762" title="Discover (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Discover&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q353563" start="13765" end="13786" title="Albert Graham Ingalls" label="Albert Graham Ingalls"/>
<link wikidata="Q560575" start="13819" end="13836" title="amateur astronomy" label="amateur astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q525592" start="13852" end="13865" title="New Scientist" label="New Scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260989" start="13880" end="13904" title="Scientific American Mind" label="Scientific American Mind"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29511" wikidata="Q323834" url="?curid=29511" title="Siouxsie and the Banshees">
<text>Siouxsie and the Banshees (, ) were a British rock band formed in London in 1976 by vocalist Siouxsie Sioux and bass guitarist Steven Severin. They were widely influential, both over their contemporaries and later acts. &quot;The Times&quot; called the group &quot;one of the most audacious and uncompromising musical adventurers of the post-punk era&quot;.

Initially associated with the punk scene, the band including guitarist John McKay and drummer Kenny Morris rapidly evolved to create &quot;a form of post-punk discord full of daring rhythmic and sonic experimentation&quot;. Their debut album &quot;The Scream&quot; was released to widespread critical acclaim in 1978. Following membership changes, including the addition of guitarist John McGeoch and drummer Budgie, they changed their musical direction and became one of the most successful alternative pop groups of the 1980s. Their third album &quot;Kaleidoscope&quot; (1980) peaked at number 5 on the UK Albums Chart. With &quot;Juju&quot; (1981) which also reached the top 10, they became an influence on the emerging gothic scene.

In 1988, the band made a breakthrough in North America with the multifaceted album &quot;Peepshow&quot;, which received critical praise. With substantial support from alternative rock radio stations, they achieved a mainstream hit in the US in 1991 with the single &quot;Kiss Them for Me&quot;.

During their career, Siouxsie and the Banshees released 11 studio albums and 30 singles. The band experienced several line-up changes, with Siouxsie and Severin being the only constant members. They disbanded in 1996, with Siouxsie and Budgie continuing to record music as the Creatures, a second band they had formed in the early 1980s. In 2004, Siouxsie began a solo career.

== History ==

=== Formation (1976–1977) ===
Siouxsie Sioux and Steven Severin met at a Roxy Music concert in September 1975, at a time when glam rock had faded and there was nothing new coming through with which they could identify. From February 1976, Siouxsie, Severin and some friends began to follow an unsigned band, the Sex Pistols. Journalist Caroline Coon dubbed them the &quot;Bromley Contingent&quot;, as most of them came from the Bromley area in south-east London, a label Severin came to despise. &quot;There was no such thing, it was just a bunch of people drawn together by the way they felt and they looked&quot;. They were all inspired by the Sex Pistols and their uncompromising attitude. When they learned that one of the bands scheduled to play the 100 Club Punk Festival, organised by Sex Pistols manager Malcolm McLaren, was pulling out from the bill at the last minute, Siouxsie suggested that she and Severin play, even though they had no band name or additional members. Two days later, the pair appeared at the festival held in London on 20 September 1976. With two borrowed musicians at their side, Marco Pirroni on guitar and Sid Vicious on drums, their set consisted of a 20-minute improvisation based on &quot;The Lord&#x27;s Prayer&quot;.

The band intended to split up after the gig, but they were asked to play again. Over the next few months, Siouxsie and Severin recruited drummer Kenny Morris and guitarist Peter Fenton. After playing several gigs in early 1977, they realised that Fenton did not fit in because he was &quot;a real rock guitarist&quot;. John McKay took his place in July. Their first live appearance on television took place in November on Manchester&#x27;s Granada, on Tony Wilson&#x27;s TV show &quot;So It Goes&quot;. That month they also recorded their first John Peel session for BBC radio in which they premiered a new song &quot;Metal Postcard&quot;, introducing a &quot;motorik austerity&quot; in the drums patterns, with &quot;the space in the sound&quot; and &quot;the serrated guitars&quot;. The band described their music as &quot;cold, machine-like and passionate at the same time&quot;. When they appeared on the cover of &quot;Sounds&quot; magazine, Vivien Goldman wrote: &quot;they sound like a 21st century industrial plant&quot;.

=== &quot;The Scream&quot; and &quot;Join Hands&quot; (1978–1979) ===
The band sold out venues in London in early 1978, but still had problems getting the right recording contract that could give them &quot;complete artistic control&quot;. Polydor offered this guarantee and signed them in June. Their first single, &quot;Hong Kong Garden&quot;, featuring a xylophone motif, reached the top 10 in the UK shortly after. An &quot;NME&quot; review hailed it as &quot;a bright, vivid narrative, something like snapshots from the window of a speeding Japanese train, power charged by the most original, intoxicating guitar playing I heard in a long, long time&quot;.

The band released their debut album, &quot;The Scream&quot;, in November 1978. Nick Kent of &quot;NME&quot; said of the record: &quot;The band sounds like some unique hybrid of the Velvet Underground mated with much of the ingenuity of &quot;Tago Mago&quot;-era Can, if any parallel can be drawn&quot;. At the end of the article, he added this remark: &quot;Certainly, the traditional three-piece sound has never been used in a more unorthodox fashion with such stunning results&quot;.

The Banshees&#x27; second album, &quot;Join Hands&quot;, was released in 1979. In &quot;Melody Maker&quot;, Jon Savage described &quot;Poppy Day&quot; as &quot;a short, powerful evocation of the Great War graveyards&quot;, and &quot;Record Mirror&quot; described the whole record as a dangerous work that &quot;should be heard&quot;. The Banshees embarked on a major tour to promote the album. A few dates into the tour in September, Morris and McKay left an in-store signing after an argument and quit the band. In need of replacements to fulfil tour dates, the Banshees&#x27; manager called drummer Budgie, formerly with the Slits, and asked him to audition. Budgie was hired, but Siouxsie and Severin had no success auditioning guitarists. Robert Smith of the Cure offered his services in case they could not find a guitarist (his group were already the support band on the tour), so the band held him to it after seeing too many &quot;rock virtuosos&quot;. The tour resumed in September and after the last concert, Smith returned to the Cure.

=== &quot;Kaleidoscope&quot;, &quot;Juju&quot; and &quot;A Kiss in the Dreamhouse&quot; (1980–1982) ===
Budgie became a permanent member, and the band entered the studios to record the single &quot;Happy House&quot; with guitarist John McGeoch, then still a member of Magazine. Their third album, &quot;Kaleidoscope&quot;, released in 1980, saw the Banshees exploring new musical territories with the use of other instruments like synthesizers, sitars and drum machines. The group initially had a concept of making each song sound completely different, without regard to whether or not the material could be performed in concert. &quot;Melody Maker&quot; described the result as &quot;a kaleidoscope of sound and imagery, new forms, and content, flashing before our eyes&quot;. &quot;Kaleidoscope&quot; was a commercial success, peaking at number 5 on the UK albums chart. This line-up, featuring McGeoch on guitar, toured the United States for the first time in support of the album, playing their first shows in New York City in November 1980.
For &quot;Juju&quot; (1981), the band took a different approach and practised the songs in concert first before recording them. &quot;Juju&quot;, according to Severin, became an unintentional concept album that &quot;drew on darker elements&quot;. &quot;Sounds&quot; hailed it as &quot;intriguing, intense, brooding and powerfully atmospheric&quot;. The album later peaked at number 7 on the UK albums chart and became one of their biggest sellers. McGeoch&#x27;s guitar contributions on &quot;Juju&quot; were later praised by Johnny Marr of the Smiths.

During the 1981 accompanying tour, Siouxsie and Budgie became a couple. At the same time, they also began a drum-and-voice duo called the Creatures, releasing their first EP, &quot;Wild Things&quot;.

The Banshees followed in 1982 with the psychedelic &quot;A Kiss in the Dreamhouse&quot;. The record, featuring strings on several numbers, was an intentional contrast to their previous work, with Severin later describing it as a &quot;sexy album&quot;. The British press greeted it enthusiastically. Richard Cook finished his &quot;NME&quot; review with this sentence: &quot;I promise...this music will take your breath away&quot;. At that time, McGeoch was struggling with alcohol problems, and was hospitalised on his return to a promotional trip from Madrid. The band fired him shortly thereafter. Severin asked Robert Smith to take over guitarist duties again; Smith accepted and rejoined the group in November 1982.

=== &quot;Hyæna&quot;, &quot;Tinderbox&quot; and &quot;Through the Looking Glass&quot; (1983–1987) ===
During 1983, the band members worked on several side projects; Siouxsie and Budgie composed the first Creatures album, &quot;Feast&quot;, while Severin and Smith recorded as the Glove. Smith then insisted on documenting his time with the Banshees, so the group released a cover version of the Beatles&#x27; &quot;Dear Prudence&quot; in September 1983. It became their biggest UK hit, reaching number 3 on the Singles Chart. They also released a live double album and video, &quot;Nocturne&quot;, and completed their sixth studio album, &quot;Hyæna&quot;. Shortly before its release in May 1984, Smith left the group, citing health issues due to an overloaded schedule, being in two bands at once.

With ex-Clock DVA guitarist John Valentine Carruthers replacing Smith, the Banshees then reworked four numbers from their repertoire, augmented by a string section, for &quot;The Thorn&quot; EP. &quot;NME&quot; praised the project: &quot;The power of a classical orchestra is the perfect foil for the band&#x27;s grindingly insistent sounds&quot;. The new Banshees line-up spent much of 1985 working on a new record, &quot;Tinderbox&quot;. The group finished the song &quot;Cities in Dust&quot; before the album, so they rushed its release as a single prior to their longest tour of the UK. &quot;Tinderbox&quot; was released in April 1986. &quot;Sounds&quot; magazine said: &quot;&quot;Tinderbox&quot; is a refreshing slant on the Banshees&#x27; disturbing perspective and restores their vivid shades to pop&#x27;s pale palette&quot;. Due to the length of time spent working on &quot;Tinderbox&quot;, the group desired spontaneity and decided to record an album of cover songs, &quot;Through the Looking Glass&quot;, in 1987. &quot;Mojo&quot; magazine later praised their version of &quot;Strange Fruit&quot;. After the album&#x27;s release, the band realised Carruthers was no longer fitting in and decided to work on new material as a trio.

=== &quot;Peepshow&quot; (1988–1990) ===
Following a lengthy break, the band recruited multi-instrumentalist Martin McCarrick and guitarist Jon Klein. The quintet recorded &quot;Peepshow&quot; in 1988, with non-traditional rock instrumentation including cello and accordion. &quot;Q&quot; magazine praised the album in its 5-star review: &quot;&quot;Peepshow&quot; takes place in some distorted fairground of the mind where weird and wonderful shapes loom&quot;. The first single, &quot;Peek-a-Boo&quot;, was seen by critics as a &quot;brave move&quot; with horns and dance elements. &quot;Sounds&quot; wrote: &quot;The snare gets slapped, Siouxsie&#x27;s voice meanders all around your head and it all comes magically together&quot;. &quot;Peek-a-Boo&quot; was their first real breakthrough in the United States. After the tour, the band decided to take a break, with Siouxsie and Budgie recording as the Creatures and releasing their most critically acclaimed album, &quot;Boomerang&quot;, and Severin and McCarrick working on material together.

=== &quot;Superstition&quot;, &quot;The Rapture&quot; and break-up (1991–1999) ===
In 1991, Siouxsie and the Banshees returned with the single &quot;Kiss Them for Me&quot;, mixing strings over a dance rhythm laced with exotica. The group collaborated with the then unknown Indian tabla player Talvin Singh, who also sang during the bridge. The single received glowing reviews and later peaked at number 23 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100, allowing them to reach a new audience. The album &quot;Superstition&quot; followed shortly afterwards, and the group toured the US as second headliners of the inaugural Lollapalooza tour. The following year, the Banshees were asked to compose &quot;Face to Face&quot; as a single for the film &quot;Batman Returns&quot;, at director Tim Burton&#x27;s request.

In 1993, the Banshees recorded new songs based on string arrangements, and then played them in festivals abroad. On their return home, they hired former Velvet Underground member John Cale to produce the rest of the record. Released in 1995, &quot;The Rapture&quot; was described by &quot;Melody Maker&quot; as &quot;a fascinating, transcontinental journey through danger and exotica&quot;. A few weeks after its release, Polydor dropped the band from its roster and Klein was replaced on the band&#x27;s last tour in 1995 by ex-Psychedelic Furs guitarist Knox Chandler. In April 1996, the Banshees disbanded after 20 years of working together. Siouxsie and Budgie announced that they would carry on recording as the Creatures. In 1999, they released the album &quot;Anima Animus&quot;.

=== 2000s–present ===
In 2002, Universal Music kicked off the band&#x27;s remastered back catalogue by releasing &quot;The Best of Siouxsie and the Banshees&quot;. In April, Siouxsie, Severin, Budgie and Chandler reunited briefly for the Seven Year Itch tour, which spawned &quot;The Seven Year Itch&quot; live album and DVD in 2003. The day after their last concert in Tokyo, Japan, Siouxsie and Budgie stayed in town on their own and entered a recording studio as the Creatures. Their fourth and final studio album, &quot;Hái!&quot;, came out a few months later.

On 4 March 2004, McGeoch died in his sleep after an epileptic seizure, at the age of 48. Siouxsie and Budgie had talked about inviting him to guest with them on stage, before hearing the news.

In November of the same year, &quot;Downside Up&quot;, a box set that collected all of the Banshees&#x27; B-sides and &quot;The Thorn&quot; EP, was released. &quot;The Times&quot; wrote in its review: &quot;here is a group that never filled B-sides with inferior, throwaway tracks. Rather they saw them as an outlet for some of their most radical and challenging work&quot;.

In 2006, the band&#x27;s first four records were remastered and compiled with previously unreleased bonus tracks. Several recordings made for the John Peel radio show from 1978 to 1986 were also compiled on the CD &quot;Voices on the Air: The Peel Sessions&quot;. AllMusic described the first session as &quot;a fiery statement of intent&quot; and qualified the other performances as &quot;excellent&quot;. Eleven years after the split of the Banshees, Siouxsie released her debut solo album &quot;Mantaray&quot; in 2007. The second batch of the remasters, concerning the band&#x27;s 1982–1986 era, was issued in April 2009. It included four other reissues (including &quot;A Kiss in the Dreamhouse&quot; from 1982). The &quot;At the BBC&quot; box set, containing a DVD with all of the band&#x27;s UK live television performances and three CDs with in-concert recordings, was also released in June of the same year.

In April 2014, their debut single &quot;Hong Kong Garden&quot; was reissued on double 7-inch vinyl. It was announced that this would be part of a three-year plan with Universal. In late October, their last four studio albums (1987&#x27;s &quot;Through the Looking Glass&quot;, 1988&#x27;s &quot;Peepshow&quot;, 1991&#x27;s &quot;Superstition&quot; and 1995&#x27;s &quot;The Rapture&quot;) were reissued on CD in remastered versions with bonus tracks. Siouxsie and Severin curated a compilation CD called &quot;It&#x27;s a Wonderfull Life&quot; for the monthly magazine &quot;Mojo&quot;, issued in September with Siouxsie on the front cover. On this CD, the pair honoured several composers of film and classical music that had inspired them.

In 2015, after releasing another compilation called &quot;Spellbound: The Collection&quot;, which included singles, album tracks and B-sides, the band reissued 1979&#x27;s &quot;Join Hands&quot; on vinyl for Record Store Day, with different cover artwork.

A vinyl reissue series on Polydor of all of the band&#x27;s albums, remastered from the original ¼&quot; tapes in 2018 by Miles Showell and cut at half speed at Abbey Road Studios, began in August 2018. The eleven studio albums were reissued on black vinyl. 

A 10 track compilation titled &quot;All Souls&quot; was released in 2022. The album&#x27;s track list was curated by Siouxsie and features &quot;Spellbound&quot; (licensed for season four of series &quot;Stranger Things&quot;), &quot;Fireworks&quot;, &quot;Peek-a-Boo&quot;, plus album tracks and rarities. It was released on black vinyl, and orange vinyl.

In 2023 &quot;The Rapture&quot; was reissued on double colored vinyl.

In 2024, &quot;Nocturne&quot;, was remastered and cut at half speed at Abbey Road studios: it was reissued on double vinyl with new artwork plus a fold out poster for Record Store Day. 

In October &quot;Through the Looking Glass&quot; including &quot;The Passenger&quot;, was reissued on crystal clear vinyl with new artwork featuring a mirror effect sleeve, for National Album Day through several online retailers. A limited edition with an extra poster was also available via the band&#x27;s website. Severin gave his first interview in years for a &quot;Record Collector&quot; Magazine &quot;Special Siouxsie and the Banshees&quot;, also out in October. 

==Artistry==
===Influences===
Siouxsie and the Banshees&#x27; earliest influences include an interest for a &quot;glamorous art rock&quot; - David Bowie and Roxy Music while also &quot;incorporating a love for Can, Kraftwerk and Neu!&quot;.

===Genres and musical style===
Siouxsie and the Banshees are considered post-punk pioneers. They have been described as developing &quot;a form of post-punk discord full of daring rhythmic and sonic experimentation&quot;. &quot;The Times&quot; wrote that &quot;The Banshees stand proudly [... as] one of the most audacious and uncompromising musical adventurers of the post-punk era&quot;. With some of their darkest material, the band also helped spawn the gothic scene. The band is also considered a new wave act.

They were also one of the first alternative bands; music historian Peter Buckley pointed out that they were at &quot;the very front of the alternative-rock scene&quot;. In 1988, &quot;Peek-a-Boo&quot; was the first track to top the US Modern Rock chart after &quot;Billboard&quot; launched this chart in the first week of September to list the most played songs on alternative and college radio stations. Simon Goddard wrote that the &quot;Banshees - Mk II would become one of the biggest alternative pop groups of the 1980s&quot;. &quot;Spin&quot; described them as &quot;alternative rockers&quot; in 1991 when referring to their presence in the top 40 chart. Noting the band&#x27;s participation in the first Lollapalooza festival, journalist Jim Gerr saw them as one of the &quot;elements of the alternative rock community&quot;. &quot;Mojo&quot; retrospectively presented them as one of &quot;alternative rock&#x27;s iconic groups&quot;. 

When commenting on the lyrics of the first two Banshees albums, Severin said that they were about &quot;madness, and childhood, and escaping suburbia, which are themes that hadn&#x27;t been dealt with at all in rock music or pop music before&quot;.

== Legacy ==
Siouxsie and the Banshees impacted many genres including post-punk, new wave, synth pop, gothic rock, alternative music, shoegaze and trip hop, influencing a wide range of musicians including Joy Division, the Cure, the Smiths, Depeche Mode, PJ Harvey, Radiohead, Jeff Buckley, Tricky and LCD Soundsystem.

Joy Division&#x27;s Peter Hook, who saw the group in concert in Manchester in 1977, said: &quot;Siouxsie and the Banshees were one of our big influences... The Banshees first LP was one of my favourite ever records, the way the guitarist and the drummer played was a really unusual way of playing and this album showcases a landmark performance&quot;. Joy Division drummer Stephen Morris was influenced by the Banshees Mk1 from their 1977&#x27;s John Peel session because their &quot;first drummer Kenny Morris played mostly toms&quot; and &quot;the sound of cymbals was forbidden&quot;. He added, &quot;The Banshees had that... foreboding sound, sketching out the future from the dark of the past&quot;. Joy Division producer Martin Hannett saw a difference between the Banshees&#x27; first main line-up and the other bands of 1977: &quot;Any harmonies you got were stark, to say the least, except for the odd exception, like Siouxsie. They were interesting&quot;. The Cure&#x27;s leader, Robert Smith, declared in 2003: &quot;Siouxsie and the Banshees and Wire were the two bands I really admired. They meant something.&quot; He also pinpointed what the 1979 &quot;Join Hands&quot; tour brought him musically. &quot;On stage that first night with the Banshees, I was blown away by how powerful I felt playing that kind of music. It was so different to what we were doing with the Cure. Before that, I&#x27;d wanted us to be like the Buzzcocks or Elvis Costello, the punk Beatles. Being a Banshee really changed my attitude to what I was doing&quot;. Killing Joke cited the band in their influences: guitarist Geordie Walker praised &quot;the Banshees on &quot;The Scream&quot;&quot; for bringing &quot;chord structures that I found very refreshing&quot;.

The two songwriters of the Smiths cited them; singer Morrissey said that &quot;Siouxsie and the Banshees were excellent&quot;, and that &quot;they were one of the great groups of the late 1970s, early 1980s&quot;. He also said in 1994, &quot;If you study modern groups, those who gain press coverage and chart action, none of them are as good as Siouxsie and the Banshees at full pelt. That&#x27;s not dusty nostalgia, that&#x27;s fact&quot;. When asked &quot;who do you regret not going to see live&quot;, guitarist Johnny Marr replied &quot;Siouxsie and the Banshees mk 1. But mk 2 were even better&quot;. Marr mentioned his liking for John McGeoch and his contribution to the single &quot;Spellbound&quot;. Marr qualified it as &quot;clever&quot; with a &quot;really good picky thing going on which is very un-rock&#x27;n&#x27;roll&quot;. Smiths&#x27; historian Goddard wrote that Marr &quot;praise[d] the McGeoch-era Banshees as a significant inspiration&quot;. U2 cited Siouxsie and the Banshees as a major influence and selected &quot;Christine&quot; for a &quot;Mojo&quot; compilation. The Edge was the presenter of an award given to Siouxsie at the &quot;Mojo&quot; ceremony in 2005. In December 1981, Dave Gahan of Depeche Mode named the Banshees as one of his three favourite bands along with Sparks and Roxy Music. Gahan later hailed the single &quot;Candyman&quot; at its release, saying, &quot;She always sounds exciting. She sings with a lot of sex - that&#x27;s what I like. This is a great Banshees record..., I like their sound. I used to see them quite a lot when I was younger.&quot; Commenting on the original Banshees line-up and how they were different from other groups, Gahan said: &quot;Siouxsie And The Banshees, whom I adored, sang much more abstract, artistic about frustration. Colder and darker&quot;. Jim Reid of the Jesus and Mary Chain selected &quot;Jigsaw Feeling&quot; from &quot;The Scream&quot; as being among his favourite songs. Jim Reid wrote that in 1978 bands were doing something new; &quot;The Banshees were one of them and their first record is one of my favourites&quot;. Thurston Moore of Sonic Youth cited &quot;Hong Kong Garden&quot; in his top 25 all-time favourite songs, saying &quot;it was a completely new world&quot;. Kevin Shields of My Bloody Valentine also mentioned them as being among his early influences. Dave Navarro of Jane&#x27;s Addiction once noted a parallel between his band and the Banshees: &quot;There are so many similar threads: melody, use of sound, attitude, sex-appeal. I always saw Jane&#x27;s Addiction as the masculine Siouxsie and the Banshees&quot;. Primal Scream&#x27;s Bobby Gillespie liked the group&#x27;s ability to produce pop songs while transmitting something subversive. He said, &quot;They were outsiders bringing outsider subjects to the mainstream. We&#x27;re not trying to rip off the Banshees, but that&#x27;s kind of where we&#x27;re coming from&quot;. He stated that among &quot;the last great rock bands were Siouxsie and the Banshees... the best post-punk bands for me. The ideas in the music and the lyrics for those... bands completely influenced Primal Scream&quot;.

The Banshees have been praised by other acts. Thom Yorke said that seeing Siouxsie on stage in concert in 1985 inspired him to become a performer. Radiohead cited McGeoch-era Siouxsie records when mentioning the recording of the song &quot;There There&quot;, and rehearsed Banshees&#x27; material prior to their 2008 tour. Jeff Buckley, who said during a press conference in Lyon, France in March 1995, &quot;Siouxsie, I have much of her influence in my voice&quot;, covered &quot;Killing Time&quot; (from the &quot;Boomerang&quot; album) on various occasions. Buckley also owned all the Banshees&#x27; albums. When asked what were his influences, Buckley replied: &quot;I grew up for the 1960s, early 1970s, 1980s, so I observed Joni Mitchell, I observed the Smiths and Siouxsie and the Banshees. That turns me on completely&quot;. Suede singer Brett Anderson named &quot;Juju&quot; as one of his favourite records. Red Hot Chili Peppers performed &quot;Christine&quot; in concert, and their guitarist John Frusciante cited the Banshees in interviews. Garbage singer Shirley Manson stated, &quot;I learned how to sing listening to &quot;The Scream&quot; and &quot;Kaleidoscope&quot;&quot;. Siouxsie has also been praised by other female singers including PJ Harvey and Courtney Love. PJ Harvey has stated, &quot;It&#x27;s hard to beat Siouxsie Sioux, in terms of live performance. She is so exciting to watch, so full of energy and human raw quality&quot;, and selected Siouxsie&#x27;s album &quot;Anima Animus&quot; in her top 10 albums of 1999. The band had a strong effect on two important trip hop acts. Tricky covered &quot;Tattoo&quot; to open his second album, &quot;Nearly God&quot;; the original 1983 proto-trip-hop version of that song aided Tricky in the creation of his style. Massive Attack heavily sampled &quot;Metal Postcard&quot; on the song &quot;Superpredators (Metal Postcard)&quot;, recorded prior to their &quot;Mezzanine&quot; album. Air&#x27;s Jean-Benoît Dunckel cited the group as one of his three main influences. Billy Corgan of the Smashing Pumpkins cited the Banshees as an important influence on his music. Faith No More covered &quot;Switch&quot; in concert and cited &quot;The Scream&quot; as one of their influences.

The Banshees continue to influence younger musicians. Singer James Murphy was marked by certain Banshees albums during his childhood. His band LCD Soundsystem covered &quot;Slowdive&quot; as a B-side to the single &quot;Disco Infiltrator&quot;. The Beta Band sampled &quot;Painted Bird&quot; on their track &quot;Liquid Bird&quot; from the &quot;Heroes to Zeros&quot; album. TV on the Radio said that they have always tried to make a song that begins like &quot;Kiss Them for Me&quot; where all of a sudden, there&#x27;s an &quot;element of surprise&quot; with &quot;a giant drum coming in&quot;. Santigold based one of her songs around the music of &quot;Red Light&quot;. &quot;&#x27;My Superman&#x27; is an interpolation of &#x27;Red Light&#x27;&quot;. Indie folk group DeVotchKa covered the ballad &quot;The Last Beat of My Heart&quot; at the suggestion of Arcade Fire singer Win Butler; it was released on the &quot;Curse Your Little Heart&quot; EP. Gossip named the Banshees as one of their major influences during the promotion of their single &quot;Heavy Cross&quot;. British indie band Bloc Party took inspiration from &quot;Peek-a-Boo&quot; and their singer Kele Okereke stated about that Banshees&#x27; single: &quot;it sounded like nothing else on this planet. This is... a pop song that they put out in the middle of their career... to me it sounded like the most current but most futuristic bit of guitar-pop music I&#x27;ve heard&quot;. A Perfect Circle&#x27;s Billy Howerdel said that the Banshees were &quot;top three favorite bands for me&quot;. The Weeknd sampled different parts of &quot;Happy House&quot; for his song &quot;House of Balloons&quot;, and also used the chorus of the initial version.

In 2022, guitarists John Frusciante, Johnny Marr, and Ed O&#x27;Brien gave interviews for a new book about John McGeoch, particularly his work with the Banshees. &quot;The Light Pours Out Of Me: The Authorised Biography Of John McGeoch&quot; was released in April on Omnibus Press. It also included new interviews with Siouxsie and Severin.

== Band members ==

==Discography==
===Studio albums===
* &quot;The Scream&quot; (1978)
* &quot;Join Hands&quot; (1979)
* &quot;Kaleidoscope&quot; (1980)
* &quot;Juju&quot; (1981)
* &quot;A Kiss in the Dreamhouse&quot; (1982)
* &quot;Hyæna&quot; (1984)
* &quot;Tinderbox&quot; (1986)
* &quot;Through the Looking Glass&quot; (1987)
* &quot;Peepshow&quot; (1988)
* &quot;Superstition&quot; (1991)
* &quot;The Rapture&quot; (1995)

== References ==
=== Sources ===
* 

== Further reading ==
* (featuring new original interviews of Siouxsie and Severin).
* 
* 
* With exclusive interviews of Siouxsie and Severin.
* 

== External links ==


* Official website
* Siouxsie and the Banshees&#x27; VEVO videos 
* Siouxsie and the Banshees&#x27; DailyMotion official channel</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q323834" start="0" end="25" title="Siouxsie and the Banshees" label="Siouxsie and the Banshees"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="46" end="50" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q243041" start="93" end="107" title="Siouxsie Sioux" label="Siouxsie Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345722" start="127" end="141" title="Steven Severin" label="Steven Severin"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="226" end="235" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q598929" start="337" end="346" title="post-punk" label="post-punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="389" end="393" title="punk rock" label="punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247959" start="430" end="440" title="John McKay (musician)" label="John McKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672157" start="453" end="465" title="Kenny Morris (musician)" label="Kenny Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188720" start="607" end="617" title="The Scream (album)" label="The Scream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346255" start="743" end="755" title="John McGeoch" label="John McGeoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074381" start="768" end="774" title="Budgie (musician)" label="Budgie"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="851" end="866" title="alternative pop" label="alternative pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q639905" start="912" end="924" title="Kaleidoscope (Siouxsie and the Banshees album)" label="Kaleidoscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="964" end="979" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q914404" start="992" end="996" title="Juju (Siouxsie and the Banshees album)" label="Juju"/>
<link wikidata="Q485395" start="1082" end="1088" title="Gothic rock" label="gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065411" start="1186" end="1194" title="Peepshow (album)" label="Peepshow"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="1264" end="1280" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155061" start="1368" end="1384" title="Kiss Them for Me (song)" label="Kiss Them for Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968986" start="1666" end="1679" title="the Creatures" label="the Creatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q334648" start="1859" end="1869" title="Roxy Music" label="Roxy Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q76092" start="1912" end="1921" title="glam rock" label="glam rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="2098" end="2109" title="Sex Pistols" label="Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q4247061" start="2122" end="2135" title="Caroline Coon" label="Caroline Coon"/>
<link wikidata="Q523057" start="2158" end="2176" title="Bromley Contingent" label="Bromley Contingent"/>
<link wikidata="Q122892" start="2214" end="2221" title="Bromley" label="Bromley"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="2241" end="2247" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425077" start="2541" end="2563" title="100 Club Punk Festival" label="100 Club Punk Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q325377" start="2598" end="2613" title="Malcolm McLaren" label="Malcolm McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307169" start="2898" end="2911" title="Marco Pirroni" label="Marco Pirroni"/>
<link wikidata="Q47878" start="2926" end="2937" title="Sid Vicious" label="Sid Vicious"/>
<link wikidata="Q23393" start="3012" end="3034" title="The Lord&amp;#x27;s Prayer" label="The Lord&amp;#x27;s Prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672157" start="3188" end="3200" title="Kenny Morris (musician)" label="Kenny Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247959" start="3362" end="3372" title="John McKay (musician)" label="John McKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="3465" end="3475" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476957" start="3483" end="3490" title="ITV Granada" label="Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q478601" start="3495" end="3506" title="Tony Wilson" label="Tony Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7549326" start="3528" end="3538" title="So It Goes (TV series)" label="So It Goes"/>
<link wikidata="Q326542" start="3588" end="3597" title="John Peel" label="John Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949856" start="3703" end="3710" title="motorik" label="motorik"/>
<link wikidata="Q265718" start="3967" end="3973" title="Sounds (magazine)" label="Sounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561603" start="3990" end="4004" title="Vivien Goldman" label="Vivien Goldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q155152" start="4314" end="4321" title="Polydor Records" label="Polydor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5894607" start="4396" end="4412" title="Hong Kong Garden (song)" label="Hong Kong Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q165666" start="4432" end="4441" title="xylophone" label="xylophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="4502" end="4505" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188720" start="4780" end="4790" title="The Scream (album)" label="The Scream"/>
<link wikidata="Q517464" start="4816" end="4825" title="Nick Kent" label="Nick Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q103550" start="4914" end="4936" title="the Velvet Underground" label="the Velvet Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q929039" start="4979" end="4988" title="Tago Mago" label="Tago Mago"/>
<link wikidata="Q170132" start="4999" end="5002" title="Can (band)" label="Can"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932326" start="5263" end="5273" title="Join Hands" label="Join Hands"/>
<link wikidata="Q580896" start="5312" end="5324" title="Melody Maker" label="Melody Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q117379" start="5332" end="5342" title="Jon Savage" label="Jon Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q844480" start="5457" end="5470" title="Record Mirror" label="Record Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q677115" start="5847" end="5856" title="the Slits" label="the Slits"/>
<link wikidata="Q491252" start="5967" end="5979" title="Robert Smith (musician)" label="Robert Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q484427" start="5983" end="5991" title="the Cure" label="the Cure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071811" start="6470" end="6481" title="Happy House" label="Happy House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346255" start="6503" end="6515" title="John McGeoch" label="John McGeoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475584" start="6540" end="6548" title="Magazine (band)" label="Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q639905" start="6575" end="6587" title="Kaleidoscope (Siouxsie and the Banshees album)" label="Kaleidoscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q914404" start="7328" end="7332" title="Juju (Siouxsie and the Banshees album)" label="Juju"/>
<link wikidata="Q265718" start="7572" end="7578" title="Sounds (magazine)" label="Sounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q317742" start="7845" end="7856" title="Johnny Marr" label="Johnny Marr"/>
<link wikidata="Q180598" start="7860" end="7870" title="the Smiths" label="the Smiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968986" start="8007" end="8020" title="the Creatures" label="the Creatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q169930" start="8044" end="8046" title="Extended play" label="EP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568124" start="8054" end="8065" title="Wild Things (EP)" label="Wild Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q206159" start="8113" end="8124" title="psychedelic rock" label="psychedelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738487" start="8131" end="8155" title="A Kiss in the Dreamhouse" label="A Kiss in the Dreamhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q356217" start="8374" end="8386" title="Richard Cook (journalist)" label="Richard Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="8628" end="8634" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q595621" start="9024" end="9029" title="Feast (The Creatures album)" label="Feast"/>
<link wikidata="Q182815" start="9073" end="9082" title="the Glove" label="the Glove"/>
<link wikidata="Q155171" start="9171" end="9184" title="cover version" label="cover version"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="9188" end="9199" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9212" end="9225" title="Dear Prudence#Cover versions" label="Dear Prudence"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="9308" end="9321" title="UK Singles Chart" label="Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2786014" start="9379" end="9387" title="Nocturne (Siouxsie and the Banshees album)" label="Nocturne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251439" start="9441" end="9446" title="Hyæna" label="Hyæna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102092" start="9605" end="9614" title="Clock DVA" label="Clock DVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701995" start="9625" end="9650" title="John Valentine Carruthers" label="John Valentine Carruthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768889" start="9772" end="9781" title="The Thorn (EP)" label="The Thorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065381" start="10020" end="10029" title="Tinderbox (Siouxsie and the Banshees album)" label="Tinderbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3678280" start="10071" end="10085" title="Cities in Dust" label="Cities in Dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065423" start="10582" end="10607" title="Through the Looking Glass (Siouxsie and the Banshees album)" label="Through the Looking Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q261633" start="10630" end="10634" title="Mojo (magazine)" label="Mojo"/>
<link wikidata="Q765709" start="10687" end="10700" title="Strange Fruit" label="Strange Fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q324577" start="10951" end="10967" title="Martin McCarrick" label="Martin McCarrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702790" start="10982" end="10991" title="Jon Klein (musician)" label="Jon Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065411" start="11020" end="11028" title="Peepshow (album)" label="Peepshow"/>
<link wikidata="Q79838" start="11106" end="11115" title="accordion" label="accordion"/>
<link wikidata="Q217629" start="11123" end="11124" title="Q (magazine)" label="Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q3898740" start="11329" end="11339" title="Peek-a-Boo (Siouxsie and the Banshees song)" label="Peek-a-Boo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910486" start="11817" end="11826" title="Boomerang (The Creatures album)" label="Boomerang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155061" start="12040" end="12056" title="Kiss Them for Me (song)" label="Kiss Them for Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q916387" start="12110" end="12117" title="exotica" label="exotica"/>
<link wikidata="Q213100" start="12171" end="12176" title="tabla" label="tabla"/>
<link wikidata="Q331450" start="12184" end="12196" title="Talvin Singh" label="Talvin Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="12304" end="12333" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q782454" start="12390" end="12402" title="Superstition (Siouxsie and the Banshees album)" label="Superstition"/>
<link wikidata="Q889643" start="12504" end="12516" title="Lollapalooza" label="Lollapalooza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252481" start="12584" end="12596" title="Face to Face (Siouxsie and the Banshees song)" label="Face to Face"/>
<link wikidata="Q189054" start="12634" end="12648" title="Batman Returns" label="Batman Returns"/>
<link wikidata="Q56008" start="12668" end="12678" title="Tim Burton" label="Tim Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q45909" start="12875" end="12884" title="John Cale" label="John Cale"/>
<link wikidata="Q642142" start="12944" end="12955" title="The Rapture (album)" label="The Rapture"/>
<link wikidata="Q276463" start="13225" end="13241" title="The Psychedelic Furs" label="Psychedelic Furs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246494" start="13252" end="13265" title="Knox Chandler" label="Knox Chandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q733043" start="13463" end="13475" title="Anima Animus" label="Anima Animus"/>
<link wikidata="Q38903" start="13515" end="13530" title="Universal Music Group" label="Universal Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q421031" start="13558" end="13568" title="Audio mastering" label="remastered"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252507" start="13603" end="13640" title="The Best of Siouxsie and the Banshees" label="The Best of Siouxsie and the Banshees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065389" start="13764" end="13783" title="The Seven Year Itch (Siouxsie and the Banshees album)" label="The Seven Year Itch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125734" start="14008" end="14012" title="Hái!" label="Hái!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065398" start="14280" end="14291" title="Downside Up" label="Downside Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q394970" start="14301" end="14308" title="box set" label="box set"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="14408" end="14417" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14840" end="14876" title="Voices on the Air: The Peel Sessions" label="Voices on the Air: The Peel Sessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="14884" end="14892" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277519" start="15118" end="15126" title="Mantaray (album)" label="Mantaray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868729" start="15347" end="15357" title="At the BBC (Siouxsie and the Banshees album)" label="At the BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q134556" start="15623" end="15629" title="7-inch" label="7-inch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2222130" start="16487" end="16503" title="Record Store Day" label="Record Store Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q209651" start="16697" end="16715" title="Abbey Road Studios" label="Abbey Road Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q114315995" start="16832" end="16841" title="All Souls (album)" label="All Souls"/>
<link wikidata="Q17066034" start="16941" end="16951" title="Spellbound (Siouxsie and the Banshees song)" label="Spellbound"/>
<link wikidata="Q85847363" start="16972" end="16983" title="Stranger Things (season 4)" label="season four"/>
<link wikidata="Q19798734" start="17000" end="17015" title="Stranger Things" label="Stranger Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452048" start="17030" end="17039" title="Fireworks (Siouxsie and the Banshees song)" label="Fireworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2786014" start="17240" end="17248" title="Nocturne (Siouxsie and the Banshees album)" label="Nocturne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2222130" start="17392" end="17408" title="Record Store Day" label="Record Store Day"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17477" end="17490" title="The Passenger (song)#Siouxsie and the Banshees version" label="The Passenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246561" start="17783" end="17799" title="Record Collector (magazine)" label="Record Collector"/>
<link wikidata="Q217467" start="18009" end="18017" title="art rock" label="art rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="18026" end="18037" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q44892" start="18100" end="18109" title="Kraftwerk" label="Kraftwerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q181874" start="18114" end="18118" title="Neu!" label="Neu!"/>
<link wikidata="Q598929" start="18199" end="18208" title="post-punk" label="post-punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q485395" start="18585" end="18591" title="gothic rock" label="gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q187760" start="18629" end="18637" title="New wave music" label="new wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="18676" end="18687" title="alternative rock" label="alternative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025849" start="18879" end="18896" title="Alternative Songs" label="Modern Rock chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037693" start="19009" end="19020" title="Modern rock" label="alternative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436229" start="19025" end="19032" title="Campus radio" label="college"/>
<link wikidata="Q7518852" start="19049" end="19062" title="Simon Goddard" label="Simon Goddard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025912" start="19182" end="19186" title="Spin (magazine)" label="Spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298934" start="19929" end="19938" title="synth pop" label="synth pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3868585" start="19953" end="19970" title="alternative music" label="alternative music"/>
<link wikidata="Q272167" start="19972" end="19980" title="shoegaze" label="shoegaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q205560" start="19985" end="19993" title="trip hop" label="trip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q172763" start="20043" end="20055" title="Joy Division" label="Joy Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q484427" start="20057" end="20065" title="the Cure" label="the Cure"/>
<link wikidata="Q180598" start="20067" end="20077" title="the Smiths" label="the Smiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q482964" start="20079" end="20091" title="Depeche Mode" label="Depeche Mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q219772" start="20093" end="20102" title="PJ Harvey" label="PJ Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q44190" start="20104" end="20113" title="Radiohead" label="Radiohead"/>
<link wikidata="Q215855" start="20115" end="20127" title="Jeff Buckley" label="Jeff Buckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q313627" start="20129" end="20135" title="Tricky (musician)" label="Tricky"/>
<link wikidata="Q45752" start="20140" end="20155" title="LCD Soundsystem" label="LCD Soundsystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q431244" start="20178" end="20188" title="Peter Hook" label="Peter Hook"/>
<link wikidata="Q539897" start="20531" end="20545" title="Stephen Morris (musician)" label="Stephen Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q766551" start="20885" end="20899" title="Martin Hannett" label="Martin Hannett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135620" start="21216" end="21220" title="Wire (band)" label="Wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q206939" start="21606" end="21620" title="Elvis Costello" label="Elvis Costello"/>
<link wikidata="Q250421" start="21710" end="21722" title="Killing Joke" label="Killing Joke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740276" start="21769" end="21783" title="Geordie Walker" label="Geordie Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q202246" start="21969" end="21978" title="Morrissey" label="Morrissey"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="22882" end="22884" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q714845" start="23009" end="23017" title="The Edge" label="The Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q488994" start="23126" end="23136" title="Dave Gahan" label="Dave Gahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344131" start="23219" end="23225" title="Sparks (band)" label="Sparks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655233" start="23278" end="23286" title="Candyman (Siouxsie and the Banshees song)" label="Candyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6066866" start="23748" end="23756" title="Jim Reid" label="Jim Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126301" start="23760" end="23784" title="the Jesus and Mary Chain" label="the Jesus and Mary Chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q505677" start="24035" end="24049" title="Thurston Moore" label="Thurston Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q188626" start="24053" end="24064" title="Sonic Youth" label="Sonic Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382495" start="24190" end="24203" title="Kevin Shields" label="Kevin Shields"/>
<link wikidata="Q841042" start="24207" end="24226" title="My Bloody Valentine (band)" label="My Bloody Valentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q352473" start="24284" end="24296" title="Dave Navarro" label="Dave Navarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q622947" start="24300" end="24321" title="Jane&amp;#x27;s Addiction" label="Jane&amp;#x27;s Addiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q666697" start="24549" end="24562" title="Primal Scream" label="Primal Scream"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248119" start="24570" end="24585" title="Bobby Gillespie" label="Bobby Gillespie"/>
<link wikidata="Q188668" start="25134" end="25144" title="Thom Yorke" label="Thom Yorke"/>
<link wikidata="Q728237" start="25328" end="25339" title="There There" label="There There"/>
<link wikidata="Q215855" start="25411" end="25423" title="Jeff Buckley" label="Jeff Buckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q205721" start="25818" end="25831" title="Joni Mitchell" label="Joni Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q826255" start="25921" end="25926" title="Suede (band)" label="Suede"/>
<link wikidata="Q344013" start="25934" end="25948" title="Brett Anderson" label="Brett Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q10708" start="26005" end="26026" title="Red Hot Chili Peppers" label="Red Hot Chili Peppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220115" start="26043" end="26052" title="Christine (Siouxsie and the Banshees song)" label="Christine"/>
<link wikidata="Q188980" start="26091" end="26106" title="John Frusciante" label="John Frusciante"/>
<link wikidata="Q485673" start="26141" end="26148" title="Garbage (band)" label="Garbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q234104" start="26156" end="26170" title="Shirley Manson" label="Shirley Manson"/>
<link wikidata="Q219772" start="26344" end="26353" title="PJ Harvey" label="PJ Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q222071" start="26358" end="26371" title="Courtney Love" label="Courtney Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q733043" start="26587" end="26599" title="Anima Animus" label="Anima Animus"/>
<link wikidata="Q205560" start="26682" end="26690" title="trip hop" label="trip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7688449" start="26718" end="26724" title="Tattoo (Siouxsie and the Banshees song)" label="Tattoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933478" start="26763" end="26773" title="Nearly God" label="Nearly God"/>
<link wikidata="Q357418" start="26878" end="26892" title="Massive Attack" label="Massive Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188720" start="26915" end="26929" title="The Scream (album)" label="Metal Postcard"/>
<link wikidata="Q844258" start="27023" end="27032" title="Mezzanine (album)" label="Mezzanine"/>
<link wikidata="Q318452" start="27046" end="27049" title="Air (French band)" label="Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316409" start="27057" end="27076" title="Jean-Benoît Dunckel" label="Jean-Benoît Dunckel"/>
<link wikidata="Q311382" start="27130" end="27142" title="Billy Corgan" label="Billy Corgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q184217" start="27150" end="27167" title="Smashing Pumpkins" label="Smashing Pumpkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q320499" start="27227" end="27240" title="Faith No More" label="Faith No More"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101632" start="27402" end="27414" title="James Murphy (electronic musician)" label="James Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542142" start="27514" end="27522" title="Slowdive (song)" label="Slowdive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281538" start="27561" end="27578" title="Disco Infiltrator" label="Disco Infiltrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775665" start="27586" end="27599" title="The Beta Band" label="The Beta Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q821541" start="27687" end="27702" title="Heroes to Zeros" label="Heroes to Zeros"/>
<link wikidata="Q829138" start="27716" end="27731" title="TV on the Radio" label="TV on the Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q240343" start="27938" end="27947" title="Santigold" label="Santigold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317816" start="28096" end="28106" title="Indie folk" label="Indie folk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179673" start="28113" end="28122" title="DeVotchKa" label="DeVotchKa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987881" start="28148" end="28173" title="The Last Beat of My Heart" label="The Last Beat of My Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q58608" start="28201" end="28212" title="Arcade Fire" label="Arcade Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349573" start="28220" end="28230" title="Win Butler" label="Win Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q12831" start="28295" end="28301" title="Gossip (band)" label="Gossip"/>
<link wikidata="Q205838" start="28435" end="28445" title="Bloc Party" label="Bloc Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q457060" start="28508" end="28520" title="Kele Okereke" label="Kele Okereke"/>
<link wikidata="Q300519" start="28792" end="28808" title="A Perfect Circle" label="A Perfect Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350322" start="28816" end="28830" title="Billy Howerdel" label="Billy Howerdel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121062" start="28904" end="28914" title="The Weeknd" label="The Weeknd"/>
<link wikidata="Q120568250" start="28985" end="29002" title="House of Balloons (song)" label="House of Balloons"/>
<link wikidata="Q842850" start="29114" end="29129" title="Ed O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Ed O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188720" start="29466" end="29476" title="The Scream (album)" label="The Scream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932326" start="29498" end="29508" title="Join Hands" label="Join Hands"/>
<link wikidata="Q639905" start="29530" end="29542" title="Kaleidoscope (Siouxsie and the Banshees album)" label="Kaleidoscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q914404" start="29564" end="29568" title="Juju (Siouxsie and the Banshees album)" label="Juju"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738487" start="29590" end="29614" title="A Kiss in the Dreamhouse" label="A Kiss in the Dreamhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251439" start="29636" end="29641" title="Hyæna" label="Hyæna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065381" start="29663" end="29672" title="Tinderbox (Siouxsie and the Banshees album)" label="Tinderbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065423" start="29694" end="29719" title="Through the Looking Glass (Siouxsie and the Banshees album)" label="Through the Looking Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065411" start="29741" end="29749" title="Peepshow (album)" label="Peepshow"/>
<link wikidata="Q782454" start="29771" end="29783" title="Superstition (Siouxsie and the Banshees album)" label="Superstition"/>
<link wikidata="Q642142" start="29805" end="29816" title="The Rapture (album)" label="The Rapture"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29513" wikidata="Q212569" url="?curid=29513" title="Simula">
<text>Simula is the name of two simulation programming languages, Simula I and Simula 67, developed in the 1960s at the Norwegian Computing Center in Oslo, by Ole-Johan Dahl and Kristen Nygaard. Syntactically, it is an approximate superset of ALGOL 60, and was also influenced by the design of SIMSCRIPT.

Simula 67 introduced objects, classes, inheritance and subclasses, virtual procedures, coroutines, and discrete event simulation, and featured garbage collection. Other forms of subtyping (besides inheriting subclasses) were introduced in Simula derivatives.

Simula is considered the first object-oriented programming language. As its name suggests, the first Simula version by 1962 was designed for doing simulations; Simula 67 though was designed to be a general-purpose programming language and provided the framework for many of the features of object-oriented languages today.

Simula has been used in a wide range of applications such as simulating very-large-scale integration (VLSI) designs, process modeling, communication protocols, algorithms, and other applications such as typesetting, computer graphics, and education. The influence of Simula is often understated, and Simula-type objects are reimplemented in C++, Object Pascal, Java, C#, and many other languages. Computer scientists such as Bjarne Stroustrup, creator of C++, and James Gosling, creator of Java, have acknowledged Simula as a major influence.

== History ==
The following account is based on Jan Rune Holmevik&#x27;s historical essay.

Kristen Nygaard started writing computer simulation programs in 1957. Nygaard saw a need for a better way to describe the heterogeneity and the operation of a system. To go further with his ideas on a formal computer language for describing a system, Nygaard realized that he needed someone with more computer programming skills than he had. Ole-Johan Dahl joined him on his work in January 1962. The decision of linking the language up to ALGOL 60 was made shortly after. By May 1962, the main concepts for a simulation language were set. &quot;SIMULA I&quot; was born, a special purpose programming language for simulating discrete event systems.

Kristen Nygaard was invited to visit the Eckert–Mauchly Computer Corporation in late May 1962 in connection with the marketing of their new UNIVAC 1107 computer. At that visit, Nygaard presented the ideas of Simula to Robert Bemer, the director of systems programming at Univac. Bemer was a great ALGOL fan and found the Simula project compelling. Bemer was also chairperson of a session at the second international conference on information processing hosted by International Federation for Information Processing (IFIP). He invited Nygaard, who presented the paper &quot;SIMULA – An Extension of ALGOL to the Description of Discrete-Event Networks&quot;.

The Norwegian Computing Center got a UNIVAC 1107 in August 1963 at a considerable discount, on which Dahl implemented the SIMULA I under contract with UNIVAC. The implementation was based on the UNIVAC ALGOL 60 compiler. SIMULA I was fully operational on the UNIVAC 1107 by January 1965. In the following few years, Dahl and Nygaard spent a lot of time teaching Simula. Simula spread to several countries around the world and SIMULA I was later implemented on other computers including the Burroughs B5500 and the Russian Ural-16.

In 1966 C. A. R. Hoare introduced the concept of record class construct, which Dahl and Nygaard extended with the concept of prefixing and other features to meet their requirements for a generalized process concept. Dahl and Nygaard presented their paper on Class and Subclass declarations at the IFIP Working Conference on simulation languages in Oslo, May 1967. This paper became the first formal definition of Simula 67. In June 1967, a conference was held to standardize the language and initiate a number of implementations. Dahl proposed to unify the type and the class concept. This led to serious discussions, and the proposal was rejected by the board. Simula 67 was formally standardized on the first meeting of the Simula Standards Group (SSG) in February 1968.

Simula was influential in the development of Smalltalk and later object-oriented programming languages. It also helped inspire the actor model of concurrent computation although Simula only supports coroutines and not true concurrency.

In the late sixties and the early seventies, there were four main implementations of Simula:

* UNIVAC 1100 by Norwegian Computing Center (NCC)
* System/360 and System/370 by NCC
* CDC 3000 by University of Oslo&#x27;s Joint Computer Installation at Kjeller
* TOPS-10 by Swedish National Defence Research Institute (FOA)

These implementations were ported to a wide range of platforms. The TOPS-10 implemented the concept of public, protected, and private member variables and procedures, that later was integrated into Simula Standard in 1986.

Simula Standard 1986 is the latest standard and is ported to a wide range of platforms. There are mainly four implementations:

* Simula AS
* Lund Simula
* GNU Cim
* Portable Simula Revisited

In November 2001, Dahl and Nygaard were awarded the IEEE John von Neumann Medal by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers &quot;For the introduction of the concepts underlying object-oriented programming through the design and implementation of SIMULA 67&quot;. In April 2002, they received the 2001 A. M. Turing Award by the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), with the citation: &quot;For ideas fundamental to the emergence of object oriented programming, through their design of the programming languages Simula I and Simula 67.&quot; Dahl and Nygaard died in June and August of that year, respectively, before the ACM Turing Award Lecture that was scheduled to be delivered at the November 2002 OOPSLA conference in Seattle.

Simula Research Laboratory is a research institute named after the Simula language, and Nygaard held a part-time position there from the opening in 2001. The new Computer Science building at the University of Oslo is named Ole Johan Dahl&#x27;s House, in Dahl&#x27;s honour, and the main auditorium is named Simula.

== Notes ==
== Sources ==

==Further reading==

==External links==
* (last working version at archive.org, accessed 2022-02-26)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q212569" start="0" end="6" title="Simula" label="Simula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7521336" start="26" end="36" title="Simulation language" label="simulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="37" end="57" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517333" start="114" end="140" title="Norwegian Computing Center" label="Norwegian Computing Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="144" end="148" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q92745" start="153" end="167" title="Ole-Johan Dahl" label="Ole-Johan Dahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q92744" start="172" end="187" title="Kristen Nygaard" label="Kristen Nygaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152399" start="189" end="202" title="Syntax (programming languages)" label="Syntactically"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="225" end="233" title="Subset" label="superset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209759" start="237" end="245" title="ALGOL 60" label="ALGOL 60"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390408" start="288" end="297" title="SIMSCRIPT" label="SIMSCRIPT"/>
<link wikidata="Q216601" start="321" end="328" title="Object (computer science)" label="objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q4479242" start="330" end="337" title="Class (computer programming)" label="classes"/>
<link wikidata="Q212542" start="339" end="350" title="Inheritance (object-oriented programming)" label="inheritance"/>
<link wikidata="Q212542" start="355" end="365" title="Subclass (computer science)" label="subclasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500644" start="367" end="385" title="Virtual function" label="virtual procedures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339231" start="387" end="396" title="coroutine" label="coroutine"/>
<link wikidata="Q574814" start="403" end="428" title="discrete event simulation" label="discrete event simulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q322202" start="443" end="461" title="Garbage collection (computer science)" label="garbage collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713292" start="478" end="487" title="subtyping" label="subtyping"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="585" end="627" title="Object-oriented programming#History" label="first object-oriented programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q45045" start="707" end="717" title="simulation" label="simulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q876049" start="956" end="984" title="very-large-scale integration" label="very-large-scale integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q27610560" start="1001" end="1017" title="process modeling" label="process modeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q132364" start="1019" end="1041" title="communication protocol" label="communication protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="1044" end="1053" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q837721" start="1087" end="1098" title="typesetting" label="typesetting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600677" start="1100" end="1117" title="computer graphics" label="computer graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8434" start="1123" end="1132" title="education" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="1225" end="1228" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q633894" start="1230" end="1243" title="Object Pascal" label="Object Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="1245" end="1249" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370" start="1251" end="1253" title="C Sharp (programming language)" label="C#"/>
<link wikidata="Q92620" start="1309" end="1326" title="Bjarne Stroustrup" label="Bjarne Stroustrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q92622" start="1348" end="1361" title="James Gosling" label="James Gosling"/>
<link wikidata="Q92744" start="1520" end="1535" title="Kristen Nygaard" label="Kristen Nygaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q272683" start="1664" end="1673" title="Instruction (computer science)" label="operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192161" start="1721" end="1727" title="Formal language" label="formal"/>
<link wikidata="Q629206" start="1728" end="1745" title="computer language" label="computer language"/>
<link wikidata="Q80006" start="1821" end="1841" title="computer programming" label="computer programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q92745" start="1862" end="1876" title="Ole-Johan Dahl" label="Ole-Johan Dahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209759" start="1960" end="1968" title="ALGOL 60" label="ALGOL 60"/>
<link wikidata="Q45045" start="2030" end="2040" title="simulation" label="simulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="2041" end="2049" title="programming language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281617" start="2211" end="2246" title="Eckert–Mauchly Computer Corporation" label="Eckert–Mauchly Computer Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467589" start="2310" end="2321" title="UNIVAC 1107" label="UNIVAC 1107"/>
<link wikidata="Q92953" start="2388" end="2400" title="Bob Bemer" label="Robert Bemer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443793" start="2441" end="2447" title="Univac" label="Univac"/>
<link wikidata="Q188436" start="2467" end="2472" title="ALGOL" label="ALGOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q140686" start="2533" end="2544" title="chairperson" label="chairperson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666530" start="2633" end="2684" title="International Federation for Information Processing" label="International Federation for Information Processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517333" start="2832" end="2858" title="Norwegian Computing Center" label="Norwegian Computing Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467589" start="2865" end="2876" title="UNIVAC 1107" label="UNIVAC 1107"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209759" start="3030" end="3038" title="ALGOL 60" label="ALGOL 60"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359776" start="3318" end="3333" title="Burroughs large systems" label="Burroughs B5500"/>
<link wikidata="Q640511" start="3350" end="3357" title="Ural (computer)" label="Ural-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q92602" start="3368" end="3382" title="C. A. R. Hoare" label="C. A. R. Hoare"/>
<link wikidata="Q4479242" start="3618" end="3623" title="Class (computer programming)" label="Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q212542" start="3628" end="3636" title="Subclass (computer science)" label="Subclass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7521336" start="3684" end="3703" title="simulation language" label="simulation language"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="3708" end="3712" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q190087" start="3917" end="3921" title="data type" label="type"/>
<link wikidata="Q235086" start="4179" end="4188" title="Smalltalk" label="Smalltalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q79872" start="4199" end="4226" title="object-oriented programming" label="object-oriented programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q344524" start="4265" end="4276" title="actor model" label="actor model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339231" start="4333" end="4342" title="coroutine" label="coroutine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414548" start="4357" end="4368" title="Concurrency (computer science)" label="concurrency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443793" start="4467" end="4473" title="UNIVAC" label="UNIVAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517333" start="4482" end="4508" title="Norwegian Computing Center" label="Norwegian Computing Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q609843" start="4517" end="4527" title="System/360" label="System/360"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586139" start="4532" end="4542" title="System/370" label="System/370"/>
<link wikidata="Q3648622" start="4552" end="4560" title="CDC 3000" label="CDC 3000"/>
<link wikidata="Q486156" start="4564" end="4582" title="University of Oslo" label="University of Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670222" start="4631" end="4638" title="TOPS-10" label="TOPS-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q10501537" start="4642" end="4685" title="Swedish National Defence Research Institute" label="Swedish National Defence Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670222" start="4761" end="4768" title="TOPS-10" label="TOPS-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q727274" start="5162" end="5189" title="IEEE John von Neumann Medal" label="IEEE John von Neumann Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q131566" start="5197" end="5246" title="Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers" label="Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q185667" start="5431" end="5443" title="Turing Award" label="Turing Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q127992" start="5451" end="5486" title="Association for Computing Machinery" label="Association for Computing Machinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278551" start="5831" end="5837" title="OOPSLA" label="OOPSLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7521282" start="5862" end="5888" title="Simula Research Laboratory" label="Simula Research Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q31855" start="5894" end="5912" title="research institute" label="research institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q486156" start="6057" end="6075" title="University of Oslo" label="University of Oslo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29515" wikidata="Q522041" url="?curid=29515" title="SNOBOL">
<text>SNOBOL (&quot;StriNg Oriented and symBOlic Language&quot;) is a series of programming languages developed between 1962 and 1967 at AT&amp;T Bell Laboratories by David J. Farber, Ralph Griswold and Ivan P. Polonsky, culminating in SNOBOL4. It was one of a number of text-string-oriented languages developed during the 1950s and 1960s; others included COMIT and TRAC. Despite the similar name, it is entirely unlike COBOL.

SNOBOL4 stands apart from most programming languages of its era by having patterns as a first-class data type, a data type whose values can be manipulated in all ways permitted to any other data type in the programming language, and by providing operators for pattern concatenation and alternation. SNOBOL4 patterns are a type of object and admit various manipulations, much like later object-oriented languages such as JavaScript whose patterns are known as regular expressions. In addition SNOBOL4 strings generated during execution can be treated as programs and either interpreted or compiled and executed (as in the eval function of other languages).

SNOBOL4 was quite widely taught in larger U.S. universities in the late 1960s and early 1970s and was widely used in the 1970s and 1980s as a text manipulation language in the humanities.

In the 1980s and 1990s, its use faded as newer languages such as AWK and Perl made string manipulation by means of regular expressions fashionable. SNOBOL4 patterns include a way to express BNF grammars, which are equivalent to context-free grammars and more powerful than regular expressions. 
The &quot;regular expressions&quot; in current versions of AWK and Perl are in fact extensions of regular expressions in the traditional sense, but regular expressions, unlike SNOBOL4 patterns, are not recursive, which gives a distinct computational advantage to SNOBOL4 patterns. (Recursive expressions did appear in Perl 5.10, though, released in December 2007.)

The later SL5 (1977) and Icon (1978) languages were designed by Griswold to combine the backtracking of SNOBOL4 pattern matching with more standard ALGOL-like structuring.

== Development ==
=== SNOBOL1 ===
The initial SNOBOL language was created as a tool to be used by its authors to work with the symbolic manipulation of polynomials. It was written in assembly language for the IBM 7090. It had a simple syntax, only one datatype, the string, no functions, and no declarations and very little error control. However, despite its simplicity and its &quot;personal&quot; nature its use began to spread to other groups. As a result, the authors decided to extend it and tidy it up.

=== SNOBOL2 ===
SNOBOL2 did exist but it was a short-lived intermediate development version without user-defined functions and was never released.

=== SNOBOL3 ===
SNOBOL was rewritten to add functions, both standard and user-defined, and the result was released as SNOBOL3. SNOBOL3 became quite popular and was rewritten for other computers than the IBM 7090 by other programmers. As a result, several incompatible dialects arose.

=== SNOBOL4 ===
As SNOBOL3 became more popular, the authors received more and more requests for extensions to the language. They also began to receive complaints about incompatibility and bugs in versions that they hadn&#x27;t written. To address this and to take advantage of the new computers being introduced in the late 1960s, the decision was taken to develop SNOBOL4 with many extra datatypes and features but based on a virtual machine to allow improved portability across computers. The SNOBOL4 language translator was still written in assembly language. However the macro features of the assembler were used to define the virtual machine instructions of the SNOBOL Implementation Language, the SIL. This very much improved the portability of the language by making it relatively easy to port the virtual machine which hosted the translator by recreating its virtual instructions on any machine which included a macro assembler or indeed a high level language.

The machine-independent language SIL arose as a generalization of string manipulation macros by Douglas McIlroy, which were used extensively in the initial SNOBOL implementation. In 1969, McIlroy influenced the language again by insisting on addition of the table type to SNOBOL4.

== SNOBOL4 features ==
SNOBOL is distinctive in format and programming style, which are radically different from contemporary procedural languages such as Fortran and ALGOL.

SNOBOL4 supports a number of built-in data types, such as integers and limited precision real numbers, strings, patterns, arrays, and tables (associative arrays), and also allows the programmer to define additional data types and new functions. SNOBOL4&#x27;s programmer-defined data type facility was advanced at the time—it is similar to the records of the earlier COBOL and the later Pascal programming languages.

All SNOBOL command lines are of the form
:&quot;label subject pattern&quot; = &quot;object&quot; : &quot;transfer&quot;

Each of the five elements is optional. In general, the &quot;subject&quot; is matched against the &quot;pattern&quot;. If the &quot;object&quot; is present, any matched portion is replaced by the &quot;object&quot; via rules for replacement. The &quot;transfer&quot; can be an absolute branch or a conditional branch dependent upon the success or failure of the subject evaluation, the pattern evaluation, the pattern match, the object evaluation or the final assignment. It can also be a transfer to code created and compiled by the program itself during a run.

A SNOBOL pattern can be very simple or extremely complex. A simple pattern is just a text string (e.g. &quot;ABCD&quot;), but a complex pattern may be a large structure describing, for example, the complete grammar of a computer language. It is possible to implement a language interpreter in SNOBOL almost directly from a Backus–Naur form expression of it, with few changes. Creating a macro assembler and an interpreter for a completely theoretical piece of hardware could take as little as a few hundred lines, with a new instruction being added with a single line.

Complex SNOBOL patterns can do things that would be impractical or impossible using the more primitive regular expressions used in most other pattern-matching languages. Some of this power derives from the so-called &quot;SPITBOL extensions&quot; (which have since been incorporated in basically all modern implementations of the original SNOBOL 4 language too), although it is possible to achieve the same power without them. Part of this power comes from the side effects that it is possible to produce during the pattern matching operation, including saving numerous intermediate/tentative matching results and the ability to invoke user-written functions during the pattern match which can perform nearly any desired processing, and then influence the ongoing direction the interrupted pattern match takes, or even to indeed change the pattern itself during the matching operation. Patterns can be saved like any other first-class data item, and can be concatenated, used within other patterns, and used to create very complex and sophisticated pattern expressions. It is possible to write, for example, a SNOBOL4 pattern which matches &quot;a complete name and international postal mailing address&quot;, which is well beyond anything that is practical to even attempt using regular expressions.

SNOBOL4 pattern-matching uses a backtracking algorithm similar to that used in the logic programming language Prolog, which provides pattern-like constructs via DCGs. This algorithm makes it easier to use SNOBOL as a logic programming language than is the case for most languages.

SNOBOL stores variables, strings and data structures in a single garbage-collected heap.

== Example programs ==

The &quot;Hello, World!&quot; program might be as follows...
 OUTPUT = &quot;Hello, World!&quot;
END
A simple program to ask for a user&#x27;s name and then use it in an output sentence...

 OUTPUT = &quot;What is your name?&quot;
 Username = INPUT
 OUTPUT = &quot;Thank you, &quot; Username
END
Use :S (branch on successful match) to choose among three possible outputs...
 OUTPUT = &quot;What is your name?&quot;
 Username = INPUT
 Username &quot;J&quot; :S(LOVE)
 Username &quot;K&quot; :S(HATE)
MEH OUTPUT = &quot;Hi, &quot; Username :(END)
LOVE OUTPUT = &quot;How nice to meet you, &quot; Username :(END)
HATE OUTPUT = &quot;Oh. It&#x27;s you, &quot; Username
END
To continue requesting input until no more is forthcoming...
 OUTPUT = &quot;This program will ask you for personal names&quot;
 OUTPUT = &quot;until you press return without giving it one&quot;
 NameCount = 0 :(GETINPUT)
AGAIN NameCount = NameCount + 1
 OUTPUT = &quot;Name &quot; NameCount &quot;: &quot; PersonalName
GETINPUT OUTPUT = &quot;Please give me name &quot; NameCount + 1 
 PersonalName = INPUT
 PersonalName LEN(1) :S(AGAIN)
 OUTPUT = &quot;Finished. &quot; NameCount &quot; names requested.&quot;
END
== Implementations ==

The classic implementation was on the PDP-10; it has been used to study compilers, formal grammars, and artificial intelligence, especially machine translation and machine comprehension of natural languages. The original implementation was on an IBM 7090 at Bell Labs, Holmdel, N.J. SNOBOL4 was specifically designed for portability; the first implementation was started on an IBM 7094 in 1966 but completed on an IBM 360 in 1967. It was rapidly ported to many other platforms.

It is normally implemented as an interpreter because of the difficulty in implementing some of its very high-level features, but there is a compiler, the SPITBOL compiler, which provides nearly all the facilities that the interpreter provides.

The classic implementation on the PDP-10 was quite slow, and in 1972 James Gimpel of Bell Labs, Holmdel, N.J. designed a native implementation of SNOBOL4 for the PDP-10 that he named SITBOL. He used the design as the basis of a graduate class in string processing that he taught that year at Stevens Institute of Technology (which is why it was named SITBOL). Students were given sections to implement (in PDP-10 assembler) and the entire semester was focused on implementing SITBOL. It was over 80% complete by the end of the semester and was subsequently completed by Professor Gimpel and several students over the summer. SITBOL was a full-featured, high-performance SNOBOL4 interpreter.

The GNAT Ada Compiler comes with a package (GNAT.Spitbol) that implements all of the Spitbol string manipulation semantics. This can be called from within an Ada program.

The file editor for the Michigan Terminal System (MTS) provided pattern matching based on SNOBOL4 patterns.

Several implementations are currently available. Macro SNOBOL4 in C written by Phil Budne is a free, open source implementation, capable of running on almost any platform. Catspaw, Inc provided a commercial implementation of the SNOBOL4 language for many different computer platforms, including DOS, Macintosh, Sun, RS/6000, and others, and these implementations are now available free from Catspaw. Minnesota SNOBOL4, by Viktors Berstis, the closest PC implementation to the original IBM mainframe version (even including Fortran-like FORMAT statement support) is also free.

Although SNOBOL itself has no structured programming features, a SNOBOL preprocessor called Snostorm was designed and implemented during the 1970s by Fred G. Swartz for use under the Michigan Terminal System (MTS) at the University of Michigan. Snostorm was used at the eight to fifteen sites that ran MTS. It was also available at University College London (UCL) between 1982 and 1984.

Snocone by Andrew Koenig adds block-structured constructs to the SNOBOL4 language. Snocone is a self-contained programming language, rather than a proper superset of SNOBOL4.

The SPITBOL implementation also introduced a number of features which, while not using traditional structured programming keywords, nevertheless can be used to provide many of the equivalent capabilities normally thought of as &quot;structured programming&quot;, most notably nested if/then/else type constructs. These features have since been added to most recent SNOBOL4 implementations. After many years as a commercial product, in April 2009 SPITBOL was released as free software under the GNU General Public License.

== Naming ==

According to Dave Farber, he, Griswold and Polonsky &quot;finally arrived at the name Symbolic EXpression Interpreter SEXI.&quot;

Common backronyms of &quot;SNOBOL&quot; are &#x27;String Oriented Symbolic Language&#x27; or (as a quasi-initialism) &#x27;StriNg Oriented symBOlic Language&#x27;.

== See also ==
* Icon (programming language)
* Snowball (programming language)
* Snostorm
* SPITBOL
* Unicon (programming language)

== References ==

== Further reading ==
* republished Salida, CO: Catspaw, 1986 ().
*
*

== External links ==
* CSNOBOL4 is a free and open source BSD-licensed port of the original Bell Labs SNOBOL4 to systems with a C compiler, and includes SPITBOL and Blocks enhancements.
* Catspaw, Inc. offers implementations of and commercial support for SNOBOL4
* 
* For a small brief taste of what SNOBOL4 is about try this online compiler
* Try It Online (Snobol4/CSNOBOL) Online compiler</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q522041" start="0" end="6" title="SNOBOL" label="SNOBOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="74" end="94" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843047" start="131" end="139" title="AT&amp;amp;T Corporation" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="140" end="157" title="Bell Laboratories" label="Bell Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235420" start="161" end="176" title="David J. Farber" label="David J. Farber"/>
<link wikidata="Q92725" start="178" end="192" title="Ralph Griswold" label="Ralph Griswold"/>
<link wikidata="Q184754" start="265" end="276" title="String (computer science)" label="text-string"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024000" start="350" end="355" title="COMIT" label="COMIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842324" start="360" end="364" title="TRAC (programming language)" label="TRAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q131140" start="414" end="419" title="COBOL" label="COBOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q303462" start="510" end="531" title="first-class object" label="first-class data type"/>
<link wikidata="Q126002" start="690" end="703" title="concatenation" label="concatenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736419" start="708" end="719" title="alternation (formal language theory)" label="alternation"/>
<link wikidata="Q79872" start="808" end="832" title="object-oriented language" label="object-oriented language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="842" end="852" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q185612" start="881" end="899" title="regular expression" label="regular expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q940058" start="1043" end="1047" title="eval" label="eval"/>
<link wikidata="Q80083" start="1255" end="1265" title="humanities" label="humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q213970" start="1333" end="1336" title="AWK" label="AWK"/>
<link wikidata="Q42478" start="1341" end="1345" title="Perl" label="Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q185612" start="1383" end="1401" title="regular expression" label="regular expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q211577" start="1458" end="1461" title="Backus–Naur Form" label="BNF"/>
<link wikidata="Q338047" start="1496" end="1516" title="context-free grammar" label="context-free grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q752532" start="1688" end="1705" title="Regular language" label="traditional sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q22682020" start="1881" end="1890" title="Perl 5 version history" label="Perl 5.10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156474" start="1954" end="1958" title="Icon (programming language)" label="Icon"/>
<link wikidata="Q188436" start="2077" end="2082" title="ALGOL" label="ALGOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701019" start="2311" end="2319" title="IBM 7090" label="IBM 7090"/>
<link wikidata="Q192726" start="3473" end="3488" title="virtual machine" label="virtual machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q92881" start="4112" end="4127" title="Douglas McIlroy" label="Douglas McIlroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83303" start="4453" end="4460" title="Fortran" label="Fortran"/>
<link wikidata="Q188436" start="4465" end="4470" title="ALGOL" label="ALGOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q190087" start="4511" end="4520" title="data type" label="data type"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="4531" end="4538" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="4562" end="4573" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q184754" start="4576" end="4583" title="string (computer science)" label="strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503724" start="4585" end="4592" title="pattern matching" label="pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q121079" start="4595" end="4600" title="Array data type" label="array"/>
<link wikidata="Q80585" start="4607" end="4612" title="associative array" label="table"/>
<link wikidata="Q190686" start="4707" end="4715" title="function (programming)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q131140" start="4840" end="4845" title="COBOL" label="COBOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q81571" start="4860" end="4866" title="Pascal programming language" label="Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q211577" start="5899" end="5915" title="Backus–Naur form" label="Backus–Naur form"/>
<link wikidata="Q275603" start="7531" end="7548" title="logic programming" label="logic programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q163468" start="7558" end="7564" title="Prolog" label="Prolog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582738" start="7609" end="7612" title="Definite clause grammar" label="DCG"/>
<link wikidata="Q322202" start="7795" end="7812" title="garbage collection (computer science)" label="garbage-collected"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568240" start="9090" end="9096" title="PDP-10" label="PDP-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q47506" start="9124" end="9132" title="compiler" label="compiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q373045" start="9135" end="9149" title="formal grammar" label="formal grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="9156" end="9179" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q79798" start="9192" end="9211" title="machine translation" label="machine translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q33742" start="9241" end="9257" title="natural language" label="natural language"/>
<link wikidata="Q183065" start="9564" end="9575" title="interpreter (computer software)" label="interpreter"/>
<link wikidata="Q47506" start="9671" end="9679" title="compiler" label="compiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7392587" start="9685" end="9701" title="SPITBOL compiler" label="SPITBOL compiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568240" start="9810" end="9816" title="PDP-10" label="PDP-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568240" start="9938" end="9944" title="PDP-10" label="PDP-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q657222" start="10068" end="10099" title="Stevens Institute of Technology" label="Stevens Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q180760" start="10472" end="10476" title="GNAT" label="GNAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q154755" start="10477" end="10480" title="Ada (programming language)" label="Ada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837755" start="10664" end="10688" title="Michigan Terminal System" label="Michigan Terminal System"/>
<link wikidata="Q223335" start="11356" end="11378" title="structured programming" label="structured programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423166" start="11418" end="11426" title="Snostorm" label="Snostorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837755" start="11509" end="11533" title="Michigan Terminal System" label="Michigan Terminal System"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="11547" end="11569" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q193196" start="11658" end="11683" title="University College London" label="University College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846651" start="11725" end="11738" title="Andrew Koenig (programmer)" label="Andrew Koenig"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603" start="12384" end="12410" title="GNU General Public License" label="GNU General Public License"/>
<link wikidata="Q636300" start="12565" end="12574" title="backronym" label="backronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q101244" start="12657" end="12673" title="Acronym and initialism" label="quasi-initialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156474" start="12740" end="12767" title="Icon (programming language)" label="Icon (programming language)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548444" start="12770" end="12801" title="Snowball (programming language)" label="Snowball (programming language)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423166" start="12804" end="12812" title="Snostorm" label="Snostorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7392587" start="12815" end="12822" title="SPITBOL" label="SPITBOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q3279945" start="12825" end="12854" title="Unicon (programming language)" label="Unicon (programming language)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29519" wikidata="Q1144241" url="?curid=29519" title="Side effect (computer science)">
<text>In computer science, an operation, function or expression is said to have a side effect if it has any observable effect other than its primary effect of reading the value of its arguments and returning a value to the invoker of the operation. Example side effects include modifying a non-local variable, a static local variable or a mutable argument passed by reference; raising errors or exceptions; performing I/O; or calling other functions with side-effects. In the presence of side effects, a program&#x27;s behaviour may depend on history; that is, the order of evaluation matters. Understanding and debugging a function with side effects requires knowledge about the context and its possible histories.
Side effects play an important role in the design and analysis of programming languages. The degree to which side effects are used depends on the programming paradigm. For example, imperative programming is commonly used to produce side effects, to update a system&#x27;s state. By contrast, declarative programming is commonly used to report on the state of system, without side effects. 

Functional programming aims to minimize or eliminate side effects. The lack of side effects makes it easier to do formal verification of a program. The functional language Haskell eliminates side effects such as I/O and other stateful computations by replacing them with monadic actions. Functional languages such as Standard ML, Scheme and Scala do not restrict side effects, but it is customary for programmers to avoid them. 

Effect systems extend types to keep track of effects, permitting concise notation for functions with effects, while maintaining information about the extent and nature of side effects. In particular, functions without effects correspond to pure functions.

Assembly language programmers must be aware of &quot;hidden&quot; side effects—instructions that modify parts of the processor state which are not mentioned in the instruction&#x27;s mnemonic. A classic example of a hidden side effect is an arithmetic instruction that implicitly modifies condition codes (a hidden side effect) while it explicitly modifies a register (the intended effect). One potential drawback of an instruction set with hidden side effects is that, if many instructions have side effects on a single piece of state, like condition codes, then the logic required to update that state sequentially may become a performance bottleneck. The problem is particularly acute on some processors designed with pipelining (since 1990) or with out-of-order execution. Such a processor may require additional control circuitry to detect hidden side effects and stall the pipeline if the next instruction depends on the results of those effects.

== Referential transparency ==

Absence of side effects is a necessary, but not sufficient, condition for referential transparency. Referential transparency means that an expression (such as a function call) can be replaced with its value. This requires that the expression is pure, that is to say the expression must be deterministic (always give the same value for the same input) and side-effect free.

== Temporal side effects ==
Side effects caused by the time taken for an operation to execute are usually ignored when discussing side effects and referential transparency. There are some cases, such as with hardware timing or testing, where operations are inserted specifically for their temporal side effects e.g. codice_1 or codice_2. These instructions do not change state other than taking an amount of time to complete.

== Idempotence ==

A subroutine with side effects is idempotent if multiple applications of the subroutine have the same effect on the system state as a single application, in other words if the function from the system state space to itself associated with the subroutine is idempotent in the mathematical sense. For instance, consider the following Python program:
x = 0

def setx(n):
 global x
 x = n

setx(3)
assert x == 3
setx(3)
assert x == 3
codice_3 is idempotent because the second application of codice_3 to 3 has the same effect on the system state as the first application: codice_5 was already set to 3 after the first application, and it is still set to 3 after the second application.

A pure function is idempotent if it is idempotent in the mathematical sense. For instance, consider the following Python program:
def abs(n):
 return -n if n &lt; 0 else n

assert abs(abs(-3)) == abs(-3)
codice_6 is idempotent because the second application of codice_6 to the return value of the first application to -3 returns the same value as the first application to -3.

== Example ==
One common demonstration of side effect behavior is that of the assignment operator in C. The assignment codice_8 is an expression that evaluates to the same value as the expression codice_9, with the side effect of storing the R-value of codice_9 into the L-value of codice_11. This allows multiple assignment:
a = (b = 3); // b = 3 evaluates to 3, which then gets assigned to a
Because the operator right associates, this is equivalent to
a = b = 3;
This presents a potential hangup for novice programmers who may confuse
while (b == 3) {} // tests if b evaluates to 3
with
while (b = 3) {} // b = 3 evaluates to 3, which then casts to true so the loop is infinite
== See also ==
* Action at a distance (computer programming)
* Don&#x27;t-care term
* Sequence point
* Side-channel attack
* Undefined behaviour
* Unspecified behaviour
* Frame problem

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="3" end="19" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q190686" start="35" end="43" title="subroutine" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q778379" start="47" end="57" title="expression (programming)" label="expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144241" start="76" end="87" title="Side effect (computer science)" label="side effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048954" start="284" end="302" title="non-local variable" label="non-local variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q960279" start="306" end="327" title="static local variable" label="static local variable"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="350" end="369" title="Evaluation_strategy#Call by reference" label="passed by reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q219320" start="412" end="415" title="I/O" label="I/O"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="776" end="796" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q275596" start="891" end="913" title="imperative programming" label="imperative programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q531152" start="1002" end="1025" title="declarative programming" label="declarative programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q193076" start="1101" end="1123" title="Functional programming" label="Functional programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q173326" start="1215" end="1234" title="formal verification" label="formal verification"/>
<link wikidata="Q34010" start="1273" end="1280" title="Haskell (programming language)" label="Haskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q219320" start="1313" end="1316" title="Input/output" label="I/O"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579914" start="1372" end="1379" title="Monad (functional programming)" label="monadic"/>
<link wikidata="Q597330" start="1418" end="1429" title="Standard ML" label="Standard ML"/>
<link wikidata="Q187560" start="1431" end="1437" title="Scheme (programming language)" label="Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q460584" start="1442" end="1447" title="Scala (programming language)" label="Scala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497866" start="1531" end="1544" title="Effect system" label="Effect system"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="1788" end="1805" title="Assembly language" label="Assembly language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322850" start="2077" end="2092" title="status register" label="condition codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q187466" start="2147" end="2155" title="processor register" label="register"/>
<link wikidata="Q272683" start="2208" end="2223" title="instruction set" label="instruction set"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490641" start="2509" end="2519" title="instruction pipeline" label="pipelining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153762" start="2541" end="2563" title="out-of-order execution" label="out-of-order execution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075265" start="3019" end="3023" title="pure function" label="pure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064349" start="3063" end="3076" title="deterministic algorithm" label="deterministic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196827" start="3099" end="3104" title="value (computer science)" label="value"/>
<link wikidata="Q190686" start="3596" end="3606" title="subroutine" label="subroutine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3869" end="3887" title="Idempotence#Definition" label="mathematical sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="3926" end="3932" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075265" start="4278" end="4291" title="pure function" label="pure function"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4333" end="4351" title="idempotence#Definition" label="mathematical sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q231158" start="4731" end="4750" title="assignment operator" label="assignment operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="4754" end="4755" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4895" end="4902" title="value (computer science)#lrvalue" label="R-value"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4924" end="4931" title="value (computer science)#lrvalue" label="L-value"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5068" end="5084" title="operator associativity#Right-associativity of assignment operators" label="right associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631502" start="5351" end="5394" title="Action at a distance (computer programming)" label="Action at a distance (computer programming)"/>
<link wikidata="Q849185" start="5397" end="5417" title="Don&amp;#x27;t-care term" label="Don&amp;#x27;t-care term"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041271" start="5420" end="5434" title="Sequence point" label="Sequence point"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267081" start="5437" end="5456" title="Side-channel attack" label="Side-channel attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964707" start="5459" end="5478" title="Undefined behaviour" label="Undefined behaviour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4318017" start="5481" end="5502" title="Unspecified behaviour" label="Unspecified behaviour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185775" start="5505" end="5518" title="Frame problem" label="Frame problem"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29523" wikidata="Q12733420" url="?curid=29523" title="List of science fiction editors">
<text>This is a list of science fiction editors, editors working for book and magazine publishing companies who have edited science fiction. Many have also edited works of fantasy and other related genres, all of which have been sometimes grouped under the name speculative fiction.

Editors on this list should fulfill the conditions for in science fiction or related genres. Evidence for notability includes an existing wiki-biography, or evidence that one could be written. Borderline cases should be discussed on the article&#x27;s talk page.


==A==

* John Joseph Adams (born 1976), US, anthologist and editor
* Brian W. Aldiss (1925–2017), UK, anthologist, critic, and author
* Susan Allison, US, editor-in-chief and vice-president at Ace Books
* Lou Anders, US, editor of &quot;Argosy Magazine&quot; (2003–2004); anthologist; editorial director of Pyr, an imprint of Prometheus Books
* Lou Aronica (born 1958), US, publisher and editor, founded the Bantam Spectra Line
* Ellen Asher, US, editor-in-chief of Science Fiction Book Club (1973–2007)
* Mike Ashley, (born 1948), UK, author, editor and anthologist
* Lady Cynthia Asquith (1887–1960), UK, writer and ghost story anthologist

==B==

* Jim Baen (1943–2006), US, editor and publisher; founded Baen Books(1983), Webscriptions (now Baen Ebooks), the Baen Free Library and &quot;Jim Baen&#x27;s Universe&quot; webzine
* Hilary Bailey (born 1936), UK, editor of &quot;New Worlds&quot; anthologies #7-10.
* Harry Bates (1900–1981), US, editor of &quot;Astounding Science Fiction&quot;, &quot;Strange Tales&quot;, and &quot;Weird Tales&quot;
* Jeff Berkwits, editor of &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;, 2005
* John Betancourt (born 1963), US, founded Wildside Press; edited &quot;Weird Tales&quot;; SF editor for Byron Preiss Books
* Sir Charles Lloyd Birkin (1907–1986), UK, editor of the &quot;Creeps Library&quot; of horror fiction anthologies (1932–1936)
* Caitlin Blasdell, US, formerly editor at HarperCollins and Avon Books, now a literary agent
* Everett F. Bleiler (1920–2010), US, anthologist, usually with T. E. Dikty
* Kyril Bonfiglioli (1929–1985), UK, editor of &quot;Science Fantasy&quot; magazine
* Anthony Boucher (1911–1968), US, founding editor of &quot;The Magazine of Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction&quot;
* Ben Bova (born 1932), US, writer, editor of &quot;Analog Science Fiction and Fact&quot; (1971–1978); fiction editor of &quot;Omni Magazine&quot; (1978–1982)
* Stacy Boyd, US, romance editor, Harlequin Luna (2001–present),
* Marion Zimmer Bradley (1930–1999), US, writer, founder and editor of &quot;Marion Zimmer Bradley&#x27;s Fantasy Magazine&quot;
* Jennifer Brehl, US, senior editor at HarperCollins
* Kent Brewster, (born 1961), US, editor of &quot;Speculations&quot;
* Damien Broderick, (born 1944), Australia/US, SF editor for Australian popular science bi-monthly &quot;Cosmos&quot;
* Keith Brooke, (born 1966), UK, author, anthologist, publisher of &quot;Infinity Plus&quot;
* Charles N. Brown (1937–2009), US, founder and editor of &quot;Locus&quot; news magazine
* Howard Browne (1908–1999), US, editor of &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; (1950–1956)
* Ginjer Buchanan (born 1944), US, editor-in-chief of Berkley-Ace-Roc Books
* Algis Budrys (1931–2008), US, writer, juror and editor of the &quot;Writers of the Future&quot; contest and anthology series, editor and publisher &quot;Tomorrow Speculative Fiction&quot; 1993-2000

==C==

* Pat Cadigan, (born 1953), US, author; editor of &quot;Shayol&quot; #1-7 (1977–1985); co-editor of &quot;Chacal&quot; (1977)
* Bill Campbell, co-editor of anthology &quot;Mothership: Tales from Afrofuturism and Beyond&quot; (2013)
* John W. Campbell, Jr. (1910–1971), US, Golden Age editor of &quot;Astounding Science Fiction&quot; (later &quot;Analog&quot;) magazine, considered the single most important and influential editor in the history of science fiction
* E.J. &quot;Ted&quot; Carnell (1912–1972), UK, editor of &quot;New Worlds&quot; magazine (1949–1963); anthologist
* Terry Carr (1937–1987), US, editor at Ace Books, founder of Ace Science Fiction Specials line
* Lin Carter (1930–1988), US, editor of the Ballantine Adult Fantasy series
* Richard Chizmar (born 1965), publisher and editor of Cemetery Dance Publications 
* Neil Clarke (born 1966), US, editor of Clarkesworld Magazine, publisher (Wyrm Publishing)
* Keith Clayton, US, editor at Del Rey Books
* Groff Conklin (1904–1968), US, anthologist and critic
* Kathryn Cramer (born 1962), US, editor and anthologist
* Edmund Crispin (1921–1978), UK, author and composer, editor of seven volumes of &quot;Best Science Fiction&quot;
* Peter Crowther (born 1949), UK, editor, publisher (PS Publishing) and anthologist

==D==
* Tony Daniel (science fiction writer) (born 1963), US, editor; Baen Books
* Richard Dalby (born 1949), UK, supernatural fiction editor and anthologist
* Jack Dann (born 1945), US/Australia, anthologist, consulting editor for Tor Books
* Peter Darvill-Evans (born 1954) UK, editor of &quot;Doctor Who&quot; novels
* Ellen Datlow (born 1949), US, anthologist and fiction editor at &quot;Omni&quot; / &quot;Event Horizon&quot; and &quot;Sci Fiction&quot; (2000–2005)
* Avram Davidson (1923–1993), US, writer, editor of &quot;The Magazine of Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction&quot; (1962–1964)
* Judy-Lynn del Rey (1943–1986), US, editor, co-founded Del Rey Books, edited &quot;Stellar&quot; original anthology series (1974–1981); won Hugo Award for Best Professional Editor posthumously (declined)
* Lester del Rey (1915–1993), US, author, co-founded Del Rey Books, edited &quot;Best Science Fiction Stories of the Year&quot; (1972–1976)
* Samuel R. Delany (born 1942), US, writer and critic, edited the anthology series &quot;Quark&quot; with Marilyn Hacker
* August Derleth (1909–1971), US, noted anthologist and founder of Arkham House
* T. E. Dikty (1920–1991), US, edited the first &quot;Best of the Year&quot; anthology series (1949–1957); founder, publisher &amp; editor, Starmont Books
* Thomas M. Disch (1940–2008), US, edited various New Wave anthologies as &quot;Bad Moon Rising: An Anthology of Political Forebodings&quot;
* Tom Doherty (born 1935), US, founder and publisher of Tor Books
* Candas Jane Dorsey, (born 1952), Canada, editor/publisher, Tesseracts Books for a number of years
* John R. Douglas, US, editor for Pocket Books, Avon, and HarperCollins
* Gardner Dozois (1947–2018), US, premier &quot;Best of the Year&quot; anthologist; multiple award-winning editor of &quot;Isaac Asimov&#x27;s Science Fiction Magazine&quot; (1984–2004)
* L. Timmel Duchamp, (born 1950), US, editor/publisher, Aqueduct Press, Seattle

==E==

* Claire Eddy, US, senior editor at Tor Books
* Malcolm Edwards (born 1949), UK, editor at Gollancz, HarperCollins and Orion Publishing Group
* Harlan Ellison (1934–2018), US, editor of the &quot;Dangerous Visions&quot; anthologies
* Roger Elwood (1943–2007), US, anthologist 1972–1975
* Andreas Eschbach (born 1959), Germany, editor of prize-winning anthology &quot;One Trillion Euro&quot;
* Lloyd Arthur Eshbach (1910–2003), US, founder &amp; editor at Fantasy Press
* Richard Evans (1950–1996), UK, editor at Gollancz, McDonald Futura and Orbit Books

==F==

* Paul W. Fairman (1916–1977), US, editor of &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;, &quot;If&quot; and &quot;Fantastic&quot; in the 1950s
* Moshe Feder, US, formerly editor at the Science Fiction Book Club and Tor Books, consulting editor for Tor
* Jenna Felice (1976–2001), US, editor at Tor Books
* Edward L. Ferman (born 1937), US, editor of the &quot;Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction&quot; (1964–1991)
* Joseph W. Ferman (1906–1974), US, founder, editor of &quot;The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction&quot;
* Jo Fletcher formerly of Gollancz, now Jo Fletcher Books
* Eric Flint (born 1947), US, reissue editor at Baen Books, cofounder of Baen Free Library
* James Frenkel (born 1948), US, editor at Dell Books; founder and publisher of Bluejay Books; editor at Tor Books (1987–2013)
* Esther Friesner (born 1951), US, editor &amp; anthologist of the &quot;Chicks in Chainmail&quot; original-anthology series
* Oscar J. Friend (1897–1963), US, anthologist

==G==

* David S. Garnett, (born 1947), UK, editor of the &quot;New Worlds&quot;, &quot;Orbit&quot; and &quot;Zenith&quot; anthology series
* Henry Gee, (born 1962), UK, editor of the Nature Futures series of science fiction short stories and the anthology of them
* Anna Genoese, US, editor for Tor Books; originated Tor&#x27;s paranormal romance imprint
* Hugo Gernsback (1884–1967), US, (born Luxembourg), pioneer editor of &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; magazine
* Nick Gevers, (born 1965), UK, anthologist and editor for PS Publishing
* Vic Ghidalia, (born 1926), US, collaborated on anthologies with Roger Elwood
* Sheila Gilbert, US, longtime editor and co-owner of DAW Books
* Diana Gill, US, SF and fantasy editor at HarperCollins
* Laura Ann Gilman, (born 1967), US, freelance editor; formerly with Berkley, Dutton and New American Library
* Robert Gleason, US, longtime editor at Tor Books; formerly Tor&#x27;s Editor-in-Chief
* H. L. Gold (1914–1996), US, (born Canada), founding editor of &quot;Galaxy&quot; magazine
* Stephen Goldin, (born 1947), US, anthologist and editor of the &quot;SFWA Bulletin&quot;
* Cele Goldsmith Lalli (1933–2002), US, editor of &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; and &quot;Fantastic&quot; magazines in the 1960s
* Liz Gorinsky, US, editor at Tor Books
* Charles L. Grant, (1942–2006), US, horror writer and anthologist
* Martin Greenberg (1918–2013), US, anthologist and founder of Gnome Press
* Martin H. Greenberg (1941–2011), US, prolific anthologist
* Anne Groell, US, senior editor at Bantam Spectra
* Eileen Gunn (born 1945), US, editor &amp; publisher of the &quot;Infinite Matrix&quot; webzine
* James Gunn (born 1923), US, editor of &quot;The Road to Science Fiction&quot; series of teaching anthologies; professor emeritus of science fiction literature at the University of Kansas and director of the Center for the Study of Science Fiction

==H==

* Karen Haber, (born 1955), US, critic, editor of &quot;Best of the Year&quot; collections (2001–2004)
* Marilyn Hacker, (born 1942), US, anthologist (with Samuel R. Delany)
* Ronald M. Hahn, born 1948, Germany, writer, translator, anthologist, editor of the German edition of The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction and Nova.
* Gabrielle Harbowy, (born 1972), US, anthologist; managing editor at Dragon Moon Press; Copyeditor at Pyr
*Lee Harris, (born 1968), UK, Hugo-nominated senior editor at Angry Robot Books, Tor.com Publishing.
* Harry Harrison, (1925–2012), US, anthologist
* David G. Hartwell (1941–2016), US, anthologist; senior editor at Tor Books; editor at Signet, Berkley, and Pocket Books; co-founder and editor of &quot;The New York Review of Science Fiction&quot;
* Raymond J. Healey (1907–1969), US, with J. Francis McComas, edited the pioneer anthology &quot;Adventures in Time and Space&quot; (1946) and alone two original anthologies in early 1950s
* Douglas Hill (1935–2007), UK, editor at Aldus Books, literary editor of &quot;Tribune&quot;
* Tim Holman, UK, publishing director for Orbit Books worldwide; formerly editor at Orbit UK
* John-Henri Holmberg (born 1947), Sweden, editor, translator, critic
* Rachel E. Holmen, US, co-editor and art director for &quot;Marion Zimmer Bradley&#x27;s Fantasy Magazine&quot;, managing editor at Locus magazine from 1979 to 1984
* Rich Horton, US, critic and editor for three &quot;Years Best&quot; anthology series.
* Stuart Hughes (editor) (born 1965), UK, publisher &amp; editor &quot;Peeping Tom&quot;
* Mary-Theresa Hussey, US, executive editor, Luna Books, Harlequin&#x27;s fantasy imprint

==I==

* Van Ikin (born 1951), Australia, anthologist; editor of &quot;Science Fiction&quot;; English professor

==J==
* Ejler Jakobsson (1911–1986), editor for a number of pulp magazines
* Anna Jackson, Orbit books
* Toni Jerrman (born 1964), editor of influential Finnish science fiction magazine &quot;Tähtivaeltaja&quot;
* Karl Johanson (born 1962 in Victoria, Canada), editor of &quot;Neo-opsis Science Fiction Magazine&quot;
* Jane Johnson (born 1960), HarperVoyager
* Oliver Johnson, Hodder &amp; Stoughton
* Stephen Jones (born 1953), British horror anthologist
* S. T. Joshi (born 1958 in Pune, India), editor of many collections of short stories

==K==
* Michael Kandel (born 1941), US, part-time editor at Harcourt; edits Ursula K. Le Guin&#x27;s work
* Marvin Kaye (born 1938), US, horror anthologist, editor of &quot;H. P. Lovecraft&#x27;s Magazine of Horror&quot;
* Gérard Klein, (born 1937) French book editor
* Damon Knight (1922–2002), US, editor of the &quot;Orbit&quot; series of original anthologies
* Jak Koke (born 1964), US, fantasy author and managing editor of Per Aspera Press
* Sean CW Korsgaard (born 1989), US, editor and author, Baen Books
* Edward E. Kramer (born 1961), US, anthologist and author
* Alisa Krasnostein, (born 1976), Australia, founder and managing editor of Twelfth Planet Press
* Péter Kuczka (1923–1999), noted Hungarian editor of &quot;Galaktika&quot; 1972–1995
* David Kyle (born 1919) co-founder of Gnome Press

==L==

* David Langford (born 1953), UK editor of collections by John Sladek, editor of &quot;The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction&quot; 3rd Edition.
* Joel Lane (1963–2013), UK author and editor of several crime and fantasy collections for small press imprints
* Warren Lapine (born 1964), US, editor and publisher of &quot;Absolute Magnitude&quot; and DNA Publications
* Denise Little, editor of fantasy anthologies with Martin H. Greenberg
* Pat LoBrutto (born 1948), US, consulting editor for Tor Books, formerly with Bantam Books and Ace Books
* Robert A. W. Lowndes (1916–1998), US, editor of &quot;Future Science Fiction&quot;, &quot;Science Fiction&quot;, and &quot;Science Fiction Quarterly&quot;
* Richard A. Lupoff (1935–2020) US, anthologist

==M==

* Daryl F. Mallett (born 1969), US, editor at Borgo Press (1989–1999); editor of &quot;SFRA Review&quot; #203-211 (1993–1994); editorial board of &quot;Extrapolation&quot; (1994-????); managing editor at Chaos! Comics (1995); associate editor of &quot;Other Worlds&quot; (1995-????)
* Barry N. Malzberg (born 1939), US, magazine editor, anthologist
* Nick Mamatas (born 1972), editor of &quot;Clarkesworld Magazine&quot;; editor of Haikasoru imprint of Japanese SF in translation
* Leo Margulies (1900–1975), US, anthologist, editor of &quot;Thrilling Wonder Stories&quot;, &quot;Captain Future&quot;, &quot;Startling Stories&quot;, and many other pulp magazines
* Shawna McCarthy (born 1954), US, anthologist, editor of &quot;Realms of Fantasy&quot;; editor of &quot;Isaac Asimov&#x27;s Science Fiction Magazine&quot; (1983–86)
* J. Francis McComas (1910–1978), US, co-founding editor of &quot;The Magazine of Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction&quot;; anthologist
* Harriet McDougal (born 1939), US, former editor-in-chief of Tor Books, former Editorial Director of Ace Books; wife of author Robert Jordan.
* Beth Meacham (born 1951), US, senior editor at Tor Books, 1984–present; editor at Ace Books 1981–1984
* Judith Merril (1923–1997), Canada (born US), edited &quot;Year&#x27;s Best&quot; anthologies, (1956–67)
* Sam Merwin, Jr. (1910–1996), US, editor of &quot;Fantastic Universe&quot; and &quot;Galaxy&quot;
* Robert P. Mills (1920–1986), US, magazine editor
* Samuel Mines (1909–1986), US, editor of &quot;Startling Stories&quot; and &quot;Thrilling Wonder Stories&quot; in the 1950s
* Jim Minz, US, editor at Baen Books, former editor at Tor Books and Del Rey Books
* Betsy Mitchell (editor), US, editor-in-chief of Del Rey Books; former editor at Baen Books, Bantam Books, and Warner Aspect
* Michael Moorcock (born 1939), UK (lives in US), editor of &quot;New Worlds&quot; magazine in the 1960s
* James Morrow (born 1947), US, anthologist, editor of &quot;The SFWA European Hall of Fame&quot;

==N==

* Darren Nash, UK (born Australia), editor for Orbit Books UK, formerly with Simon &amp; Schuster UK
* Gabriella Nemeth, UK, editor for Atom Books division of Little, Brown)
* Annalee Newitz (born 1969), editor in chief, io9
* Patrick Nielsen Hayden (born 1959), US, manager of science fiction at Tor Books; editor of &quot;Starlight&quot; original anthology series
* Teresa Nielsen Hayden (born 1956), US, consulting editor (former managing editor) for Tor Books
* Raimo Nikkonen, Finland, editor of major Finnish Science fiction magazine &quot;Portti&quot;
* Kate Nintzel, acquisitions editor at Eos books (HarperCollins)
* Scot Noel, US, editor in chief of Dreamforge (Dreamforge)
* Sharyn November, US, senior editor of Viking Children&#x27;s Books and editorial director of Firebird Books

==O==
* John O&#x27;Neill, founder of SF Site and editor of &quot;Black Gate&quot;
* John Oakes, former editor and publisher for Thunder&#x27;s Mouth Press and Four Walls Eight Windows
* Andrew J. Offutt (1934–2013), anthologist
* Jonathan Oliver (publishing), Solaris and Abaddon
* John J. Ordover, former editor at Pocket Books, responsible for &quot;Star Trek&quot; novelizations, now at Phobos Books

==P==
* Bella Pagan, previously editor for Orbit Books UK, now Tor UK
* Raymond A. Palmer (1910–1977), US, influential editor of &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;, 1938–1949
* Anne C. Perry, Hodder &amp; Stoughton
* Rog Peyton (born 1942), UK, Birmingham bookseller who launched the Drunken Dragon imprint and co-edited (with Rod Milner) the &quot;Venture SF&quot; reprint series
* John J. Pierce (born 1941), US, editor of &quot;Galaxy Science Fiction&quot;, 1977–1979
* Devi Pillai, Tor Books
* Frederik Pohl (1919–2013), US, writer, edited &quot;Galaxy&quot; and &quot;If&quot; magazines in 1960s and the &quot;Star Science Fiction&quot; series of original anthologies (1953–1959)
* Andrew I. Porter, (born 1946), US, editor of &quot;Science Fiction Chronicle&quot; for many years
* Byron Preiss (1952–2005), American editor, anthologist and publisher of Byron Preiss Visual Publications
* David Pringle (born 1950), Scottish editor and publisher of &quot;Interzone&quot; 1988–2004
* Bill Pronzini (born 1943), American anthologist, often with Barry N. Malzberg and/or Martin H. Greenberg

== Q ==
* James L. Quinn, editor of &quot;If&quot; in the 1950s

==R==

* Eric Raab, editor, Tor Books
* Cat Rambo (born 1963), co-editor, &quot;Fantasy Magazine&quot;
* Gillian Redfearn, Gollancz
* Mike Resnick (1942–2020), US, anthologist
* Lezli Robyn, Co-editor Heart&#x27;s Kiss magazine (2017–2018), editor Galaxy&#x27;s Edge magazine (2020-), anthologist
* Christopher Ruocchio, editor at Baen Books
* Kristine Kathryn Rusch (born 1960), US, editor of &quot;Pulphouse&quot; and &quot;The Magazine of Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction&quot; (1991–97)

==S==

* Steve Saffel, US, freelance editor, formerly at Del Rey Books and Marvel Comics
* Arthur W. Saha (1923–1999), US anthologist closely associated with Donald A. Wollheim
* Pamela Sargent, edited &quot;Women of Wonder&quot; series and &quot;Nebula Awards Showcase&quot; (1995-97)
* Karl-Herbert Scheer (1928–1991), Germany, shared editorial direction of the Perry Rhodan series with Walter Ernsting
* Liz Scheier, editor formerly for Roc and Del Rey
* Christopher Schelling, US, literary agent, former editor for Roc Books and HarperPrism
* Chris Schluep, US, editor at Del Rey Books
* Bryan Thomas Schmidt (born 1969), American science fiction author and editor
* Stanley Schmidt (born 1944), US, award-winning editor of &quot;Analog Science Fiction and Fact&quot; since 1977
* George H. Scithers (1929–2010), US, first editor of &quot;Isaac Asimov&#x27;s Science Fiction Magazine&quot; 1976–1981; editor &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;, mid-1980s
* Shelly Shapiro, US, acquisitions editor, Ballantine Del Rey
* Larry Shaw (1924–1985), editor of &quot;Infinity Science Fiction&quot;, &quot;If magazine&quot; and Lancer Books
* Mike Shohl, freelance editor, formerly with HarperCollins
* John Silbersack, US, literary agent, Trident Media Group. Former publishing director or editor at HarperCollins, Warner Books, Roc and Berkley
* Steven H Silver (born 1967), American anthologist with Martin H. Greenberg; critic; editor at ISFiC Press
* Robert Silverberg (born 1935), important American writer and editor of original anthologies and a &quot;The Best of&quot; line from 2001 to 2002.
* Janna Silverstein, US, acquisitions editor, Spectra from 1985 to 1994; editor, Kobold Press from 2008–present; critic and reviewer.
* Melissa Ann Singer, US, editor, Tor/Forge; primarily known as a horror editor
* Jason Sizemore, American founder and former editor of &quot;Apex Digest&quot;, anthologist, managing editor of Apex Publications
* T. O&#x27;Conor Sloane (1851–1940), US, editor of &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; (1929–1938)
* George Edgar Slusser, (1938–2014), US, editor of Eaton anthologies of SF studies
* Anne Sowards, US, acquisitions editor, Roc Books and Ace Books
* Simon Spanton, UK, co-editorial director of Orion Gollancz, UK
* Catriona Sparks (born 1965), Australia, founding editor of Agog! Press
* Lou Stathis (1952–1997), editor of &quot;Heavy Metal&quot; magazine and of DC Comics&#x27; Vertigo line
* Paul Stevens, US, editor at Tor/Forge Books
* Amy Stout, US, editor at Bantam Spectra, consultantinf editor to Ballantine/Del Rey, author. 
* Jonathan Strahan (born 1964 Northern Ireland), Australia, anthologist, editor, publisher and critic

==T==

* Lynne M. Thomas, US, editor of &quot;Apex Digest&quot;, &quot;Chicks Dig...&quot;
* Richard Thomas, US, editor of &quot;Gamut Magazine&quot; and Dark House Press
* Sheree Thomas, US, editor of the &quot;Dark Matter&quot; anthologies and (since 2020) of &quot;The Magazine of Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction&quot;
* Brian Thomsen (1959–2008), US, consulting editor for Tor Books, former editor for DAW Books and Warner Books
* Roy Torgeson, editor of &quot;Other Worlds&quot; and &quot;Chrysalis&quot; anthology series, 1977–1983
* F. Orlin Tremaine (1899–1956), US, editor of &quot;Astounding Science Fiction&quot; 1933–1937
* Liza Groen Trombi, US, editor and publisher, Locus Publications
* Gary Turner, US, editor and publisher, Golden Gryphon Press

==U==
* Juliet Ulman, Formerly senior editor for Bantam Spectra, now editor-in-chief for Pugilist Press, an independent publisher of literary fiction.

==V==
* Gordon Van Gelder (born 1966), US, editor (1997-2015) and publisher (since 2000) of &quot;The Magazine of Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction&quot;; editor at St. Martin&#x27;s Press, 1988–2000
* Ann VanderMeer, US, editor of &quot;Weird Tales&quot;; anthologist; founder of Buzzcity Press.
* Jeff VanderMeer (born 1968), US writer, anthologist; founding editor and publisher of the Ministry of Whimsy Press (now defunct)

==W==

* Sean Wallace (born 1976), US, editor and publisher at Prime Books, Cosmos Books, and other small press publishers
* Toni Weisskopf (born 1965), US, publisher of Baen Books after Baen&#x27;s death; executive editor since 1987
* Peter Weston (1943–2017), UK, published the literary journal &quot;Speculation&quot; (launched as &quot;Zenith&quot; in 1963) and later edited the &quot;Andromeda&quot; original anthologies (1975–77)
* Ted White (born 1938), US, former editor of &quot;Fantastic&quot;, &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; and &quot;Heavy Metal&quot;; anthologist
* Paul Williams (1948–2013), US, editor of the complete short fiction of Philip K. Dick and Theodore Sturgeon
* Sheila Williams (born 1956), US, editor &quot;Asimov&#x27;s Science Fiction&quot; since 2004; managing editor and assistant editor, 1982–2004
* Terri Windling (born 1958), US, editor at Ace Books (1980–1985); consulting editor for Tor Books since 1986; award-winning anthologist; editor of &quot;The Journal of Mythic Arts&quot; since 1996
* Betsy Wollheim (born 1951), US, publisher and co-owner of DAW Books; daughter of Donald A. Wollheim
* Donald A. Wollheim (1914–1990), US, influential SF editor at Ace Books 1950–60s, founded DAW Books in 1971
* Jane Yolen (born 1939), prolific children&#x27;s writer, editor of &quot;Jane Yolen Books&quot; at Harcourt Brace; fantasy anthology series &quot;Xanadu&quot; (1992–1994), &quot;Year&#x27;s Best Science Fiction and Fantasy for Teens&quot;
* Brian Youmans, editor, &quot;Best of the Rest&quot; small press anthology series
* Angela Yuriko Smith, editor in chief, Space and Time Magazine

==See also==
* Editing
* Futurians
* List of fantasy authors
* List of horror fiction authors
* List of science fiction authors
* Science fiction fandom

== References ==
== External links ==
* Locus index, Honors for editors and publishers</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12733420" start="10" end="41" title="List of science fiction editors" label="list of science fiction editors"/>
<link wikidata="Q194105" start="43" end="49" title="editor" label="editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="118" end="133" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="166" end="173" title="fantasy" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9326077" start="256" end="275" title="speculative fiction" label="speculative fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6242102" start="552" end="569" title="John Joseph Adams" label="John Joseph Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="587" end="598" title="anthologist" label="anthologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q238702" start="612" end="627" title="Brian W. Aldiss" label="Brian W. Aldiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="645" end="656" title="anthologist" label="anthologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6430706" start="658" end="664" title="critic" label="critic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647511" start="679" end="692" title="Susan Allison" label="Susan Allison"/>
<link wikidata="Q536795" start="736" end="745" title="Ace Books" label="Ace Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q6685335" start="748" end="758" title="Lou Anders" label="Lou Anders"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="815" end="826" title="anthologist" label="anthologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7263199" start="850" end="853" title="Pyr (publisher)" label="Pyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871370" start="869" end="885" title="Prometheus Books" label="Prometheus Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q15462728" start="888" end="899" title="Lou Aronica" label="Lou Aronica"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857181" start="951" end="965" title="Bantam Spectra" label="Bantam Spectra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364740" start="973" end="984" title="Ellen Asher" label="Ellen Asher"/>
<link wikidata="Q30587673" start="1009" end="1034" title="Science Fiction Book Club" label="Science Fiction Book Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q15454805" start="1049" end="1060" title="Mike Ashley (writer)" label="Mike Ashley"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="1098" end="1109" title="anthologist" label="anthologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699902" start="1117" end="1132" title="Cynthia Asquith" label="Cynthia Asquith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519335" start="1161" end="1172" title="ghost story" label="ghost story"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="1173" end="1184" title="anthologist" label="anthologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510491" start="1195" end="1203" title="Jim Baen" label="Jim Baen"/>
<link wikidata="Q799732" start="1251" end="1261" title="Baen Books" label="Baen Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q4841271" start="1288" end="1299" title="Baen Ebooks" label="Baen Ebooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4841272" start="1306" end="1323" title="Baen Free Library" label="Baen Free Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q6193477" start="1334" end="1358" title="Jim Baen&amp;#x27;s Universe" label="Jim Baen&amp;#x27;s Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760877" start="1375" end="1388" title="Hilary Bailey" label="Hilary Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027727" start="1422" end="1432" title="New Worlds (magazine)" label="New Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q707333" start="1460" end="1471" title="Harry Bates (author)" label="Harry Bates"/>
<link wikidata="Q42345" start="1505" end="1531" title="Astounding Science Fiction" label="Astounding Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115055" start="1545" end="1558" title="Strange Tales" label="Strange Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136124" start="1576" end="1587" title="Weird Tales" label="Weird Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q6173342" start="1596" end="1609" title="Jeff Berkwits" label="Jeff Berkwits"/>
<link wikidata="Q991271" start="1627" end="1642" title="Amazing Stories" label="Amazing Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q4085950" start="1657" end="1672" title="John Betancourt" label="John Betancourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8001508" start="1698" end="1712" title="Wildside Press" label="Wildside Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136124" start="1727" end="1738" title="Weird Tales" label="Weird Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018628" start="1760" end="1772" title="Byron Preiss" label="Byron Preiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063729" start="1781" end="1805" title="Sir Charles Lloyd Birkin" label="Sir Charles Lloyd Birkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16575965" start="1867" end="1881" title="horror fiction" label="horror fiction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1908" end="1924" title="Caitlin Blasdell" label="Caitlin Blasdell"/>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="1949" end="1962" title="HarperCollins" label="HarperCollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2874472" start="1967" end="1977" title="Avon Books" label="Avon Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321850" start="2002" end="2020" title="Everett F. Bleiler" label="Everett F. Bleiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="2038" end="2049" title="anthologist" label="anthologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7668218" start="2064" end="2075" title="T. E. Dikty" label="T. E. Dikty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634009" start="2078" end="2095" title="Kyril Bonfiglioli" label="Kyril Bonfiglioli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3475733" start="2129" end="2144" title="Science Fantasy (magazine)" label="Science Fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q246303" start="2162" end="2177" title="Anthony Boucher" label="Anthony Boucher"/>
<link wikidata="Q937202" start="2220" end="2265" title="The Magazine of Fantasy &amp;amp; Science Fiction" label="The Magazine of Fantasy &amp;amp; Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q436664" start="2274" end="2282" title="Ben Bova" label="Ben Bova"/>
<link wikidata="Q42345" start="2324" end="2355" title="Analog Science Fiction and Fact" label="Analog Science Fiction and Fact"/>
<link wikidata="Q663053" start="2399" end="2412" title="Omni Magazine" label="Omni Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2433" end="2443" title="Stacy Boyd" label="Stacy Boyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q612938" start="2465" end="2474" title="Harlequin Enterprises" label="Harlequin"/>
<link wikidata="Q465179" start="2498" end="2519" title="Marion Zimmer Bradley" label="Marion Zimmer Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6765457" start="2573" end="2618" title="Marion Zimmer Bradley&amp;#x27;s Fantasy Magazine" label="Marion Zimmer Bradley&amp;#x27;s Fantasy Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2627" end="2641" title="Jennifer Brehl" label="Jennifer Brehl"/>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="2664" end="2677" title="HarperCollins" label="HarperCollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6391626" start="2680" end="2693" title="Kent Brewster" label="Kent Brewster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575331" start="2728" end="2740" title="Speculations (magazine)" label="Speculations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158494" start="2749" end="2765" title="Damien Broderick" label="Damien Broderick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174593" start="2852" end="2858" title="Cosmos (magazine)" label="Cosmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6384114" start="2867" end="2879" title="Keith Brooke" label="Keith Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q55614452" start="2938" end="2951" title="Infinity Plus" label="Infinity Plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081185" start="2960" end="2976" title="Charles N. Brown" label="Charles N. Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q963987" start="3022" end="3027" title="Locus (magazine)" label="Locus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11682621" start="3050" end="3063" title="Howard Browne" label="Howard Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q991271" start="3097" end="3112" title="Amazing Stories" label="Amazing Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563135" start="3133" end="3148" title="Ginjer Buchanan" label="Ginjer Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2753848" start="3185" end="3192" title="Berkley Books" label="Berkley"/>
<link wikidata="Q536795" start="3193" end="3196" title="Ace Books" label="Ace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646621" start="3197" end="3206" title="Roc Books" label="Roc Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q547414" start="3209" end="3221" title="Algis Budrys" label="Algis Budrys"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038511" start="3277" end="3298" title="Writers of the Future" label="Writers of the Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q266947" start="3417" end="3428" title="Pat Cadigan" label="Pat Cadigan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3543" end="3556" title="Bill Campbell (editor)" label="Bill Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q435056" start="3649" end="3670" title="John W. Campbell" label="John W. Campbell, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2420210" start="3688" end="3698" title="Golden Age of Science Fiction" label="Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q42345" start="3709" end="3774" title="Analog Science Fiction and Fact" label="&amp;quot;Astounding Science Fiction&amp;quot; (later &amp;quot;Analog&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225230" start="3881" end="3909" title="John Carnell" label="E.J. &amp;quot;Ted&amp;quot; Carnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027727" start="3943" end="3953" title="New Worlds (magazine)" label="New Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="3982" end="3993" title="anthologist" label="anthologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292432" start="3996" end="4006" title="Terry Carr" label="Terry Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q536795" start="4034" end="4043" title="Ace Books" label="Ace Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q4673011" start="4056" end="4084" title="Ace Science Fiction Specials" label="Ace Science Fiction Specials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248054" start="4092" end="4102" title="Lin Carter" label="Lin Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851429" start="4134" end="4165" title="Ballantine Adult Fantasy series" label="Ballantine Adult Fantasy series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324736" start="4168" end="4183" title="Richard Chizmar" label="Richard Chizmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058698" start="4221" end="4248" title="Cemetery Dance Publications" label="Cemetery Dance Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q6988393" start="4252" end="4263" title="Neil Clarke (editor)" label="Neil Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127527" start="4291" end="4312" title="Clarkesworld Magazine" label="Clarkesworld Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4344" end="4357" title="Keith Clayton" label="Keith Clayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562301" start="4373" end="4386" title="Del Rey Books" label="Del Rey Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610108" start="4389" end="4402" title="Groff Conklin" label="Groff Conklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="4420" end="4431" title="anthologist" label="anthologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377021" start="4445" end="4459" title="Kathryn Cramer" label="Kathryn Cramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="4488" end="4499" title="anthologist" label="anthologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351641" start="4502" end="4516" title="Edmund Crispin" label="Edmund Crispin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173464" start="4617" end="4631" title="Peter Crowther" label="Peter Crowther"/>
<link wikidata="Q7120889" start="4668" end="4681" title="PS Publishing" label="PS Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q768866" start="4708" end="4744" title="Tony Daniel (science fiction writer)" label="Tony Daniel (science fiction writer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q799732" start="4770" end="4780" title="Baen Books" label="Baen Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325072" start="4783" end="4796" title="Richard Dalby" label="Richard Dalby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644030" start="4814" end="4834" title="supernatural fiction" label="supernatural fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="4846" end="4857" title="anthologist" label="anthologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112002" start="4860" end="4869" title="Jack Dann" label="Jack Dann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647037" start="4932" end="4941" title="Tor Books" label="Tor Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173550" start="4944" end="4963" title="Peter Darvill-Evans" label="Peter Darvill-Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810264" start="5022" end="5034" title="Ellen Datlow" label="Ellen Datlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="5052" end="5063" title="anthologist" label="anthologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q663053" start="5092" end="5096" title="Omni (magazine)" label="Omni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359153" start="5141" end="5152" title="Sci Fiction" label="Sci Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q782991" start="5173" end="5187" title="Avram Davidson" label="Avram Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q937202" start="5229" end="5274" title="The Magazine of Fantasy &amp;amp; Science Fiction" label="The Magazine of Fantasy &amp;amp; Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6304303" start="5295" end="5312" title="Judy-Lynn del Rey" label="Judy-Lynn del Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562301" start="5349" end="5362" title="Del Rey Books" label="Del Rey Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933760" start="5434" end="5473" title="Hugo Award for Best Professional Editor" label="Hugo Award for Best Professional Editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q684748" start="5500" end="5514" title="Lester del Rey" label="Lester del Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562301" start="5551" end="5564" title="Del Rey Books" label="Del Rey Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q438164" start="5640" end="5656" title="Samuel R. Delany" label="Samuel R. Delany"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293094" start="5744" end="5758" title="Marilyn Hacker" label="Marilyn Hacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q509002" start="5761" end="5775" title="August Derleth" label="August Derleth"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="5799" end="5810" title="anthologist" label="anthologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q673540" start="5826" end="5838" title="Arkham House" label="Arkham House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7668218" start="5841" end="5852" title="T. E. Dikty" label="T. E. Dikty"/>
<link wikidata="Q708581" start="5996" end="6011" title="Thomas M. Disch" label="Thomas M. Disch"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6074" end="6128" title="Bad Moon Rising: An Anthology of Political Forebodings" label="Bad Moon Rising: An Anthology of Political Forebodings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815601" start="6137" end="6148" title="Tom Doherty" label="Tom Doherty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647037" start="6191" end="6200" title="Tor Books" label="Tor Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q187424" start="6203" end="6221" title="Candas Jane Dorsey" label="Candas Jane Dorsey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6303" end="6318" title="John R. Douglas" label="John R. Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q720562" start="6375" end="6389" title="Gardner Dozois" label="Gardner Dozois"/>
<link wikidata="Q144949" start="6496" end="6540" title="Isaac Asimov&amp;#x27;s Science Fiction Magazine" label="Isaac Asimov&amp;#x27;s Science Fiction Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6456660" start="6561" end="6578" title="L. Timmel Duchamp" label="L. Timmel Duchamp"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6649" end="6660" title="Claire Eddy" label="Claire Eddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647037" start="6683" end="6692" title="Tor Books" label="Tor Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742297" start="6695" end="6710" title="Malcolm Edwards" label="Malcolm Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522363" start="6738" end="6746" title="Victor Gollancz Ltd" label="Gollancz"/>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="6748" end="6761" title="HarperCollins" label="HarperCollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q861799" start="6766" end="6788" title="Orion Publishing Group" label="Orion Publishing Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q311253" start="6791" end="6805" title="Harlan Ellison" label="Harlan Ellison"/>
<link wikidata="Q745250" start="6843" end="6860" title="Dangerous Visions" label="Dangerous Visions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358154" start="6881" end="6893" title="Roger Elwood" label="Roger Elwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="6911" end="6922" title="anthologist" label="anthologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q19015" start="6935" end="6951" title="Andreas Eschbach" label="Andreas Eschbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q710435" start="7040" end="7060" title="Lloyd Arthur Eshbach" label="Lloyd Arthur Eshbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434321" start="7102" end="7115" title="Fantasy Press" label="Fantasy Press"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7118" end="7131" title="Richard Evans (editor)" label="Richard Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522363" start="7159" end="7167" title="Victor Gollancz Ltd" label="Gollancz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355196" start="7189" end="7200" title="Orbit Books" label="Orbit Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154184" start="7211" end="7226" title="Paul W. Fairman" label="Paul W. Fairman"/>
<link wikidata="Q991271" start="7260" end="7275" title="Amazing Stories" label="Amazing Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382305" start="7289" end="7291" title="If (magazine)" label="If"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434174" start="7308" end="7317" title="Fantastic (magazine)" label="Fantastic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7339" end="7350" title="Moshe Feder" label="Moshe Feder"/>
<link wikidata="Q30587673" start="7379" end="7404" title="Science Fiction Book Club" label="Science Fiction Book Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647037" start="7409" end="7418" title="Tor Books" label="Tor Books"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7448" end="7460" title="Jenna Felice" label="Jenna Felice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647037" start="7488" end="7497" title="Tor Books" label="Tor Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350792" start="7500" end="7516" title="Edward L. Ferman" label="Edward L. Ferman"/>
<link wikidata="Q937202" start="7554" end="7593" title="Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction" label="Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190929" start="7614" end="7630" title="Joseph W. Ferman" label="Joseph W. Ferman"/>
<link wikidata="Q937202" start="7673" end="7716" title="The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction" label="The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q10485016" start="7725" end="7736" title="Jo Fletcher" label="Jo Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320489" start="7783" end="7793" title="Eric Flint" label="Eric Flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q799732" start="7829" end="7839" title="Baen Books" label="Baen Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q4841272" start="7854" end="7871" title="Baen Free Library" label="Baen Free Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q6134259" start="7874" end="7887" title="James Frenkel" label="James Frenkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075464" start="7915" end="7925" title="Dell Books" label="Dell Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647037" start="7977" end="7986" title="Tor Books" label="Tor Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q548201" start="8001" end="8016" title="Esther Friesner" label="Esther Friesner"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="8047" end="8058" title="anthologist" label="anthologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096373" start="8072" end="8091" title="Chicks in Chainmail" label="Chicks in Chainmail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7106055" start="8126" end="8141" title="Oscar J. Friend" label="Oscar J. Friend"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="8159" end="8170" title="anthologist" label="anthologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239367" start="8181" end="8197" title="David S. Garnett" label="David S. Garnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027727" start="8236" end="8246" title="New Worlds (magazine)" label="New Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5721852" start="8314" end="8323" title="Henry Gee" label="Henry Gee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8439" end="8451" title="Anna Genoese" label="Anna Genoese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647037" start="8468" end="8477" title="Tor Books" label="Tor Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192185" start="8501" end="8519" title="paranormal romance" label="paranormal romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q312242" start="8530" end="8544" title="Hugo Gernsback" label="Hugo Gernsback"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="8568" end="8578" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q991271" start="8605" end="8620" title="Amazing Stories" label="Amazing Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q14979122" start="8638" end="8649" title="Nick Gevers" label="Nick Gevers"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="8668" end="8679" title="anthologist" label="anthologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7120889" start="8695" end="8708" title="PS Publishing" label="PS Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8711" end="8723" title="Vic Ghidalia" label="Vic Ghidalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358154" start="8775" end="8787" title="Roger Elwood" label="Roger Elwood"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8790" end="8804" title="Sheila Gilbert" label="Sheila Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646630" start="8842" end="8851" title="DAW Books" label="DAW Books"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8854" end="8864" title="Diana Gill" label="Diana Gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="8895" end="8908" title="HarperCollins" label="HarperCollins"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8911" end="8927" title="Laura Ann Gilman" label="Laura Ann Gilman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2753848" start="8978" end="8985" title="Berkley Books" label="Berkley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5317558" start="8987" end="8993" title="E. P. Dutton" label="Dutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7005314" start="8998" end="9018" title="New American Library" label="New American Library"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9021" end="9035" title="Robert Gleason (writer)" label="Robert Gleason"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647037" start="9060" end="9069" title="Tor Books" label="Tor Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627887" start="9109" end="9119" title="H. L. Gold" label="H. L. Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007573" start="9177" end="9183" title="Galaxy science fiction" label="Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498557" start="9201" end="9215" title="Stephen Goldin" label="Stephen Goldin"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="9234" end="9245" title="anthologist" label="anthologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005515" start="9292" end="9312" title="Cele Goldsmith Lalli" label="Cele Goldsmith Lalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q991271" start="9346" end="9361" title="Amazing Stories" label="Amazing Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434174" start="9378" end="9387" title="Fantastic (magazine)" label="Fantastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16729382" start="9419" end="9431" title="Liz Gorinsky" label="Liz Gorinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647037" start="9447" end="9456" title="Tor Books" label="Tor Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q3666432" start="9459" end="9475" title="Charles L. Grant" label="Charles L. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="9512" end="9523" title="anthologist" label="anthologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6775562" start="9526" end="9542" title="Martin Greenberg (publisher)" label="Martin Greenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5574338" start="9587" end="9598" title="Gnome Press" label="Gnome Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680150" start="9601" end="9620" title="Martin H. Greenberg" label="Martin H. Greenberg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9661" end="9672" title="Anne Groell" label="Anne Groell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349378" start="9712" end="9723" title="Eileen Gunn" label="Eileen Gunn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9777" end="9792" title="Infinite Matrix" label="Infinite Matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q847906" start="9799" end="9806" title="webzine" label="webzine"/>
<link wikidata="Q715505" start="9809" end="9819" title="James Gunn (author)" label="James Gunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761150" start="9853" end="9880" title="The Road to Science Fiction" label="The Road to Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q52413" start="9975" end="9995" title="University of Kansas" label="University of Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6369672" start="10066" end="10077" title="Karen Haber" label="Karen Haber"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293094" start="10169" end="10183" title="Marilyn Hacker" label="Marilyn Hacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="10202" end="10213" title="anthologist" label="anthologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q438164" start="10220" end="10236" title="Samuel R. Delany" label="Samuel R. Delany"/>
<link wikidata="Q115070" start="10240" end="10254" title="Ronald M. Hahn" label="Ronald M. Hahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="10296" end="10307" title="anthologist" label="anthologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q937202" start="10341" end="10384" title="The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction" label="The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516073" start="10397" end="10414" title="Gabrielle Harbowy" label="Gabrielle Harbowy"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="10433" end="10444" title="anthologist" label="anthologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305241" start="10465" end="10482" title="Dragon Moon Press" label="Dragon Moon Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7263199" start="10498" end="10501" title="Pyr (publisher)" label="Pyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q66732400" start="10503" end="10513" title="Lee Harris (editor)" label="Lee Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763946" start="10564" end="10581" title="Angry Robot" label="Angry Robot Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647037" start="10583" end="10590" title="Tor Books" label="Tor.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q489193" start="10605" end="10619" title="Harry Harrison (writer)" label="Harry Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="10638" end="10649" title="anthologist" label="anthologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233934" start="10652" end="10669" title="David G. Hartwell" label="David G. Hartwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="10687" end="10698" title="anthologist" label="anthologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647037" start="10717" end="10726" title="Tor Books" label="Tor Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q7005314" start="10738" end="10744" title="New American Library" label="Signet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2753848" start="10746" end="10753" title="Berkley Books" label="Berkley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7206385" start="10759" end="10771" title="Pocket Books" label="Pocket Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q5007979" start="10804" end="10842" title="The New York Review of Science Fiction" label="The New York Review of Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298888" start="10851" end="10868" title="Raymond J. Healey" label="Raymond J. Healey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5923872" start="10891" end="10909" title="J. Francis McComas" label="J. Francis McComas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686621" start="10946" end="10974" title="Adventures in Time and Space" label="Adventures in Time and Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301602" start="11040" end="11052" title="Douglas Hill" label="Douglas Hill"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11080" end="11091" title="Aldus Books" label="Aldus Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840487" start="11118" end="11125" title="Tribune (magazine)" label="Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11134" end="11144" title="Tim Holman" label="Tim Holman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355196" start="11174" end="11185" title="Orbit Books" label="Orbit Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q5810936" start="11227" end="11246" title="John-Henri Holmberg" label="John-Henri Holmberg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11297" end="11313" title="Rachel E. Holmen" label="Rachel E. Holmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6765457" start="11356" end="11401" title="Marion Zimmer Bradley&amp;#x27;s Fantasy Magazine" label="Marion Zimmer Bradley&amp;#x27;s Fantasy Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q963987" start="11428" end="11442" title="Locus magazine" label="Locus magazine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11463" end="11474" title="Rich Horton" label="Rich Horton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11551" end="11573" title="Stuart Hughes (editor)" label="Stuart Hughes (editor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7160339" start="11620" end="11631" title="Peeping Tom (magazine)" label="Peeping Tom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11640" end="11659" title="Mary-Theresa Hussey" label="Mary-Theresa Hussey"/>
<link wikidata="Q612938" start="11683" end="11693" title="Luna Books" label="Luna Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q612938" start="11695" end="11704" title="Harlequin Enterprises" label="Harlequin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913447" start="11738" end="11746" title="Van Ikin" label="Van Ikin"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="11771" end="11782" title="anthologist" label="anthologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433548" start="11800" end="11815" title="Science Fiction (Australian magazine)" label="Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350146" start="11850" end="11865" title="Ejler Jakobsson" label="Ejler Jakobsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q48876916" start="11919" end="11931" title="Anna Jackson" label="Anna Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355576" start="11947" end="11959" title="Toni Jerrman" label="Toni Jerrman"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="11995" end="12002" title="Finland" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5407645" start="12034" end="12047" title="Tähtivaeltaja" label="Tähtivaeltaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q6991800" start="12056" end="12069" title="Karl Johanson" label="Karl Johanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6991800" start="12119" end="12153" title="Neo-opsis Science Fiction Magazine" label="Neo-opsis Science Fiction Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q95092" start="12162" end="12174" title="Jane Johnson (writer, born 1960)" label="Jane Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12204" end="12218" title="Oliver Johnson (editor)" label="Oliver Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q14175176" start="12220" end="12242" title="Hodder &amp;amp; Stoughton" label="Hodder &amp;amp; Stoughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4160428" start="12245" end="12258" title="Stephen Jones (author)" label="Stephen Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q625272" start="12301" end="12312" title="S. T. Joshi" label="S. T. Joshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8191787" start="12394" end="12408" title="Michael Kandel" label="Michael Kandel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5654997" start="12446" end="12454" title="Harcourt (publisher)" label="Harcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q181659" start="12462" end="12479" title="Ursula K. Le Guin" label="Ursula K. Le Guin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778397" start="12494" end="12505" title="Marvin Kaye" label="Marvin Kaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628458" start="12559" end="12600" title="H. P. Lovecraft&amp;#x27;s Magazine of Horror" label="H. P. Lovecraft&amp;#x27;s Magazine of Horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369735" start="12609" end="12621" title="Gérard Klein" label="Gérard Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q534599" start="12656" end="12668" title="Damon Knight" label="Damon Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100032" start="12706" end="12711" title="Orbit (anthology series)" label="Orbit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12751" end="12759" title="Jak Koke" label="Jak Koke"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12815" end="12831" title="Per Aspera Press" label="Per Aspera Press"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12834" end="12851" title="Sean CW Korsgaard" label="Sean CW Korsgaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q799732" start="12888" end="12898" title="Baen Books" label="Baen Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342699" start="12901" end="12917" title="Edward E. Kramer" label="Edward E. Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12960" end="12977" title="Alisa Krasnostein" label="Alisa Krasnostein"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13034" end="13054" title="Twelfth Planet Press" label="Twelfth Planet Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q713527" start="13057" end="13069" title="Péter Kuczka" label="Péter Kuczka"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="13089" end="13098" title="Hungary" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q430921" start="13115" end="13124" title="Galaktika" label="Galaktika"/>
<link wikidata="Q551929" start="13143" end="13153" title="David Kyle" label="David Kyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5574338" start="13180" end="13191" title="Gnome Press" label="Gnome Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q720787" start="13202" end="13216" title="David Langford" label="David Langford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701769" start="13258" end="13269" title="John Sladek" label="John Sladek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099499" start="13287" end="13322" title="The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction" label="The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6213671" start="13344" end="13353" title="Joel Lane" label="Joel Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970340" start="13456" end="13469" title="Warren Lapine" label="Warren Lapine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13565" end="13578" title="Denise Little" label="Denise Little"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680150" start="13615" end="13634" title="Martin H. Greenberg" label="Martin H. Greenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q16121664" start="13637" end="13649" title="Pat LoBrutto" label="Pat LoBrutto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647037" start="13689" end="13698" title="Tor Books" label="Tor Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609948" start="13714" end="13726" title="Bantam Books" label="Bantam Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q536795" start="13731" end="13740" title="Ace Books" label="Ace Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q15976259" start="13743" end="13763" title="Robert A. W. Lowndes" label="Robert A. W. Lowndes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510759" start="13797" end="13819" title="Future Science Fiction" label="Future Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510759" start="13833" end="13848" title="Science Fiction (American magazine)" label="Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433540" start="13866" end="13891" title="Science Fiction Quarterly" label="Science Fiction Quarterly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430446" start="13900" end="13917" title="Richard A. Lupoff" label="Richard A. Lupoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5226166" start="13956" end="13972" title="Daryl F. Mallett" label="Daryl F. Mallett"/>
<link wikidata="Q113554" start="14239" end="14256" title="Barry N. Malzberg" label="Barry N. Malzberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="14291" end="14302" title="anthologist" label="anthologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7027498" start="14305" end="14317" title="Nick Mamatas" label="Nick Mamatas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524032" start="14436" end="14449" title="Leo Margulies" label="Leo Margulies"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="14467" end="14478" title="anthologist" label="anthologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706756" start="14496" end="14520" title="Thrilling Wonder Stories" label="Thrilling Wonder Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q559324" start="14534" end="14548" title="Captain Future" label="Captain Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229855" start="14562" end="14579" title="Startling Stories" label="Startling Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q865585" start="14602" end="14616" title="pulp magazines" label="pulp magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3265813" start="14619" end="14634" title="Shawna McCarthy" label="Shawna McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="14652" end="14663" title="anthologist" label="anthologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301351" start="14681" end="14698" title="Realms of Fantasy" label="Realms of Fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q144949" start="14722" end="14766" title="Isaac Asimov&amp;#x27;s Science Fiction Magazine" label="Isaac Asimov&amp;#x27;s Science Fiction Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5923872" start="14785" end="14803" title="J. Francis McComas" label="J. Francis McComas"/>
<link wikidata="Q937202" start="14849" end="14894" title="The Magazine of Fantasy &amp;amp; Science Fiction" label="The Magazine of Fantasy &amp;amp; Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043271" start="14916" end="14932" title="Harriet McDougal" label="Harriet McDougal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647037" start="14976" end="14985" title="Tor Books" label="Tor Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q536795" start="15016" end="15025" title="Ace Books" label="Ace Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q166351" start="15042" end="15055" title="Robert Jordan" label="Robert Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897585" start="15059" end="15071" title="Beth Meacham" label="Beth Meacham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647037" start="15106" end="15115" title="Tor Books" label="Tor Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q536795" start="15141" end="15150" title="Ace Books" label="Ace Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q276304" start="15163" end="15176" title="Judith Merril" label="Judith Merril"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407909" start="15269" end="15284" title="Sam Merwin, Jr." label="Sam Merwin, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q3739352" start="15318" end="15336" title="Fantastic Universe" label="Fantastic Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007573" start="15353" end="15359" title="Galaxy Science Fiction" label="Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046721" start="15368" end="15383" title="Robert P. Mills" label="Robert P. Mills"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15419" end="15431" title="Samuel Mines" label="Samuel Mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229855" start="15465" end="15482" title="Startling Stories" label="Startling Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706756" start="15499" end="15523" title="Thrilling Wonder Stories" label="Thrilling Wonder Stories"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15545" end="15553" title="Jim Minz" label="Jim Minz"/>
<link wikidata="Q799732" start="15569" end="15579" title="Baen Books" label="Baen Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647037" start="15598" end="15607" title="Tor Books" label="Tor Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562301" start="15612" end="15625" title="Del Rey Books" label="Del Rey Books"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15628" end="15651" title="Betsy Mitchell (editor)" label="Betsy Mitchell (editor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562301" start="15676" end="15689" title="Del Rey Books" label="Del Rey Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q799732" start="15708" end="15718" title="Baen Books" label="Baen Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609948" start="15720" end="15732" title="Bantam Books" label="Bantam Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567078" start="15738" end="15751" title="Warner Aspect" label="Warner Aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q316138" start="15754" end="15770" title="Michael Moorcock" label="Michael Moorcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027727" start="15818" end="15828" title="New Worlds (magazine)" label="New Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q725065" start="15859" end="15871" title="James Morrow" label="James Morrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="15889" end="15900" title="anthologist" label="anthologist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15965" end="15976" title="Darren Nash" label="Darren Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355196" start="16010" end="16021" title="Orbit Books" label="Orbit Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756332" start="16040" end="16060" title="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster" label="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16066" end="16082" title="Gabriella Nemeth" label="Gabriella Nemeth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16099" end="16109" title="Atom Books" label="Atom Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q552959" start="16122" end="16135" title="Little, Brown" label="Little, Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4767817" start="16139" end="16153" title="Annalee Newitz" label="Annalee Newitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q575871" start="16184" end="16187" title="io9" label="io9"/>
<link wikidata="Q7147331" start="16190" end="16212" title="Patrick Nielsen Hayden" label="Patrick Nielsen Hayden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647037" start="16260" end="16269" title="Tor Books" label="Tor Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q16928353" start="16287" end="16296" title="Starlight (anthology series)" label="Starlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7702190" start="16331" end="16352" title="Teresa Nielsen Hayden" label="Teresa Nielsen Hayden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647037" start="16417" end="16426" title="Tor Books" label="Tor Books"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16429" end="16443" title="Raimo Nikkonen" label="Raimo Nikkonen"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="16470" end="16477" title="Finland" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232528" start="16509" end="16515" title="Portti" label="Portti"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16524" end="16536" title="Kate Nintzel" label="Kate Nintzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="16572" end="16585" title="HarperCollins" label="HarperCollins"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16589" end="16598" title="Scot Noel" label="Scot Noel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039227" start="16635" end="16645" title="Dreamforge" label="Dreamforge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490520" start="16649" end="16664" title="Sharyn November" label="Sharyn November"/>
<link wikidata="Q921536" start="16687" end="16715" title="Viking Press" label="Viking Children&amp;#x27;s Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451731" start="16742" end="16756" title="Firebird Books" label="Firebird Books"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16766" end="16783" title="John O&amp;#x27;Neill (editor)" label="John O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544665" start="16796" end="16803" title="SF Site" label="SF Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666226" start="16824" end="16834" title="Black Gate (magazine)" label="Black Gate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16843" end="16853" title="John Oakes (editor and publisher)" label="John Oakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4046698" start="16887" end="16913" title="Thunder&amp;#x27;s Mouth Press" label="Thunder&amp;#x27;s Mouth Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q5475605" start="16918" end="16942" title="Four Walls Eight Windows" label="Four Walls Eight Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q325664" start="16945" end="16961" title="Andrew J. Offutt" label="Andrew J. Offutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6274057" start="16989" end="17017" title="Jonathan Oliver (publishing)" label="Jonathan Oliver (publishing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6241229" start="17041" end="17056" title="John J. Ordover" label="John J. Ordover"/>
<link wikidata="Q7206385" start="17075" end="17087" title="Pocket Books" label="Pocket Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092" start="17111" end="17120" title="Star Trek" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17149" end="17161" title="Phobos Books" label="Phobos Books"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17171" end="17182" title="Bella Pagan" label="Bella Pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355196" start="17206" end="17217" title="Orbit Books" label="Orbit Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025311" start="17235" end="17252" title="Raymond A. Palmer" label="Raymond A. Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q991271" start="17298" end="17313" title="Amazing Stories" label="Amazing Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q123620984" start="17333" end="17346" title="Anne C. Perry" label="Anne C. Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q14175176" start="17348" end="17370" title="Hodder &amp;amp; Stoughton" label="Hodder &amp;amp; Stoughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7357637" start="17373" end="17383" title="Rog Peyton" label="Rog Peyton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6241255" start="17539" end="17553" title="John J. Pierce" label="John J. Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007573" start="17587" end="17609" title="Galaxy Science Fiction" label="Galaxy Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17629" end="17640" title="Devi Pillai" label="Devi Pillai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647037" start="17642" end="17651" title="Tor Books" label="Tor Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q312641" start="17654" end="17667" title="Frederik Pohl" label="Frederik Pohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007573" start="17706" end="17712" title="Galaxy Science Fiction" label="Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382305" start="17729" end="17731" title="If (magazine)" label="If"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17771" end="17791" title="Star Science Fiction" label="Star Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757383" start="17843" end="17859" title="Andrew I. Porter" label="Andrew I. Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5938762" start="17894" end="17919" title="Science Fiction Chronicle" label="Science Fiction Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018628" start="17943" end="17955" title="Byron Preiss" label="Byron Preiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818247" start="18050" end="18063" title="David Pringle" label="David Pringle"/>
<link wikidata="Q507109" start="18116" end="18125" title="Interzone (magazine)" label="Interzone"/>
<link wikidata="Q862387" start="18144" end="18157" title="Bill Pronzini" label="Bill Pronzini"/>
<link wikidata="Q113554" start="18204" end="18221" title="Barry N. Malzberg" label="Barry N. Malzberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680150" start="18229" end="18248" title="Martin H. Greenberg" label="Martin H. Greenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137646" start="18260" end="18274" title="James L. Quinn (editor)" label="James L. Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382305" start="18292" end="18294" title="If (magazine)" label="If"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18324" end="18333" title="Eric Raab" label="Eric Raab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647037" start="18343" end="18352" title="Tor Books" label="Tor Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051056" start="18355" end="18364" title="Cat Rambo" label="Cat Rambo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434310" start="18395" end="18411" title="Fantasy Magazine (2005)" label="Fantasy Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18420" end="18436" title="Gillian Redfearn" label="Gillian Redfearn"/>
<link wikidata="Q913403" start="18449" end="18461" title="Mike Resnick" label="Mike Resnick"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="18479" end="18490" title="anthologist" label="anthologist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18493" end="18504" title="Lezli Robyn" label="Lezli Robyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="18600" end="18611" title="anthologist" label="anthologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q106762639" start="18614" end="18634" title="Christopher Ruocchio" label="Christopher Ruocchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q799732" start="18646" end="18656" title="Baen Books" label="Baen Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q446973" start="18659" end="18681" title="Kristine Kathryn Rusch" label="Kristine Kathryn Rusch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259592" start="18715" end="18724" title="Pulphouse Publishing" label="Pulphouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q937202" start="18741" end="18786" title="The Magazine of Fantasy &amp;amp; Science Fiction" label="The Magazine of Fantasy &amp;amp; Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18813" end="18825" title="Steve Saffel" label="Steve Saffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562301" start="18861" end="18874" title="Del Rey Books" label="Del Rey Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="18879" end="18892" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800570" start="18895" end="18909" title="Arthur W. Saha" label="Arthur W. Saha"/>
<link wikidata="Q908589" start="18962" end="18980" title="Donald A. Wollheim" label="Donald A. Wollheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q453835" start="18983" end="18997" title="Pamela Sargent" label="Pamela Sargent"/>
<link wikidata="Q24952369" start="19012" end="19027" title="Women of Wonder" label="Women of Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q28419278" start="19051" end="19073" title="Nebula Awards Showcase" label="Nebula Awards Showcase"/>
<link wikidata="Q71804" start="19092" end="19111" title="K. H. Scheer" label="Karl-Herbert Scheer"/>
<link wikidata="Q753209" start="19168" end="19180" title="Perry Rhodan" label="Perry Rhodan"/>
<link wikidata="Q71309" start="19193" end="19208" title="Walter Ernsting" label="Walter Ernsting"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19211" end="19222" title="Liz Scheier" label="Liz Scheier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19262" end="19283" title="Christopher Schelling" label="Christopher Schelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646621" start="19323" end="19332" title="Roc Books" label="Roc Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q5663423" start="19337" end="19348" title="HarperPrism" label="HarperPrism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19351" end="19364" title="Chris Schluep" label="Chris Schluep"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562301" start="19380" end="19393" title="Del Rey Books" label="Del Rey Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q62732111" start="19396" end="19416" title="Bryan Thomas Schmidt" label="Bryan Thomas Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q720779" start="19475" end="19490" title="Stanley Schmidt" label="Stanley Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q42345" start="19538" end="19569" title="Analog Science Fiction and Fact" label="Analog Science Fiction and Fact"/>
<link wikidata="Q628482" start="19589" end="19607" title="George H. Scithers" label="George H. Scithers"/>
<link wikidata="Q144949" start="19647" end="19691" title="Isaac Asimov&amp;#x27;s Science Fiction Magazine" label="Isaac Asimov&amp;#x27;s Science Fiction Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q991271" start="19722" end="19737" title="Amazing Stories" label="Amazing Stories"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19757" end="19771" title="Shelly Shapiro" label="Shelly Shapiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881141" start="19798" end="19808" title="Ballantine Books" label="Ballantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562301" start="19809" end="19816" title="Del Rey Books" label="Del Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5475462" start="19819" end="19829" title="Larry Shaw (editor)" label="Larry Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097045" start="19859" end="19883" title="Infinity Science Fiction" label="Infinity Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382305" start="19897" end="19908" title="If (magazine)" label="If magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483671" start="19919" end="19931" title="Lancer Books" label="Lancer Books"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19934" end="19944" title="Mike Shohl" label="Mike Shohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="19978" end="19991" title="HarperCollins" label="HarperCollins"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19994" end="20009" title="John Silbersack" label="John Silbersack"/>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="20092" end="20105" title="HarperCollins" label="HarperCollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q18150392" start="20107" end="20119" title="Warner Books" label="Warner Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646621" start="20121" end="20124" title="Roc Books" label="Roc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2753848" start="20129" end="20136" title="Berkley Books" label="Berkley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614786" start="20139" end="20154" title="Steven H Silver" label="Steven H Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680150" start="20194" end="20213" title="Martin H. Greenberg" label="Martin H. Greenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973860" start="20233" end="20244" title="ISFiC Press" label="ISFiC Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q314553" start="20247" end="20264" title="Robert Silverberg" label="Robert Silverberg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20395" end="20412" title="Janna Silverstein" label="Janna Silverstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609948" start="20439" end="20446" title="Bantam Books" label="Spectra"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245301" start="20474" end="20486" title="Kobold Press" label="Kobold Press"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20529" end="20547" title="Melissa Ann Singer" label="Melissa Ann Singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647037" start="20561" end="20570" title="Tor Books" label="Tor/Forge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6163492" start="20609" end="20623" title="Jason Sizemore (editor)" label="Jason Sizemore"/>
<link wikidata="Q260665" start="20669" end="20680" title="Apex Digest" label="Apex Digest"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="20688" end="20699" title="anthologist" label="anthologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965713" start="20740" end="20762" title="T. O&amp;#x27;Conor Sloane" label="T. O&amp;#x27;Conor Sloane"/>
<link wikidata="Q991271" start="20796" end="20811" title="Amazing Stories" label="Amazing Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q5538834" start="20832" end="20852" title="George Edgar Slusser" label="George Edgar Slusser"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20915" end="20927" title="Anne Sowards" label="Anne Sowards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646621" start="20954" end="20963" title="Roc Books" label="Roc Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q536795" start="20968" end="20977" title="Ace Books" label="Ace Books"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20980" end="20993" title="Simon Spanton" label="Simon Spanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q861799" start="21024" end="21029" title="Orion Publishing Group" label="Orion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522363" start="21030" end="21038" title="Victor Gollancz Ltd" label="Gollancz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053975" start="21045" end="21060" title="Catriona Sparks" label="Catriona Sparks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693321" start="21104" end="21115" title="Agog! Press" label="Agog! Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q6685780" start="21118" end="21129" title="Lou Stathis" label="Lou Stathis"/>
<link wikidata="Q654659" start="21159" end="21170" title="Heavy Metal (magazine)" label="Heavy Metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q122669" start="21209" end="21216" title="Vertigo Comics" label="Vertigo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21224" end="21236" title="Paul Stevens (editor)" label="Paul Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647037" start="21252" end="21255" title="Tor Books" label="Tor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108217" start="21256" end="21267" title="Forge Books" label="Forge Books"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21270" end="21279" title="Amy Stout" label="Amy Stout"/>
<link wikidata="Q6274539" start="21366" end="21382" title="Jonathan Strahan" label="Jonathan Strahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6709382" start="21476" end="21491" title="Lynne M. Thomas" label="Lynne M. Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q260665" start="21513" end="21524" title="Apex Digest" label="Apex Digest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329442" start="21560" end="21574" title="Richard Thomas (author)" label="Richard Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21596" end="21610" title="Gamut Magazine" label="Gamut Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494803" start="21640" end="21653" title="Sheree Thomas" label="Sheree Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5223315" start="21679" end="21690" title="Dark_Matter_(prose_anthologies)" label="Dark Matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q937202" start="21735" end="21780" title="The Magazine of Fantasy &amp;amp; Science Fiction" label="The Magazine of Fantasy &amp;amp; Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965466" start="21789" end="21802" title="Brian Thomsen" label="Brian Thomsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647037" start="21842" end="21851" title="Tor Books" label="Tor Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646630" start="21871" end="21880" title="DAW Books" label="DAW Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q18150392" start="21885" end="21897" title="Warner Books" label="Warner Books"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21900" end="21912" title="Roy Torgeson" label="Roy Torgeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062960" start="22005" end="22022" title="F. Orlin Tremaine" label="F. Orlin Tremaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q42345" start="22056" end="22082" title="Astounding Science Fiction" label="Astounding Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22101" end="22118" title="Liza Groen Trombi (editor)" label="Liza Groen Trombi"/>
<link wikidata="Q963987" start="22146" end="22164" title="Locus Publications" label="Locus Publications"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22167" end="22178" title="Gary Turner (editor)" label="Gary Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579530" start="22206" end="22226" title="Golden Gryphon Press" label="Golden Gryphon Press"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22236" end="22248" title="Juliet Ulman" label="Juliet Ulman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857181" start="22277" end="22291" title="Bantam Spectra" label="Bantam Spectra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389424" start="22388" end="22405" title="Gordon Van Gelder" label="Gordon Van Gelder"/>
<link wikidata="Q937202" start="22478" end="22523" title="The Magazine of Fantasy &amp;amp; Science Fiction" label="The Magazine of Fantasy &amp;amp; Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445044" start="22541" end="22564" title="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Press" label="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766726" start="22578" end="22592" title="Ann VanderMeer" label="Ann VanderMeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136124" start="22614" end="22625" title="Weird Tales" label="Weird Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038440" start="22675" end="22690" title="Jeff VanderMeer" label="Jeff VanderMeer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22765" end="22789" title="Ministry of Whimsy Press" label="Ministry of Whimsy Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441515" start="22814" end="22826" title="Sean Wallace" label="Sean Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441515" start="22868" end="22879" title="Prime Books" label="Prime Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661080" start="22905" end="22916" title="small press" label="small press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821356" start="22930" end="22944" title="Toni Weisskopf" label="Toni Weisskopf"/>
<link wikidata="Q799732" start="22975" end="22985" title="Baen Books" label="Baen Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177665" start="23041" end="23053" title="Peter Weston" label="Peter Weston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6145872" start="23243" end="23252" title="Ted White (author)" label="Ted White"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434174" start="23293" end="23302" title="Fantastic (magazine)" label="Fantastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q991271" start="23316" end="23331" title="Amazing Stories" label="Amazing Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q654659" start="23348" end="23359" title="Heavy Metal (magazine)" label="Heavy Metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154386" start="23381" end="23394" title="Paul Williams (Crawdaddy)" label="Paul Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q171091" start="23452" end="23466" title="Philip K. Dick" label="Philip K. Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q240253" start="23471" end="23488" title="Theodore Sturgeon" label="Theodore Sturgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493174" start="23491" end="23506" title="Sheila Williams" label="Sheila Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q144949" start="23537" end="23566" title="Asimov&amp;#x27;s Science Fiction" label="Asimov&amp;#x27;s Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518754" start="23635" end="23649" title="Terri Windling" label="Terri Windling"/>
<link wikidata="Q536795" start="23677" end="23686" title="Ace Books" label="Ace Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647037" start="23722" end="23731" title="Tor Books" label="Tor Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q39334343" start="23833" end="23847" title="Betsy Wollheim" label="Betsy Wollheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646630" start="23891" end="23900" title="DAW Books" label="DAW Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q908589" start="23935" end="23953" title="Donald A. Wollheim" label="Donald A. Wollheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q536795" start="23996" end="24005" title="Ace Books" label="Ace Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646630" start="24024" end="24033" title="DAW Books" label="DAW Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394387" start="24044" end="24054" title="Jane Yolen" label="Jane Yolen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5654997" start="24143" end="24157" title="Harcourt Brace" label="Harcourt Brace"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24285" end="24298" title="Brian Youmans" label="Brian Youmans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661080" start="24337" end="24348" title="small press" label="small press"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24368" end="24387" title="Angela Yuriko Smith" label="Angela Yuriko Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572560" start="24406" end="24429" title="Space and Time Magazine" label="Space and Time Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q194105" start="24446" end="24453" title="Editing" label="Editing"/>
<link wikidata="Q848452" start="24456" end="24465" title="Futurians" label="Futurians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723651" start="24468" end="24491" title="List of fantasy authors" label="List of fantasy authors"/>
<link wikidata="Q287925" start="24494" end="24524" title="List of horror fiction authors" label="List of horror fiction authors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136807" start="24527" end="24558" title="List of science fiction authors" label="List of science fiction authors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085171" start="24561" end="24583" title="Science fiction fandom" label="Science fiction fandom"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29525" wikidata="Q50706" url="?curid=29525" title="Square-free integer">
<text>In mathematics, a square-free integer (or squarefree integer) is an integer which is divisible by no square number other than 1. That is, its prime factorization has exactly one factor for each prime that appears in it. For example, is square-free, but is not, because 18 is divisible by . The smallest positive square-free numbers are
==Square-free factorization==
Every positive integer formula_1 can be factored in a unique way as
formula_2
where the formula_3 different from one are square-free integers that are pairwise coprime.
This is called the &quot;square-free factorization&quot; of .

To construct the square-free factorization, let
formula_4 
be the prime factorization of formula_1, where the formula_6 are distinct prime numbers. Then the factors of the square-free factorization are defined as 
formula_7

An integer is square-free if and only if formula_8 for all formula_9. An integer greater than one is the formula_10th power of another integer if and only if formula_10 is a divisor of all formula_12 such that formula_13

The use of the square-free factorization of integers is limited by the fact that its computation is as difficult as the computation of the prime factorization. More precisely every known algorithm for computing a square-free factorization computes also the prime factorization. This is a notable difference with the case of polynomials for which the same definitions can be given, but, in this case, the square-free factorization is not only easier to compute than the complete factorization, but it is the first step of all standard factorization algorithms.

==Square-free factors of integers==
The radical of an integer is its largest square-free factor, that is formula_14 with notation of the preceding section. An integer is square-free if and only if it is equal to its radical.

Every positive integer formula_1 can be represented in a unique way as the product of a powerful number (that is an integer such that is divisible by the square of every prime factor) and a square-free integer, which are coprime. In this factorization, the square-free factor is formula_16 and the powerful number is formula_17

The &quot;square-free part&quot; of formula_1 is formula_16 which is the largest square-free divisor formula_10 of formula_1 that is coprime with formula_22. The square-free part of an integer may be smaller than the largest square-free divisor, which is formula_23

Any arbitrary positive integer formula_1 can be represented in a unique way as the product of a square and a square-free integer:
formula_25
In this factorization, formula_26 is the largest divisor of formula_1 such that formula_28 is a divisor of formula_1.

In summary, there are three square-free factors that are naturally associated to every integer: the square-free part, the above factor formula_10, and the largest square-free factor. Each is a factor of the next one. All are easily deduced from the prime factorization or the square-free factorization: if
formula_31
are the prime factorization and the square-free factorization of formula_1, where formula_33 are distinct prime numbers, then the square-free part is
formula_34
The square-free factor such the quotient is a square is 
formula_35
and the largest square-free factor is 
formula_36

For example, if formula_37 one has formula_38 The square-free part is , the square-free factor such that the quotient is a square is , and the largest square-free factor is .

No algorithm is known for computing any of these square-free factors which is faster than computing the complete prime factorization. In particular, there is no known polynomial-time algorithm for computing the square-free part of an integer, or even for determining whether an integer is square-free. In contrast, polynomial-time algorithms are known for primality testing. This is a major difference between the arithmetic of the integers, and the arithmetic of the univariate polynomials, as polynomial-time algorithms are known for square-free factorization of polynomials (in short, the largest square-free factor of a polynomial is its quotient by the greatest common divisor of the polynomial and its formal derivative).

==Equivalent characterizations==
A positive integer formula_1 is square-free if and only if in the prime factorization of formula_1, no prime factor occurs with an exponent larger than one. Another way of stating the same is that for every prime factor formula_41 of formula_1, the prime formula_41 does not evenly divide formula_44. Also formula_1 is square-free if and only if in every factorization formula_46, the factors formula_47 and formula_48 are coprime. An immediate result of this definition is that all prime numbers are square-free.

A positive integer formula_1 is square-free if and only if all abelian groups of order formula_1 are isomorphic, which is the case if and only if any such group is cyclic. This follows from the classification of finitely generated abelian groups.

A integer formula_1 is square-free if and only if the factor ring formula_52 (see modular arithmetic) is a product of fields. This follows from the Chinese remainder theorem and the fact that a ring of the form formula_53 is a field if and only if formula_10 is prime.

For every positive integer formula_1, the set of all positive divisors of formula_1 becomes a partially ordered set if we use divisibility as the order relation. This partially ordered set is always a distributive lattice. It is a Boolean algebra if and only if formula_1 is square-free.

A positive integer formula_1 is square-free if and only if formula_59, where formula_60 denotes the Möbius function.

==Dirichlet series==
The absolute value of the Möbius function is the indicator function for the square-free integers – that is, is equal to 1 if is square-free, and 0 if it is not. The Dirichlet series of this indicator function is
:formula_61
where is the Riemann zeta function. This follows from the Euler product
:formula_62
where the products are taken over the prime numbers.

==Distribution==
Let &quot;Q&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) denote the number of square-free integers between 1 and &quot;x&quot; ( shifting index by 1). For large &quot;n&quot;, 3/4 of the positive integers less than &quot;n&quot; are not divisible by 4, 8/9 of these numbers are not divisible by 9, and so on. Because these ratios satisfy the multiplicative property (this follows from Chinese remainder theorem), we obtain the approximation:

:formula_63

This argument can be made rigorous for getting the estimate (using big O notation)

:formula_64

&quot;Sketch of a proof:&quot; the above characterization gives
:formula_65
observing that the last summand is zero for formula_66, it follows that

 \mu(d)\left\lfloor\frac{x}{d^2}\right\rfloor&lt;/math&gt;|}}

:formula_67

By exploiting the largest known zero-free region of the Riemann zeta function Arnold Walfisz improved the approximation to
:formula_68
for some positive constant .

Under the Riemann hypothesis, the error term can be reduced to
:formula_69

In 2015 the error term was further reduced (assuming also Riemann hypothesis) to

:formula_70

The asymptotic/natural density of square-free numbers is therefore

:formula_71

Therefore over 3/5 of the integers are square-free.

Likewise, if &quot;Q&quot;(&quot;x&quot;,&quot;n&quot;) denotes the number of &quot;n&quot;-free integers (e.g. 3-free integers being cube-free integers) between 1 and &quot;x&quot;, one can show
:formula_72

Since a multiple of 4 must have a square factor 4=22, it cannot occur that four consecutive integers are all square-free. On the other hand, there exist infinitely many integers &quot;n&quot; for which 4&quot;n&quot; +1, 4&quot;n&quot; +2, 4&quot;n&quot; +3 are all square-free. Otherwise, observing that 4&quot;n&quot; and at least one of 4&quot;n&quot; +1, 4&quot;n&quot; +2, 4&quot;n&quot; +3 among four could be non-square-free for sufficiently large &quot;n&quot;, half of all positive integers minus finitely many must be non-square-free and therefore
:formula_73 for some constant &quot;C&quot;,
contrary to the above asymptotic estimate for formula_74.

There exist sequences of consecutive non-square-free integers of arbitrary length. Indeed, for every tuple of distinct primes, the Chinese remainder theorem guarantees the existence of an that satisfies the simultaneous congruence
:formula_75
Each is then divisible by . On the other hand, the above-mentioned estimate formula_76 implies that, for some constant &quot;c&quot;, there always exists a square-free integer between &quot;x&quot; and formula_77 for positive &quot;x&quot;. Moreover, an elementary argument allows us to replace formula_77 by formula_79 The &quot;abc&quot; conjecture would allow formula_80.

=== Computation of ===
The squarefree integers can be identified and counted in time by using a modified Sieve of Eratosthenes. If only is desired, and not a list of the numbers that it counts, then () can be used to compute in time. The largest known value of , for , was computed by Jakub Pawlewicz in 2011 using an algorithm that achieves time, and an algorithm taking time has been outlined but not implemented.

===Table of &quot;Q&quot;(&quot;x&quot;), &quot;x&quot;, and &quot;R&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) ===

The table shows how formula_81 and formula_82 (with the latter rounded to one decimal place) compare at powers of 10.

formula_83 , also denoted as formula_84.
formula_85 changes its sign infinitely often as formula_86 tends to infinity.

The absolute value of formula_85 is astonishingly small compared with formula_86.

==Encoding as binary numbers==
If we represent a square-free number as the infinite product

:formula_89

then we may take those formula_90 and use them as bits in a binary number with the encoding

:formula_91

The square-free number 42 has factorization , or as an infinite product Thus the number 42 may be encoded as the binary sequence codice_1 or 11 decimal. (The binary digits are reversed from the ordering in the infinite product.)

Since the prime factorization of every number is unique, so also is every binary encoding of the square-free integers.

The converse is also true. Since every positive integer has a unique binary representation it is possible to reverse this encoding so that they may be decoded into a unique square-free integer.

Again, for example, if we begin with the number 42, this time as simply a positive integer, we have its binary representation codice_2. This decodes to 

Thus binary encoding of squarefree numbers describes a bijection between the nonnegative integers and the set of positive squarefree integers.

(See sequences , and in the OEIS.)

==Erdős squarefree conjecture==
The central binomial coefficient

: formula_92

is never squarefree for &quot;n&quot; &gt; 4. This was proven in 1985 for all sufficiently large integers by András Sárközy, and for all integers &gt; 4 in 1996 by Olivier Ramaré and Andrew Granville.

==Squarefree core==
Let us call &quot;&quot;t&quot;-free&quot; a positive integer that has no &quot;t&quot;-th power in its divisors. In particular, the 2-free integers are the square-free integers.

The multiplicative function formula_93 maps every positive integer &quot;n&quot; to the quotient of &quot;n&quot; by its largest divisor that is a &quot;t&quot;-th power. That is, 
: formula_94

The integer formula_93 is &quot;t&quot;-free, and every &quot;t&quot;-free integer is mapped to itself by the function formula_96

The Dirichlet generating function of the sequence formula_97 is
: formula_98.

See also (&quot;t&quot;=2), (&quot;t&quot;=3) and (&quot;t&quot;=4).

== Notes ==
== References ==
*
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q50706" start="18" end="37" title="Square-free integer" label="square-free integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q50706" start="42" end="60" title="Square-free integer" label="squarefree integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="68" end="75" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q50708" start="85" end="94" title="divisor" label="divisible"/>
<link wikidata="Q50705" start="101" end="114" title="square number" label="square number"/>
<link wikidata="Q4846249" start="142" end="161" title="prime factorization" label="prime factorization"/>
<link wikidata="Q104752" start="517" end="533" title="pairwise coprime" label="pairwise coprime"/>
<link wikidata="Q4846249" start="664" end="683" title="prime factorization" label="prime factorization"/>
<link wikidata="Q49008" start="731" end="743" title="prime number" label="prime number"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="1232" end="1241" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q43260" start="1369" end="1379" title="polynomial" label="polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581979" start="1449" end="1474" title="square-free factorization" label="square-free factorization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498974" start="1646" end="1667" title="radical of an integer" label="radical of an integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q949972" start="1788" end="1802" title="if and only if" label="if and only if"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191171" start="1920" end="1935" title="powerful number" label="powerful number"/>
<link wikidata="Q104752" start="2053" end="2060" title="coprime" label="coprime"/>
<link wikidata="Q164" start="2524" end="2530" title="square" label="square"/>
<link wikidata="Q4846249" start="2937" end="2956" title="prime factorization" label="prime factorization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393193" start="3628" end="3643" title="polynomial-time" label="polynomial-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q3262192" start="3716" end="3727" title="decision problem" label="determining"/>
<link wikidata="Q829546" start="3817" end="3834" title="primality testing" label="primality testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q43260" start="3929" end="3950" title="univariate polynomial" label="univariate polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581979" start="3997" end="4022" title="square-free factorization" label="square-free factorization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226640" start="4119" end="4142" title="polynomial greatest common divisor" label="greatest common divisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955819" start="4169" end="4186" title="formal derivative" label="formal derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q670235" start="4289" end="4308" title="canonical representation of a positive integer" label="prime factorization"/>
<link wikidata="Q50708" start="4436" end="4442" title="divisor" label="factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q104752" start="4646" end="4653" title="coprime" label="coprime"/>
<link wikidata="Q181296" start="4801" end="4814" title="abelian group" label="abelian group"/>
<link wikidata="Q589491" start="4819" end="4824" title="order (group theory)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q742064" start="4839" end="4849" title="group isomorphism" label="isomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q245462" start="4902" end="4908" title="cyclic group" label="cyclic"/>
<link wikidata="Q142140" start="4950" end="4982" title="finitely generated abelian group" label="finitely generated abelian group"/>
<link wikidata="Q619436" start="5040" end="5051" title="factor ring" label="factor ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q319400" start="5068" end="5086" title="modular arithmetic" label="modular arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406712" start="5093" end="5100" title="product of rings" label="product"/>
<link wikidata="Q190109" start="5104" end="5109" title="field (mathematics)" label="field"/>
<link wikidata="Q193878" start="5134" end="5159" title="Chinese remainder theorem" label="Chinese remainder theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q474715" start="5350" end="5371" title="partially ordered set" label="partially ordered set"/>
<link wikidata="Q50708" start="5382" end="5394" title="divisor" label="divisibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363730" start="5457" end="5477" title="distributive lattice" label="distributive lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973304" start="5487" end="5502" title="Boolean algebra (structure)" label="Boolean algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q949972" start="5589" end="5603" title="if and only if" label="if and only if"/>
<link wikidata="Q205243" start="5645" end="5660" title="Möbius function" label="Möbius function"/>
<link wikidata="Q371983" start="5733" end="5751" title="indicator function" label="indicator function"/>
<link wikidata="Q620595" start="5849" end="5865" title="Dirichlet series" label="Dirichlet series"/>
<link wikidata="Q187235" start="5921" end="5942" title="Riemann zeta function" label="Riemann zeta function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194667" start="5966" end="5979" title="Euler product" label="Euler product"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048447" start="6381" end="6404" title="multiplicative function" label="multiplicative property"/>
<link wikidata="Q193878" start="6424" end="6449" title="Chinese remainder theorem" label="Chinese remainder theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q269878" start="6562" end="6576" title="big O notation" label="big O notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q354609" start="6895" end="6909" title="Arnold Walfisz" label="Arnold Walfisz"/>
<link wikidata="Q205966" start="6992" end="7010" title="Riemann hypothesis" label="Riemann hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q752723" start="7168" end="7183" title="natural density" label="natural density"/>
<link wikidata="Q193878" start="8289" end="8314" title="Chinese remainder theorem" label="Chinese remainder theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q306393" start="8725" end="8751" title="abc conjecture" label="&amp;quot;abc&amp;quot; conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q177898" start="8882" end="8903" title="Sieve of Eratosthenes" label="Sieve of Eratosthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q180907" start="10577" end="10586" title="bijection" label="bijection"/>
<link wikidata="Q728415" start="10694" end="10698" title="On-Line Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences" label="OEIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045966" start="10738" end="10766" title="central binomial coefficient" label="central binomial coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q716211" start="10891" end="10905" title="András Sárközy" label="András Sárközy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3292746" start="10946" end="10960" title="Olivier Ramaré" label="Olivier Ramaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q504907" start="10965" end="10981" title="Andrew Granville" label="Andrew Granville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048447" start="11188" end="11211" title="multiplicative function" label="multiplicative function"/>
<link wikidata="Q860609" start="11514" end="11543" title="Dirichlet generating function" label="Dirichlet generating function"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29530" wikidata="Q782181" url="?curid=29530" title="Sentinel (comics)">
<text>The Sentinels are a group of mutant-hunting robots appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. They are typically depicted as antagonists to the X-Men.

The Sentinels played a large role in several &quot;X-Men&quot; animated series, and have been featured in several &quot;X-Men&quot; video games. The Sentinels are featured prominently in the 2014 film &quot;X-Men: Days of Future Past&quot;, and made brief appearances in the 2006 film &quot;X-Men: The Last Stand&quot; and the 2016 film &quot;X-Men: Apocalypse&quot;. In 2009, The Sentinels were ranked in &quot;IGN&quot; as the 38th Greatest Comic Book Villain of All Time.

==Publication history==

Created by Stan Lee and Jack Kirby, they first appeared in &quot;The X-Men&quot; #14 (Nov. 1965).

Sentinels are programmed to locate mutants and capture or kill them. Though several types of Sentinels have been introduced, the typical Sentinel is three stories tall, is capable of flight, projects energy blasts, and can detect mutants. Pursuing genocide as the means of dealing with a threat has made the Sentinels an analogy for racial hatred and other negative types of fanaticism in Marvel stories, represent the horrific consequences of humanity&#x27;s actions based on hate and ignorance, along with a caution of the risks of AI takeover.

==Characteristics==
Sentinels are designed to hunt mutants. While many are capable of tactical thought, only a handful are self-aware.

Sentinels are technologically advanced, and have exhibited a wide variety of abilities. They are armed (primarily with energy weapons and restraining devices), capable of flight, and can detect mutants at long range. They possess vast physical strength, and their bodies are highly resistant to damage. Some are able to alter their physical forms or re-assemble and reactivate themselves after they have been destroyed.

Some Sentinel variants have the ability to learn from their experiences, developing their defenses during an engagement. Several groups of Sentinels have been created or led by a single massive Sentinel called Master Mold. Some Sentinels are also equipped with an inconspicuous logic loop in case they should go rogue to convince them that they are mutants.

Because of their power, sophistication, and high mass production, Sentinels are sold on the black market. Entities obtain them—often in poor condition—for their own purposes (not necessarily mutant-related).

During the &quot;Iron Man 2020&quot; event, a Sentinel appears as a member of the A.I. Army.

==Types of Sentinels==
There are different types of Sentinels that appear in the comics:

* Mark I and Master Mold - Created by Bolivar Trask. First appeared in &quot;X-Men&quot; #14. Trask sacrificed himself to destroy the Master Mold.
* Mark II - Created by Larry Trask. This model was capable of adapting to and counteracting superpowers almost instantly. First appeared in &quot;X-Men&quot; #57.
**No.2, the robotic leader of Larry&#x27;s Sentinels, later &quot;mutated&quot; with the capability of creating space warps.
* Composite - Created by merging the remaining portions of five Sentinels destroyed by the X-Men and came under control of Ashley Martin. It rebelled against her and was subsequently destroyed.
* Mark III - Created by Stephen Lang and Project: Armageddon, secretly funded by Edward Buckman and the Council of the Chosen. Based on incomplete notes of Trask and inferior to Mark II. First appeared in &quot;X-Men&quot; #98.
** X-Sentinels - Created by Stephen Lang. They are androids who were duplicates of the original X-Men. First appeared in &quot;X-Men&quot; #99.
* Mark IV - Created by Sebastian Shaw. First appeared in &quot;The Uncanny X-Men&quot; #151.
* Mark V - Created by Shaw for U.S. government&#x27;s Project Wideawake. First appeared in &quot;The New Mutants&quot; #2.
* Mark VI - Created by Shaw Industries for Project Wideawake and used by Onslaught. Also incorporated parts of Project Nimrod.
* Mark VII - Created by Shaw Industries. They were experimental and remote controlled.
* Nimrod - A prototype Super Sentinel that arrived from the &quot;Days of Future Past&quot; timeline and was later reactivated by Reverend William Stryker.
** Project Nimrod - Created by an offshoot of Project Wideawake and was in the experimental stage, Project Nimrod was actually a self-awareness program that Nimrod implanted before its demise into the base&#x27;s military computer cybernet, the program served as a sleeper virus that awaited the opportunity to access a Sentinel development program so it could use it to re-create Nimrod itself. Cancelled after X-Force interfered.

* Prime Sentinels - Created by Bastion and &quot;&quot;. They were at first disabled humans infected with Nano-Sentinel technology at Prospero Clinic under the believe that they were being equipped with cybernetic nanotech implants to replace their lost limbs. Unbeknownst to many of them, they became sleeper agents for Operation: Zero Tolerance, as they would, upon activation by a mutant attack or near the presence of one, transformed into armored cyborg beings with powerful weapons systems.
** Omega Prime Sentinels - The second generation of Prime Sentinels. Often simply called Omega Sentinels, their nanotechnology is far afield&#x27;s in advancement to their brethren. Omega&#x27;s have an 8 step cycle of transformation they undergo before transmuting from full organic to complete machine entities; which are Infection, Nesting, Replication, Dormancy, Activation, Union, Adaptation and finally Omega. Karima Shapandar is one of them.
* Wild Sentinels - Built in secret by Master Mold in Ecuador, activated and used by Cassandra Nova for the genocide of Genosha.
* Mark VIII - Sentinel Squad O*N*E, designed by Stark Enterprises. Unlike other Sentinels, the Mark VIII requires a human pilot.
** T.O. Sentinels - An intended upgrade to the Squad O*N*E sentinels conceived of by director Robert Callahan, who sought to use techno-organic substance to increase the effectiveness of his Sentinel program. Failing in his first attempt he would get a second chance after obtaining the Warlock infected New Mutants to use as experimental fodder for further technoforming augmentation to his Sentinel Squad Armor unit.
* Bio-Sentinels - Human mutant corpse infected by a technological virus created by Kaga. They come with the innate capacity of weaponizing bio-technological apparati such as Brood designed missiles as a means of offense.
* Stark Sentinels MK I - The Stark Sentinels debuted during the &quot;AXIS&quot; storyline. Under the influence of the Red Skull (who also had erased from him any memory of their construction), Tony Stark created a model of Adamantium constructed Sentinels outfitted with Pym Particle technology with databases withholding knowledge of different super heroes he acquired after the 1st &quot;Civil War&quot; storyline. When Red Skull became the Red Onslaught, and the Avengers arrived to Genosha to stop him, he deployed the Stark Sentinels.
* Mother Mold - A self-aware and capable of adaptation Master Mold variant head designed to create &quot;Master Molds&quot; which in turn create Sentinels. Built in secrecy near the Sun by a human group called Project ORCHIS which is made up of various members of human organizations such as A.I.M., S.H.I.E.L.D., Hydra, Alpha Flight and others, once coming online, Mother Mold will lead directly to the creation of Nimrod, the ultimate nanotechnological Sentinel form.
** Nimrod the Hunter - Created in the modern era solely from contemporary technology and independent of its time-travelling counterparts by Dr. Alia Gregor on Orchis&#x27;s Mother Mold.
* X-Sentinels - Orchis&#x27; new era of Sentinel, which is a modern Sentinel created by Mister Sinister&#x27;s clone Doctor Stasis. He pulled this off by building over his gene-spliced animal/human Chimeras and used the many corpses of Wolverine to perfect a process and converting them into Sentinel units, combining Wolverine&#x27;s Adamantium skeleton and claws with the latest Sentinel casing and systems prove to be a lethal combination.
** Sentinel Zero - The first X-Sentinel to come online and built over the frame of Wolverine&#x27;s Adamantium Skeleton. In the end, Firestar incinerated Sentinel Zero&#x27;s Sentinel parts, leaving a smoking Wolverine skeleton.
* Stark Sentinel MK II - A new version of Stark Sentinel created by the anti-mutant industrialist Feilong after he embedded himself in the Stark Unlimited company and secretly funneled its resources in the construction of Sentinels based on the technology of the Iron Man Armor. Once Feilong publicly took control of the company, Iron Man investigated his movements and found out the first Stark Sentinel in the final process of assembly. Feilong had the robot come online to chase off Stark and herald his plans for mutantkind.
* Fireteam - A group of cyborg sentinels created by Larry Trask from the harvested nanites inside Juston Seyfert, to create human sentinels of his own. This led to the creation of a new Sentinel Program which he uses to track down and capture the world&#x27;s most dangerous mutants.
** Lockstep (Bradley Hansen)
** Voivod (Dragos Teodorescu)
** Sawtooth (Camila Rivera)
** Shellback (Michael Babineaux) 
** Drumfire (Patricia Pham)
* Bloodhounds - The Bloodhounds were captured wolves that were turned into sentinels to hunt mutants for the Graymalkin Prison.

===Related mutant-hunting creations===

* Tri-Sentinel - A giant-sized, six-armed, three-faced combination of three Sentinels created by Loki and acquired by the Life Foundation.
* Soviet Sentinels - Created by the Soviet Union and later purchased by Cuban government officials.
* Super-Sentinels - Using Nano-Sentinel technology, Weapon Plus created artificially evolved superhumans at &quot;The World&quot;. Three of the creations were chosen to form the mutant-hunting Super-Sentinels: Huntsman, Fantomex and Ultimaton, who were intended to be presented to the public as superheroes to make the extermination of mutantkind look &quot;like a Saturday morning cartoon&quot;.
* Colcord&#x27;s Sentinels - Some of the Boxbots created by Madison Jeffries (aka Box) to serve the Weapon X Program, run by Malcolm Colcord. In one variation of the &quot;Days of Future Past&quot; timeline seen in the &quot;Weapon X: Days of Future Now&quot; limited series, one of the Boxbots evolves into a new Master Mold and a new breed of Sentinels.
* Hardaway - A cyborg created at Camp Hayden, killed by the Mutant Liberation Front, who called himself a Bio-Sentinel.
* X-51 (Machine Man) - Captured by Bastion and &quot;infected&quot; with Prime Sentinel nano-bots which reconfigured and reconstructed his systems thereby giving him similar capabilities to Nimrod, such as adapting to almost any situation and programming that at times forced him to attack mutants. 
* Juston Seyfert&#x27;s Sentinel: First appearing in &quot;Sentinel&quot; #1, this is a rebuilt Sentinel (likely a Mark V or Mark VI), reprogrammed to obey Juston Seyfert. Initially, Seyfert controlled the Sentinel by riding on its shoulder; he now has built a cockpit into it. Seyfert and his Sentinel are former members of Avengers Academy and featured in &quot;Avengers Arena&quot;.
* Sentinaughts - One of the types of sentient robots who live in the free robot city of The Core, Sentinaughts are apparently based on the Sentinel design. They vary in size from roughly human to the large stature of traditional Sentinels.
* Nano-Sentinel - Microscopic Sentinel type of tech created by Cassandra Nova and implemented in various ways by other users. Moving within the body and attaching themselves to the brains of humans and mutants alike, turning them into mutant-hating assault drones with no self control. Ready to take down any mutant who so much as looks at them.
** An unknown form of human made Sentinels created by Simon Trask using a nanite based Sentinel Tech virus. The victims become anti-mutant activists who later, at Trask&#x27;s command, are fully transformed into lifeless robotic Sentinels mindlessly following Trask&#x27;s orders.
* Adamantium Cyborgs - Near-fully mechanical mutant hunter killers refitted by Weapon X with the titular metal as an endoskeleton using sentinel based nanotech. Coming in numerous alphabetical categorical batches, these bionic weapons can shed their skin revealing a murderous automaton with the abilities of various X-Men heroes and villains integrated into them.
* Core/Central Command - A biotech Master Mold variant behind the design parameters of the new Prime Sentinel&#x27;s.
* Box Sentinels - Smaller and faster Sentinels based on the Box technology created by a joint venture between Department H and Orchis to track down and capture mutants in Canada.

==Other versions==
The following are alternative versions of the Sentinels, which appear outside of regular Marvel canon.

===Age of Apocalypse===
In the &quot;Age of Apocalypse&quot; timeline, Bolivar Trask created the Sentinels with his wife Moira. These Sentinels are equipped with several body-mounted gun turrets, and their primary directive is to protect humans rather than to hunt mutants. They are capable of cooperating with mutants to further this mission. Later, the Sentinels are adapted by Weapon Omega to serve a reverse purpose, and now aid in the hunting of the human race.

===Days of Future Past===
In the &quot;Days of Future Past&quot; timeline, which takes place in an alternate future, the &quot;Omega Sentinels&quot; have advanced technologically and become the &quot;de facto&quot; rulers of the United States. The most powerful among them is Nimrod.

===Hembeck===
In the joke comic &quot;Fred Hembeck Destroys the Marvel Universe&quot;, the X-Men are killed by silent, black, man-sized &quot;Ninja Sentinels&quot;.

===Here Comes Tomorrow===
In the &quot;Here Comes Tomorrow&quot; future timeline, a Sentinel named Rover is Tom Skylark&#x27;s companion and protector. After more than 150 years of being active, Rover has become self-aware and, possibly, capable of emotion.

===House of M===
In the &quot;House of M&quot; storyline, Magneto is victorious in a mutant/human war. The Sentinels are adapted by Sebastian Shaw, now the director of S.H.I.E.L.D., to serve a reverse purpose, and now aid in the hunting of sapien rebels.

===MC2===
In the MC2 timeline, Wild Thing encounters a Prime Sentinel that has accidentally been activated by a faulty microwave.

===Ronin===
In the alternate reality of &quot;X-Men: Ronin&quot;, the story is played out in Japan. A police unit called &quot;Sentinel Force&quot; designs, builds and pilots the robots. These are aesthetically similar to regular Sentinels, but each is subtly different from the others.

===Star Trek===
In the comic crossover &quot;X-Men/Star Trek: Second Contact&quot;, the X-Men work with the crew of the &quot;Enterprise&quot;-E to battle Kang the Conqueror. An away team composed of Captain Picard, Deanna Troi, Nightcrawler and Colossus encounter an approximation of the &quot;Days of Future Past&quot; timeline, in which the Sentinels have merged with the Borg.

===Ultimate Marvel===
The &quot;Ultimate Marvel&quot; version of Sentinels were created by Bolivar Trask, were already in action in the &quot;Ultimate X-Men&quot; story arc, hunting down and killing mutants on the streets, in a program apparently openly and publicly acknowledged by the U.S. government. Later on, there were also the New Sentinels that were sixty of S.H.I.E.L.D.&#x27;s top agents in Sentinel battle armor and they were described to have enough hardware to take on a fleet of the old Sentinel models. A new breed of Sentinel robots, created by Trask under the Fenris twins&#x27; orders, was later created. After the events of the Ultimatum Wave, Nimrod Sentinels was deployed to hunt, capture or kill mutants that refused to turn themselves in. William Stryker, Jr., using Sentinel tech, later displayed an ability to summon a fleet of Sentinels after being attacked by the Shroud.

===What If?===
* In &quot;What If&quot;... Starring Cannonball&#x27;s little brother Josh—and his pet Sentinel&quot;, shows Josh (who would, in normal continuity, later become Icarus) finding and adopting a Sentinel.
* In &quot;What if... Starring Secret Wars: 25 Years Later&quot;, the children of Marvel heroes are teleported back to Earth where, sometime in the last 25 years, a variation of &quot;Days of Future Past&quot; is shown when the group is attacked by Sentinels.
* In &quot;What if... Starring Juggernaut: The Kingdom of Cain&quot;, Juggernaut has killed the X-Men, and as a result there is no one to oppose the Sentinels, so the world is ravaged by them until they are destroyed by Juggernaut.

==In other media==

===Television===
* A Sentinel appears in the &quot;Spider-Man and His Amazing Friends&quot; episode &quot;A Firestar Is Born&quot; in a flashback.
* The Sentinels appear in &quot;X-Men: The Animated Series&quot;, voiced by David Fox. Introduced in the first season, the Sentinel program was controlled by Bolivar Trask and Henry Peter Gyrich and was cancelled before being transferred to Genosha, with Master Mold constructed as the Sentinels&#x27; leader/mass-production unit. While the Sentinels are seemingly destroyed by Storm, a possible future depicts them as having taken over the world and successfully putting mutants on the verge of extinction. In the first season finale, Master Mold takes over the Sentinels from Trask and Gyrich&#x27;s secret U.S. facility in an attempt to kidnap world leaders and replace the captives&#x27; brains with computers to bring under its control, resulting in Professor X and Magneto joining forces to seemingly destroy Master Mold. Afterwards, the Sentinels and Master Mold make sporadic minor appearances in the fourth season.
* The Sentinels appear in the &quot;Spider-Man&quot; episode &quot;The Mutant Agenda&quot; as a simulation of the Danger Room.
* The Sentinels appear in &quot;X-Men: Evolution&quot;. These versions are much more powerful and heavily armed than their comic book counterparts. In &quot;Day of Reckoning&quot; Pt.1, a prototype was manipulated by Magneto to attack the X-Men and reveal mutant existence to the media. In &quot;Uprising&quot;, three upgraded models were used by S.H.I.E.L.D. against Apocalypse. Additionally, the series finale &quot;Ascension&quot; Pt. 2 features a vision of the future which includes a fleet of Sentinels led by Nimrod.
* A Sentinel appears in the &quot;Robot Chicken&quot; episode &quot;Sausage Fest&quot;.
* Parodies of the Sentinels appear in the &quot;&quot; episode &quot;Operation S.A.F.E.T.Y.&quot; Senator Safely builds giant Safety-bots to prevent children from playing harmful games. However, the lead robot captures adults as well because of their potential for harming children and attempts to take over the world, only to be forced to self-destruct by Numbah 4 who believed the robot had injured his little brother despite its protocols and called it out on it.
* The Sentinels appear in &quot;Wolverine and the X-Men&quot;, voiced by Jim Ward. This version of the Sentinel program consists of Mark I Sentinels, Sentinel Prowlers, an unnamed futuristic variation in the Sentinel-dominated future, and Sentinel Hounds, all controlled by Master Mold. Additionally, the reprogrammed Sentinel Rover appears in a self-titled episode as an associate of a future incarnation of the X-Men.
* Alternate timeline variants of the Sentinels appear in &quot;The Super Hero Squad Show&quot; episode &quot;Days, Nights, and Weekends of Future Past! (Six Against Infinity Part 2)&quot;, voiced by Tom Kenny. This version was created to defend Super Hero City in a possible future where the Scarlet Witch is a dictator.
* A Sentinel appears in &quot;Marvel Anime: X-Men&quot; as a simulation of the Danger Room. 
* A Sentinel appears in the &quot;Ultimate Spider-Man&quot; episode &quot;Game Over&quot; as a part of Arcade&#x27;s Madland.
* A Sentinel appears in &quot;Marvel Disk Wars: The Avengers&quot;.
* The Sentinels appear in &quot;The Gifted&quot;. These versions are small spider-like robots created by Trask Industries to withstand various hazardous environments and forms of attack as well as adapt quickly to damage taken. Additionally, a similarly named government agency called Sentinel Services appears throughout the series.
* The Sentinels appear in &quot;X-Men &#x27;97&quot;, voiced by Eric Bauza and Jennifer Hale. This version of the Sentinel program consist of the regular robots, a three-headed version, and Bastion&#x27;s Prime Sentinels.

===Film===
* The Sentinels were originally meant to appear in &quot;X-Men&quot; (2000). In an early draft written by Andrew Kevin Walker and turned in during June 1994, Henry Gyrich and Bolivar Trask use three 8 feet (2.4 m) tall Sentinels to attack the X-Men. Following several rewrites and new scripts, the Sentinels were eventually dropped from the film.
* A Sentinel appears in &quot;X-Men: The Last Stand&quot; (2006) as a Danger Room simulation. This version is massive, and different in coloration and structure from its comics counterpart, having a vent like mouthpiece, trapezoid shaped eyes that appear as white from a distance but are orange from close up and turn red when the Sentinel shuts down. 
* Two variations of the Sentinels appear in &quot;X-Men: Days of Future Past&quot; (2014). The prototype Mark I Sentinels were designed by Legacy Effects with Digital Domain building digital models based on a full-scale practical model while the future Mark X variants, based on Nimrod Sentinels, were computer graphics made by Moving Picture Company. In the film, the prototypes are said to be built using space-age polymers and are equipped with chest-mounted vent-like structures that grant flight capabilities as well as arm-mounted Gatling guns while the future Sentinels are smaller, sleeker, and built with adaptive mechanical scales, hands that can reform into blades, and emitters in their heads capable of firing energy beams. This version of the Sentinel program was originally created in the 1970s, with Bolivar Trask experimenting on mutants to accelerate his research, though he found little success in gaining support for his project. After Mystique assassinated Trask in 1973, the U.S. government approved the Sentinel program, captured Mystique, and experimented on the latter to give the Sentinels the ability to adapt to and utilize mutant powers. However, the Sentinels subsequently target humans due to their potential for having mutant descendants, culminating in a dystopian future where most of humanity and mutant-kind are nearly extinct by 2023. Using Kitty Pryde&#x27;s new ability to project the minds of others into their past selves, the surviving X-Men project Logan&#x27;s mind back into his 1973 self to rally Charles Xavier and Erik Lehnsherr&#x27;s younger selves and avert Trask&#x27;s assassination. Mystique defeats Lehnsherr, but Xavier and Hank McCoy convince Mystique not to kill Trask, causing the U.S. government to realize that not all mutants are a threat to humanity and abandon the Sentinel program.
* The Sentinels make a cameo appearance in &quot;X-Men: Apocalypse&quot; (2016) as Danger Room simulations.

===Video games===

* The Sentinels appear in &quot;X-Men&quot; (1992).
* The Sentinels appear in &quot;Spider-Man and the X-Men in Arcade&#x27;s Revenge&quot;.
* The Sentinels appear as bosses in &quot;X-Men: Mutant Apocalypse&quot; via the Genosha stage.
* The Sentinels appear in &quot;X-Men 2: Clone Wars&quot;.
* A non-standard 10&#x27; tall Sentinel appears as a playable character in &quot;X-Men: Children of the Atom&quot;.
* A non-standard 10&#x27; tall Sentinel appears as a secret assist character in &quot;Marvel vs. Capcom: Clash of Super Heroes&quot;.
* A non-standard 10&#x27; tall Sentinel appears as a playable character in &quot;Marvel vs. Capcom 2: New Age of Heroes&quot;.
* The Sentinels appear in &quot;X-Men: Mutant Academy&quot;.
* The Sentinels appear as background characters in &quot;X-Men: Mutant Academy 2&quot;.
* The Sentinels appear in &quot;X-Men: Next Dimension&quot;, with a male Prime Sentinel and a female Prime Sentinel available as playable characters.
* The Sentinels appear in &quot;X-Men Legends&quot;, voiced by Scott MacDonald. This version of the Sentinel program includes regular Sentinels, Sentinel Alpha, a Sentinel Controller, a Sentinel Weapons Platform, and a Sentinel Advanced.
* The Sentinels appear in &quot;X-Men Legends II: Rise of Apocalypse&quot;.
* The Sentinels appear in &quot;X-Men: The Official Game&quot;, voiced by Robin Atkin Downes. This version of the Sentinel program includes a small flight-capable model and a walking behemoth.
* The Sentinels appear in &quot;X-Men Origins: Wolverine&quot;, with a Mark I model appearing as a boss.
* A non-standard 10&#x27; tall Sentinel appears as an unlockable playable character in &quot;Marvel vs. Capcom 3: Fate of Two Worlds&quot; and &quot;Ultimate Marvel vs Capcom 3&quot;, voiced again by Jim Ward. In its arcade mode ending, it uploads Master Mold&#x27;s program into Galactus&#x27;s warship with the intention of killing mutants and humanity via Galactus-inspired Sentinels.
* The Sentinels appear in &quot;X-Men Destiny&quot;.
* The Sentinels appear in &quot;&quot;. This version of the Sentinel program includes several Sentinel models named after the Titans. Additionally, the Brotherhood of Mutants employ M-Series Sentinels while the Hellfire Club hired the Crimson Dynamo to build Sentinels loyal to them.
* The Sentinels appear in &quot;Marvel Heroes&quot;.
* The Sentinels appear in &quot;Deadpool&quot;.
* The Sentinels appear in &quot;Lego Marvel Super Heroes&quot;, voiced by Stephen Stanton. Additionally, a Mini-Sentinel appears as an unlockable playable character.
* A Sentinel appears as a playable character in &quot;&quot;.
* The Sentinels appear as playable and non-playable characters in &quot;Marvel Contest of Champions&quot;.
* The Sentinels appear in &quot;Marvel Ultimate Alliance 3: The Black Order&quot;, voiced again by Jim Ward. 
* The Sentinels appear as a landmark in &quot;Fortnite Battle Royale&quot;.
* The Sentinels appears in &quot;Marvel Snap&quot;.

===Merchandise===
* A Sentinel figure was released in Toy Biz&#x27;s X-Men Classics line.
* A Sentinel &quot;Build-A-Figure&quot;, based on the &quot;Here Comes Tomorrow&quot; incarnation, was released in wave ten of the &quot;Marvel Legends&quot; line.
* Two Sentinel figures was released in Hasbro&#x27;s Marvel Universe line.
* Two Sentinel figures and a statue were released in the Marvel Minimates line, with the first figure depicting it fighting Rachel Summers as either Phoenix or Marvel Girl and the second, which is based on its appearance in &quot;Marvel vs. Capcom 3: Fate of Two Worlds&quot;, fighting Ryu.
* A Sentinel figure was released in Lego&#x27;s &quot;X-Men vs. the Sentinel&quot; set.
* A twenty-six inch Sentinel figure was announced as part of Hasbro&#x27;s HasLab crowdfunding releases.

===Music===
In 2020, Brooklyn rapper Magneto Dayo unveiled &quot;The Sentinels&quot;, a project that gained viral traction on Instagram reels in 2024, amassing over 5 million plays.

===Miscellaneous===
A parody of a Sentinel called the &quot;Sentinent&quot; appears in &quot;MAD Magazine&quot; for a parody of the X-Men, the &quot;ECH!-Men&quot;.

==References==
==External links==
* Sentinels at Marvel.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q782181" start="4" end="13" title="Sentinel (comics)" label="Sentinels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094617" start="29" end="35" title="Mutant (Marvel Comics)" label="mutant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11012" start="44" end="49" title="robot" label="robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114502" start="64" end="83" title="American comic book" label="American comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="98" end="111" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q245204" start="144" end="154" title="antagonist" label="antagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q128452" start="163" end="168" title="X-Men" label="X-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="303" end="313" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="" start="378" end="404" title="X-Men: Days of Future Past" label="X-Men: Days of Future Past"/>
<link wikidata="" start="462" end="483" title="X-Men: The Last Stand" label="X-Men: The Last Stand"/>
<link wikidata="" start="514" end="531" title="X-Men: Apocalypse" label="X-Men: Apocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="583" end="586" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q181900" start="683" end="691" title="Stan Lee" label="Stan Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q311607" start="696" end="706" title="Jack Kirby" label="Jack Kirby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399747" start="737" end="746" title="Uncanny X-Men" label="The X-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094617" start="806" end="813" title="Mutant (Marvel Comics)" label="mutants"/>
<link wikidata="Q831691" start="926" end="933" title="Storey" label="stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q206021" start="954" end="960" title="flight" label="flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q489750" start="1146" end="1156" title="fanaticism" label="fanaticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254427" start="1305" end="1316" title="AI takeover" label="AI takeover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000344" start="1405" end="1421" title="tactic (method)" label="tactical thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314553" start="1442" end="1452" title="self-awareness" label="self-aware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341528" start="1574" end="1588" title="Directed-energy weapon" label="energy weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q746713" start="2086" end="2097" title="Master Mold" label="Master Mold"/>
<link wikidata="Q107284696" start="2461" end="2474" title="Iron Man 2020 (event)" label="Iron Man 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777295" start="2526" end="2535" title="A.I. Army" label="A.I. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3641739" start="2666" end="2679" title="Bolivar Trask" label="Bolivar Trask"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589367" start="2798" end="2809" title="Larry Trask (comics)" label="Larry Trask"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614956" start="3281" end="3293" title="Steven Lang (comics)" label="Stephen Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2109149" start="3338" end="3352" title="Edward Buckman" label="Edward Buckman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2109149" start="3361" end="3382" title="Hellfire Club (comics)" label="Council of the Chosen"/>
<link wikidata="Q181787" start="3536" end="3543" title="Android (robot)" label="android"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265812" start="3652" end="3666" title="Sebastian Shaw (comics)" label="Sebastian Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075745" start="3918" end="3927" title="Onslaught (Marvel Comics)" label="Onslaught"/>
<link wikidata="Q887309" start="4061" end="4067" title="Nimrod (comics)" label="Nimrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q467204" start="4125" end="4144" title="Days of Future Past" label="Days of Future Past"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551564" start="4198" end="4213" title="William Stryker" label="William Stryker"/>
<link wikidata="Q938034" start="4627" end="4634" title="X-Force" label="X-Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243338" start="4650" end="4664" title="Prime Sentinel" label="Prime Sentinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737565" start="4679" end="4686" title="Bastion (comics)" label="Bastion"/>
<link wikidata="Q235799" start="5100" end="5106" title="cyborg" label="cyborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354713" start="5561" end="5577" title="Karima Shapandar" label="Karima Shapandar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589367" start="5596" end="5610" title="Wild Sentinels" label="Wild Sentinels"/>
<link wikidata="Q858901" start="5678" end="5692" title="Cassandra Nova" label="Cassandra Nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q898025" start="5713" end="5720" title="Genosha" label="Genosha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439694" start="5751" end="5756" title="Office of National Emergency" label="O*N*E"/>
<link wikidata="Q180704" start="5770" end="5787" title="Iron Man" label="Stark Enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q17985696" start="6561" end="6565" title="AXIS (comics)" label="AXIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034529" start="6610" end="6619" title="Red Skull" label="Red Skull"/>
<link wikidata="Q180704" start="6685" end="6695" title="Iron Man" label="Tony Stark"/>
<link wikidata="Q726495" start="6882" end="6891" title="Civil War (comics)" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q887309" start="7505" end="7522" title="Nimrod (comics)" label="Nimrod the Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777295" start="7704" end="7710" title="Orchis (comics)" label="Orchis"/>
<link wikidata="Q302534" start="7776" end="7791" title="Mister Sinister" label="Mister Sinister"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589367" start="9493" end="9505" title="Tri-Sentinel" label="Tri-Sentinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147326" start="9588" end="9592" title="Loki (Marvel Comics)" label="Loki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777295" start="9613" end="9628" title="Life Foundation" label="Life Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11468" start="9756" end="9780" title="Nanotechnology" label="Nano-Sentinel technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566949" start="9782" end="9793" title="Weapon Plus" label="Weapon Plus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9844" end="9853" title="Weapon Plus#The World" label="The World"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539413" start="9950" end="9958" title="Fantomex" label="Fantomex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276124" start="10187" end="10203" title="Madison Jeffries" label="Madison Jeffries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053320" start="10227" end="10235" title="Weapon X" label="Weapon X"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281680" start="10252" end="10267" title="Malcolm Colcord" label="Malcolm Colcord"/>
<link wikidata="Q467204" start="10299" end="10318" title="Days of Future Past" label="Days of Future Past"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777295" start="10543" end="10566" title="Mutant Liberation Front" label="Mutant Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601925" start="10611" end="10622" title="Machine Man" label="Machine Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q6202575" start="10905" end="10919" title="Juston Seyfert" label="Juston Seyfert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451303" start="10962" end="10970" title="Sentinel (comic book)" label="Sentinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822366" start="11228" end="11244" title="Avengers Academy" label="Avengers Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114242" start="11267" end="11281" title="Avengers Arena" label="Avengers Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735518" start="12699" end="12702" title="Box (comics)" label="Box"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12749" end="12761" title="Features of the Marvel Universe#Government agencies" label="Department H"/>
<link wikidata="Q931597" start="12927" end="12939" title="Marvel Universe" label="Marvel canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274103" start="12979" end="12996" title="Age of Apocalypse" label="Age of Apocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361279" start="13063" end="13068" title="Moira MacTaggert" label="Moira"/>
<link wikidata="Q467204" start="13449" end="13468" title="Days of Future Past" label="Days of Future Past"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="13639" end="13652" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q887309" start="13686" end="13692" title="Nimrod (comics)" label="Nimrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q5495425" start="13733" end="13745" title="Fred Hembeck" label="Fred Hembeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q9402" start="13837" end="13842" title="Ninja" label="Ninja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035490" start="13900" end="13919" title="Here Comes Tomorrow" label="Here Comes Tomorrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451303" start="13969" end="13987" title="Sentinel (comic book)" label="Tom Skylark&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072636" start="14150" end="14160" title="House of M" label="House of M"/>
<link wikidata="Q840291" start="14178" end="14185" title="Magneto (Marvel Comics)" label="Magneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265812" start="14252" end="14266" title="Sebastian Shaw (comics)" label="Sebastian Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q911971" start="14288" end="14300" title="S.H.I.E.L.D." label="S.H.I.E.L.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q2050824" start="14393" end="14396" title="Marvel Comics 2" label="MC2"/>
<link wikidata="Q11819141" start="14407" end="14417" title="Wild Thing (comics)" label="Wild Thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q128452" start="14840" end="14845" title="X-Men" label="X-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092" start="14846" end="14855" title="Star Trek" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051324" start="14915" end="14939" title="USS Enterprise (NCC-1701-E)" label="&amp;quot;Enterprise&amp;quot;-E"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982051" start="14950" end="14968" title="Kang the Conqueror" label="Kang the Conqueror"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14973" end="14982" title="away team (Star Trek term)" label="away team"/>
<link wikidata="Q16276" start="14995" end="15009" title="Jean-Luc Picard" label="Captain Picard"/>
<link wikidata="Q625731" start="15011" end="15022" title="Deanna Troi" label="Deanna Troi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342183" start="15024" end="15036" title="Nightcrawler (comics)" label="Nightcrawler"/>
<link wikidata="Q60002" start="15041" end="15049" title="Colossus (comics)" label="Colossus"/>
<link wikidata="Q467204" start="15090" end="15109" title="Days of Future Past" label="Days of Future Past"/>
<link wikidata="Q220652" start="15170" end="15174" title="Borg (Star Trek)" label="Borg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890491" start="15209" end="15224" title="Ultimate Marvel" label="Ultimate Marvel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646396" start="15319" end="15333" title="Ultimate X-Men" label="Ultimate X-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q938523" start="15587" end="15599" title="powered exoskeleton" label="battle armor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068408" start="15754" end="15760" title="Fenris (comics)" label="Fenris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606714" start="15824" end="15838" title="Ultimatum Wave" label="Ultimatum Wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q20979405" start="15939" end="15959" title="Jason Stryker" label="William Stryker, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q945117" start="16068" end="16074" title="Shroud (comics)" label="Shroud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089219" start="16103" end="16110" title="What If (comics)" label="What If"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194236" start="16129" end="16139" title="Cannonball (comics)" label="Cannonball"/>
<link wikidata="Q31825044" start="16253" end="16259" title="Icarus (comics)" label="Icarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q841372" start="16624" end="16634" title="Juggernaut (character)" label="Juggernaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365411" start="16858" end="16892" title="Spider-Man and His Amazing Friends" label="Spider-Man and His Amazing Friends"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16986" end="17012" title="X-Men: The Animated Series" label="X-Men: The Animated Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233780" start="17030" end="17039" title="David Fox (actor)" label="David Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3641739" start="17112" end="17125" title="Bolivar Trask" label="Bolivar Trask"/>
<link wikidata="Q555791" start="17130" end="17148" title="Henry Peter Gyrich" label="Henry Peter Gyrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q898025" start="17195" end="17202" title="Genosha" label="Genosha"/>
<link wikidata="Q632212" start="17332" end="17337" title="Storm (Marvel Comics)" label="Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q838076" start="17709" end="17720" title="Professor X" label="Professor X"/>
<link wikidata="Q840291" start="17725" end="17732" title="Magneto (Marvel Comics)" label="Magneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q569934" start="17914" end="17924" title="Spider-Man (1994 TV series)" label="Spider-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q929620" start="17992" end="18003" title="Danger Room" label="Danger Room"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18037" end="18053" title="X-Men: Evolution" label="X-Men: Evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q911971" start="18352" end="18364" title="S.H.I.E.L.D." label="S.H.I.E.L.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q2071805" start="18373" end="18383" title="Apocalypse (character)" label="Apocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="Q8822" start="18562" end="18575" title="Robot Chicken" label="Robot Chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990905" start="19115" end="19138" title="Wolverine and the X-Men (TV series)" label="Wolverine and the X-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q4280417" start="19156" end="19164" title="Jim Ward (voice actor)" label="Jim Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132395" start="19233" end="19249" title="Spider-Slayer" label="Sentinel Prowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035490" start="19410" end="19415" title="Here Comes Tomorrow" label="Rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509756" start="19566" end="19591" title="The Super Hero Squad Show" label="The Super Hero Squad Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q299282" start="19702" end="19711" title="Tom Kenny" label="Tom Kenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q929285" start="19795" end="19808" title="Scarlet Witch" label="Scarlet Witch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461966" start="19854" end="19873" title="Marvel Anime" label="Marvel Anime: X-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q401601" start="19951" end="19970" title="Ultimate Spider-Man (TV series)" label="Ultimate Spider-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q931048" start="20020" end="20026" title="Arcade (Marvel Comics)" label="Arcade"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20073" end="20103" title="Marvel Disk Wars: The Avengers" label="Marvel Disk Wars: The Avengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q29018745" start="20143" end="20153" title="The Gifted (U.S. TV series)" label="The Gifted"/>
<link wikidata="Q109558622" start="20477" end="20491" title="X-Men &amp;#x27;97" label="X-Men &amp;#x27;97"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386105" start="20509" end="20519" title="Eric Bauza" label="Eric Bauza"/>
<link wikidata="Q195041" start="20524" end="20537" title="Jennifer Hale" label="Jennifer Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589367" start="20609" end="20629" title="Wild Sentinels" label="three-headed version"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737565" start="20635" end="20642" title="Bastion (comics)" label="Bastion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243338" start="20650" end="20664" title="Prime Sentinel" label="Prime Sentinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q106182" start="20736" end="20741" title="X-Men (film)" label="X-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q505689" start="20785" end="20804" title="Andrew Kevin Walker" label="Andrew Kevin Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q555791" start="20837" end="20849" title="Henry Peter Gyrich" label="Henry Gyrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3641739" start="20854" end="20867" title="Bolivar Trask" label="Bolivar Trask"/>
<link wikidata="Q128452" start="20922" end="20927" title="X-Men" label="X-Men"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21056" end="21077" title="X-Men: The Last Stand" label="X-Men: The Last Stand"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21429" end="21455" title="X-Men: Days of Future Past" label="X-Men: Days of Future Past"/>
<link wikidata="Q17149291" start="21518" end="21532" title="Legacy Effects" label="Legacy Effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q568817" start="21538" end="21552" title="Digital Domain" label="Digital Domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866664" start="21707" end="21729" title="Moving Picture Company" label="Moving Picture Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q116987109" start="22335" end="22343" title="Mystique (film character)" label="Mystique"/>
<link wikidata="Q547306" start="22757" end="22768" title="Kitty Pryde" label="Kitty Pryde"/>
<link wikidata="Q97275436" start="22871" end="22876" title="Logan (film character)" label="Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q105350971" start="22922" end="22936" title="Charles Xavier (film character)" label="Charles Xavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q105424624" start="22941" end="22955" title="Magneto (film character)" label="Erik Lehnsherr"/>
<link wikidata="Q302186" start="23059" end="23069" title="Hank McCoy" label="Hank McCoy"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23275" end="23292" title="X-Men: Apocalypse" label="X-Men: Apocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442055" start="23386" end="23391" title="X-Men (1992 video game)" label="X-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748343" start="23438" end="23487" title="Spider-Man and the X-Men in Arcade&amp;#x27;s Revenge" label="Spider-Man and the X-Men in Arcade&amp;#x27;s Revenge"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23537" end="23561" title="X-Men: Mutant Apocalypse" label="X-Men: Mutant Apocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="Q898025" start="23576" end="23583" title="Genosha" label="Genosha"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23623" end="23642" title="X-Men 2: Clone Wars" label="X-Men 2: Clone Wars"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23731" end="23758" title="X-Men: Children of the Atom (video game)" label="X-Men: Children of the Atom"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23852" end="23892" title="Marvel vs. Capcom: Clash of Super Heroes" label="Marvel vs. Capcom: Clash of Super Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23981" end="24019" title="Marvel vs. Capcom 2: New Age of Heroes" label="Marvel vs. Capcom 2: New Age of Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24059" end="24080" title="X-Men: Mutant Academy" label="X-Men: Mutant Academy"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24145" end="24168" title="X-Men: Mutant Academy 2" label="X-Men: Mutant Academy 2"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24208" end="24229" title="X-Men: Next Dimension" label="X-Men: Next Dimension"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957004" start="24358" end="24371" title="X-Men Legends" label="X-Men Legends"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476254" start="24389" end="24404" title="Scott MacDonald (actor)" label="Scott MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24596" end="24632" title="X-Men Legends II: Rise of Apocalypse" label="X-Men Legends II: Rise of Apocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24672" end="24696" title="X-Men: The Official Game" label="X-Men: The Official Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346488" start="24714" end="24732" title="Robin Atkin Downes" label="Robin Atkin Downes"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24865" end="24889" title="X-Men Origins: Wolverine (video game)" label="X-Men Origins: Wolverine"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25031" end="25070" title="Marvel vs. Capcom 3: Fate of Two Worlds" label="Marvel vs. Capcom 3: Fate of Two Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073725" start="25087" end="25114" title="Ultimate Marvel vs Capcom 3" label="Ultimate Marvel vs Capcom 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429836" start="25218" end="25226" title="Galactus" label="Galactus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078082" start="25358" end="25371" title="X-Men Destiny" label="X-Men Destiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q45713" start="25505" end="25511" title="Titans" label="Titans"/>
<link wikidata="Q514974" start="25531" end="25553" title="Brotherhood of Mutants" label="Brotherhood of Mutants"/>
<link wikidata="Q2109149" start="25590" end="25603" title="Hellfire Club (comics)" label="Hellfire Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339552" start="25614" end="25628" title="Crimson Dynamo" label="Crimson Dynamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9283458" start="25695" end="25708" title="Marvel Heroes (video game)" label="Marvel Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112423" start="25748" end="25756" title="Deadpool (video game)" label="Deadpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q3662198" start="25796" end="25820" title="Lego Marvel Super Heroes" label="Lego Marvel Super Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610592" start="25838" end="25853" title="Stephen Stanton" label="Stephen Stanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q18643731" start="26064" end="26091" title="Marvel Contest of Champions" label="Marvel Contest of Champions"/>
<link wikidata="" start="26131" end="26174" title="Marvel Ultimate Alliance 3: The Black Order" label="Marvel Ultimate Alliance 3: The Black Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q50822580" start="26255" end="26277" title="Fortnite Battle Royale" label="Fortnite Battle Royale"/>
<link wikidata="Q112075374" start="26318" end="26329" title="Marvel Snap" label="Marvel Snap"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041480" start="26407" end="26421" title="X-Men Classics" label="X-Men Classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035490" start="26488" end="26507" title="Here Comes Tomorrow" label="Here Comes Tomorrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296044" start="26565" end="26579" title="Marvel Legends" label="Marvel Legends"/>
<link wikidata="Q501476" start="26631" end="26637" title="Hasbro" label="Hasbro"/>
<link wikidata="Q16161999" start="26731" end="26740" title="Minimates" label="Minimates"/>
<link wikidata="Q258015" start="26791" end="26805" title="Rachel Summers" label="Rachel Summers"/>
<link wikidata="" start="26897" end="26936" title="Marvel vs. Capcom 3: Fate of Two Worlds" label="Marvel vs. Capcom 3: Fate of Two Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223440" start="26953" end="26956" title="Ryu (Street Fighter)" label="Ryu"/>
<link wikidata="Q170484" start="26994" end="26998" title="Lego" label="Lego"/>
<link wikidata="Q312086" start="27428" end="27440" title="Mad (magazine)" label="MAD Magazine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29532" wikidata="Q404607" url="?curid=29532" title="Sebastian Shaw">
<text>Sebastian Shaw is the name of:

* Sebastian Shaw (actor) (1905–1994), English film and stage actor
* Sebastian Francis Shaw (born 1957), Roman Catholic metropolitan archbishop of Lahore
* Sebastian Shaw (character), a character from the &quot;X-Men&quot; comic books by Marvel Comics
* Sebastian Shaw (serial killer) (1967–2021), Vietnamese-born American serial killer
* Sebastian Shaw, British TV actor on &quot;Coronation Street&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q532184" start="34" end="56" title="Sebastian Shaw (actor)" label="Sebastian Shaw (actor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295302" start="101" end="123" title="Sebastian Francis Shaw" label="Sebastian Francis Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265812" start="188" end="214" title="Sebastian Shaw (character)" label="Sebastian Shaw (character)"/>
<link wikidata="Q97162678" start="286" end="316" title="Sebastian Shaw (serial killer)" label="Sebastian Shaw (serial killer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28654011" start="407" end="436" title="List of Coronation Street characters (2017)" label="&amp;quot;Coronation Street&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
